
Forest City, Iowa Code of Ordinances


CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES



 



1.01  Title
 
1.09  Catchlines and Notes


1.02  Definitions
 
1.10  Altering Code


1.03  City Powers
 
1.11  Severability


1.04  Indemnity
 
1.12  Warrants


1.05  Personal Injuries
 
1.13  General Standards for Action


1.06  Rules of Construction
 
1.14  Standard Penalty


1.07  Extension of Authority
 
1.15  Right of Entry for Inspection


1.08  Amendments
 




 



1.01    TITLE. 



This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Forest City, Iowa, 2007.



1.02    DEFINITIONS. 



Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined in the
Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the Council or repugnant to the context of the provision.  Other words and
phrases used herein have the following meanings, unless specifically defined
otherwise in another portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or
repugnant to the context of the provision:



   1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street,
affording secondary means of access to abutting property. 



   2.   “City” means the City of Forest City, Iowa.



   3.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of Forest City, Iowa.



   4.   “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of
Ordinances in which a specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive
title word (such as the Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by
reference).



   5.   “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Forest City, Iowa, 2007.



   6.   “Council” means the city council of Forest City, Iowa.



   7.   “County” means Winnebago County or Hancock County, Iowa.



   8.   “May” confers a power.



   9.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or
motion.



   10.   “Must” states a requirement.



   11.   “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land,
includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or
land, whether alone or with others.



   12.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Forest
City, Iowa, as embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed
by the ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted
hereafter.



   13.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic
or foreign corporation, company, association or joint stock association,
trust, or other legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or
similar representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.



   14.   “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard,
parkway, highway, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.



   15.   “Shall” imposes a duty.



   16.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street
between the edge of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the
adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.



   17.   “State” means the State of Iowa.



   18.   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the
Code of Iowa, as amended.



   19.   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between
property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof
is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of
vehicular traffic.



Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa
have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the
provision.



1.03    CITY POWERS.



The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if
not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any
power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve
the rights, privileges and property of the City and of its residents, and
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and
convenience of its residents and each and every provision of this Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and
the performance of the foregoing functions.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)



1.04    INDEMNITY.



The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by
making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or death
of any person or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or damage to property
whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however
arising from or related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the issuance of
the permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of
such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such applicant, to
abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or
the terms and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by
making such application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its
officers, agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and
all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage,
injury or death, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason
of the foregoing.  The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a
part of any permit or license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any
other ordinance of the City whether expressly recited therein or not.



1.05    PERSONAL INJURIES.



When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to have
been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person by
whose negligence it claims the injury was caused.  The notice shall state
the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location
of the court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged
facts from which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person
notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and
asking the person to appear and defend.  A judgment obtained in the suit is
conclusive in any action by the City against any person so notified, as to
the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the
liability of the City to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to
the amount of the damage or injury.  The City may maintain an action against
the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment together with all
the expenses incurred by the City in the suit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)



1.06    RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of statutory
construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized
to ascertain the intent of the Council with the understanding that the term
“statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term
“ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.



1.07    EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.



Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a
provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as
authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.



1.08    AMENDMENTS.



All ordinances which amend, repeal or in any manner affect this Code of
Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)



1.09    CATCHLINES AND NOTES.



The catchlines of the several sections of the Code of Ordinances, titles,
headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross
references and State law references, unless set out in the body of the
section itself, contained in the Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any
part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or
clarify the contents of a section.



1.10    ALTERING CODE.



It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of the Code of Ordinances, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code of
Ordinances in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to
be misrepresented thereby.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.5)



1.11    SEVERABILITY.



If any section, provision or part of the Code of Ordinances is adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity
of the Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision or part
thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.



1.12    WARRANTS.



If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful
right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon
or conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the
County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative
search warrant.  No owner, operator or occupant or any other person having
charge, care or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure,
building or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search
warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.



1.13    GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.



Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the
Council or any commission, board or officer or employee of the City and does
not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be
exercised in light of the following standard:  The discretionary power to
grant, deny or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts
and circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due
consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and
welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under
similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.



1.14    STANDARD PENALTY.



Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Code of Ordinances for
any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing to perform a
duty, or obtain a license required by, or violating any provision of the Code
of Ordinances, or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).



(Ord. 772 – Oct. 17 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])



1.15    RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION.



Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or
resolution, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there
exists an ordinance or resolution violation in any building or upon any
premises within the jurisdiction of the City, any authorized official of the
City may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or
premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to perform any duty
imposed upon such official by ordinance.  Except in emergency situations or
when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been
otherwise obtained, such official shall give the owner and/or occupant, if
the owner or occupant can be located after reasonable effort, a 24-hour
written notice of the authorized official’s intention to inspect.  The
notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state that the property
owner has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is
refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a
duly authorized magistrate.  In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses
entry after such request has been made, the official is empowered to seek
assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.



CHAPTER 2
CHARTER



 

2.01  Title
 
2.04  Number and Term of Council


2.02  Form of Government
 
2.05  Term of Mayor


2.03  Powers and Duties
 
2.06  Copies on File



 



2.01    TITLE.



This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Forest City, Iowa.†
1



2.02    FORM OF GOVERNMENT.



The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council form of government.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)



2.03    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City.



2.04    NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.



The Council consists of three Council Members elected at large and one
Council Member from each of four wards as established by this Code of
Ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)



2.05    TERM OF MAYOR.



The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)



2.06    COPIES ON FILE.



The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the
official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep
copies of the charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)



 


Notes

1 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  Ordinance No. 239, adopting a charter for the City was
passed and approved by the Council on November 26, 1973, and was published on
November 29, 1973.  The charter became effective on January 2, 1974.



CHAPTER 3
BOUNDARIES



3.01    VOTING PRECINCTS ESTABLISHED.



The City is divided into five (5) voting precincts described as follows:



   1.   The First Precinct consists of the portion of the City
beginning at the Northwest Corner of the Hillcrest Subdivision; thence south
along the West line of said Hillcrest Subdivision to the Northwest Corner of
the Happy Hollow Subdivision; thence west along the north corporate limits to
the Northeast Corner of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of the Southwest
Quarter (SW ¼) of Section Twenty-six (26), Township Ninety-eight (98) North,
Range Twenty-four (24) West of the 5th P.M.; thence south along the west
corporate limits to the Winnebago River; thence following the Winnebago River
to the intersection of the Winnebago River and 7th Street extended; thence
West on Halvorson to the intersection of Halvorson Street and 9th  Street;
thence  South on 9th to the intersection of 9th Street and “O” Street;
thence East on “O” Street to the intersection of “O” Street and 8th
Street; thence South on 8th Street to the intersection of 8th Street and
“J” Street; thence East on “J” Street to the intersection of “J”
Street and 6th Street; thence south on 6th Street to the intersection of
“G” Street and 6th Street; thence east on “G” Street to the
intersection of “G” Street and Central Street;thence north on Central
Street to the intersection of Central Street and “J” Street; thence east
on “J” Street to the intersection of “J” Street and Golf Course Road;
thence south on South Golf Course Road to the intersection of South Golf
Course Road and “J” Street; thence east on “J” Street to the City
limits of the City of Forest City; thence north along the east City limits of
the City; thence west along the north City limits to the point of beginning. 



   2.   The Second Precinct consists of that portion of the City
beginning at the intersection of the west corporate limits and the Winnebago
River; thence following the Winnebago River to the intersection of the
Winnebago River and 7th Street extended; thence West on Halvorson to the
intersection of Halvorson Street and 9th  Street; thence South on 9th to the
intersection of 9th Street and “O” Street; thence East on “O” Street
to the intersection of “O” Street and 8th Street; thence South on 8th
Street to the intersection of 8th Street and “J” Street; thence East on
“J” Street to the intersection of “J” Street and 6th Street; thence
south on 6th Street to the intersection of “I” Street and 6th Street;
thence west on “I” Street to the intersection of “I” Street and 8th
Street; thence south to the intersection of 8th Street and “G”
Street;thence west on “G” Street to the intersection of “G” Street
and John K. Hanson Drive; thence south and west on John K. Hanson Drive to
the intersection of John K. Hanson Drive and the west line of the B. Johanson
Subdivision; thence north along the west line of the B. Johanson Subdivision
to the intersection of said west line with “I” Street; thence west on
“I” Street to the intersection of “I” Street and Spring Valley Road;
thence north on Spring Valley Road to the north line of the Forest City
corporate limits; thence continuing east from this point along said north
corporate limits; thence north along the west corporate limits to the
intersection of the corporate limits with the Winnebago River; the point of
beginning.



   3.   The Third Precinct consists of that portion of the City
beginning at the intersection of Spring Valley Road and "I” Street; thence
south on Spring Valley Road to the Winnebago-Hancock County Boundary line;
thence east on said County line to the intersection of said County line and
6th Street; thence north on 6th Street to the intersection of 6th Street and
“B” Street; thence west on “B” Street to the intersection of “B”
Street and 8th Street; thence north on 8th Street to the intersection of 8th
Street and “G” Street; thence west on “G” Street to the intersection
of “G” Street and John K. Hanson Drive; thence south and west on John K.
Hanson Drive to the intersection of John K. Hanson Drive and the west line of
the B. Johanson Subdivision; thence north along the west line of the B.
Johanson Subdivision to the intersection of said west line with “I”
Street; thence continuing west on “I” Street to the intersection of
“I” Street and Spring Valley Road, the point of beginning.



   4.   The Fourth Precinct consists of that portion of the City
beginning at a point at the intersection of “J” Street with the east
corporate boundary of the City; thence west along “J” Street to the
intersection of “J” Street and South Golf Course Road; thence north on
South Golf Course Road to the intersection of Golf Course Road and “J”
Street; thence west on “J” Street to the intersection of “J” Street
and Central Street; thence south on Central Street to the intersection of
Central Street and “G” Street; thence west on “G” Street to the
intersection of “G” Street and 6th Street; thence north on 6th Street to
the intersection of 6th Street and “I” Street; thence west on “I”
Street to the intersection of “I” Street and 8th Street; thence south on
8th Street to the intersection of 8th Street and “B” Street; thence east
on “B” Street to the intersection of “B” Street and 6th Street;
thence south on 6th Street to the Winnebago-Hancock County Boundary line;
thence east on the Winnebago-Hancock County Boundary line to the Southeast
corner of  Prairie View Estates Subdivision; thence North on the East line
of  said Prairie View Estates Subdivision to the Northeast corner of said
Prairie View Estates Subdivision; thence West on the North boundary of said
Prairie View Estates Subdivision to the east line of the Forest City
Corporate limits; thence north on the east corporate limits to the
intersection of said east corporate limits with “J” Street, also the
place of beginning.



   5.   The Fifth Precinct consists of the portion of the City lying in
Hancock County.



The First Ward consists of the First Precinct; the Second Ward consists of
the Second Precinct; the Third Ward consists of the Third Precinct; the
Fourth Ward consists of the Fourth Precinct and the Fifth Precinct.



(Section 3.01 -Ord. 718 – Aug. 11 Supp.)



CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS



 

4.01  Municipal Infraction
 
4.04  Civil Citations


4.02  Environmental Violation
 
4.05  Alternative Relief


4.03  Penalties
 
4.06  Criminal Penalties



 



4.01    MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.



A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein
adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty
required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically
provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious
misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the
Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as
provided herein.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])



4.02    ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION.



A municipal infraction which is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of
Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the
Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an
environmental violation.  However, the provisions of this section shall not
be applicable until the City has offered to participate in informal
negotiations regarding the violation or to the following specific violations:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])



   1.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.



   2.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the
handling, drying or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the
industrial production or manufacturing of grain products.



   3.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the
handling, drying or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial
production or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to
January 15.



4.03    PENALTIES.



A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])



   1.   Standard Civil Penalties.



      A.   First Offense – Not to exceed $750.00



      B.   Each Repeat Offense – Not to exceed $1,000.00



Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a
repeat offense.



   2.   Special Civil Penalties.



      A.   A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an
industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for
each day a violation exists or continues.



      B.   A municipal infraction classified as an environmental
violation is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each
occurrence.  However, an environmental violation is not subject to such
penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:



         (1)   The violation results solely from conducting an
initial startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance,
testing, or conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation
or the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.



         (2)   The City is notified of the violation within
twenty-four (24) hours from the time that the violation begins.



         (3)   The violation does not continue in existence for
more than eight (8) hours.



4.04    CIVIL CITATIONS.



Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may
issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction.  A
copy of the citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of
Civil Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at
defendant’s last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by
publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and
subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311.  A copy of the
citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation
shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court.  The citation shall serve
as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain the
following information:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])



   1.   The name and address of the defendant.



   2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the
officer issuing the citation.



   3.   The location and time of the infraction.



   4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative
relief sought, or both.



   5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.



   6.   The time and place of court appearance.



   7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.



   8.   The legal description of the affected real property, if
applicable.



If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the
condition of the property, including a building code violation, a local
housing regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health or
safety violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District
Court, the City shall also file the citation in the office of the County
Treasurer.



(Ord. 707 – Oct. 10 Supp.)



4.05    ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.



Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the
City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. 
Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for
abatement or injunctive relief.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[8])



4.06    CRIMINAL PENALTIES.



This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal
citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal
penalties are also provided for the violation.  Nor does it preclude or
limit the authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])



CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES



 

5.01  Oaths
 
5.07  Conflict of Interest


5.02  Bonds
 
5.08  Resignations


5.03  Duties:  General
 
5.09  Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees


5.04  Books and Records
 
5.10  Vacancies


5.05  Transfer to Successor
 
5.11  Gifts


5.06  Meetings
 



 



5.01    OATHS.



The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:



   1.   Qualify for Office.  Each elected or appointed officer shall
qualify for office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when
required, a bond.  The oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after being
certified as elected but not later than noon of the first day which is not a
Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which
the officer was elected.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)



   2.   Prescribed Oath.  The prescribed oath is:  “I, (name), do
solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and
the Constitution of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and
impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of
(name of office) in Forest City as now or hereafter required by law.”



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)



   3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths.  The following are
empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter
pertaining to the business of their respective offices:



      A.   Mayor



      B.   City Clerk



      C.   Members of all boards, commissions or bodies created by
law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)



5.02    BONDS.



Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:



   1.   Required.  The Council shall provide by resolution for a
surety bond or blanket position bond running to the City and covering the
Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer and such other officers and employees as may be
necessary and advisable.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)



   2.   Bonds Approved.  Bonds shall be approved by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)



   3.   Bonds Filed.  All bonds, after approval and proper record,
shall be filed with the Clerk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])



   4.   Record.  The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the
“Record of Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds
of all City officers, elective or appointive.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])



5.03    DUTIES:  GENERAL.



Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by
the Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



5.04    BOOKS AND RECORDS.



All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open
to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of
law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept
confidential.  Access to public records which are combined with data
processing software shall be in accordance with policies and procedures
established by the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A)



5.05    TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.



Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



5.06    MEETINGS.



All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be
held in accordance with the following:



   1.   Notice of Meetings.  Reasonable notice, as defined by State
law, of the time, date and place of each meeting, and its tentative agenda
shall be given.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)



   2.   Meetings Open.  All meetings shall be held in open session
unless closed sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)



   3.   Minutes.  Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the
date, time and place, the members present, and the action taken at each
meeting.  The minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and
information sufficient to indicate the vote of each member present.  The
vote of each member present shall be made public at the open session.  The
minutes shall be public records open to public inspection.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)



   4.   Closed Session.  A closed session may be held only by
affirmative vote of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members
present at the meeting and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)



   5.   Cameras and Recorders.  The public may use cameras or
recording devices at any open session.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)



   6.   Electronic Meetings.  A meeting may be conducted by electronic
means only in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or
impractical and then only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of
the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)



5.07    CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in
any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to
be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. 
A contract entered into in violation of this section is void.  The
provisions of this section do not apply to:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)



   1.   Compensation of Officers.  The payment of lawful compensation
of a City officer or employee holding more than one City office or position,
the holding of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not
prohibited by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[1])



   2.   Investment of Funds.  The designation of a bank or trust
company as a depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[2])



   3.   City Treasurer.  An employee of a bank or trust company, who
serves as Treasurer of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3])



   4.   Stock Interests.  Contracts in which a City officer or
employee has an interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest
of the kind described in subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the
contracts are made by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and
opened, or if the remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as
a result of the contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve
the procurement or preparation of any part of the contract.  The competitive
bid qualification of this subsection does not apply to a contract for
professional services not customarily awarded by competitive bid.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[5])



   5.   Newspaper.  The designation of an official newspaper. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[6])



   6.   Existing Contracts.  A contract in which a City officer or
employee has an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer
or employee was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[7])



   7.   Volunteers.  Contracts with volunteer fire fighters or civil
defense volunteers.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[8])



   8.   Corporations.  A contract with a corporation in which a City
officer or employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less
than five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned
or controlled directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse
or immediate family of such officer or employee.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[9])



   9.   Contracts.  Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in
writing, publicly invited and opened. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[4])



   10.   Cumulative Purchases.  Contracts not otherwise permitted by
this section, for the purchase of goods or services which benefit a City
officer or employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do
not exceed a cumulative total purchase price of fifteen hundred dollars
($1500.00) in a fiscal year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[10])



   11.   Franchise Agreements.  Franchise agreements between the City
and a utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of
essential City utility services.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[12])



   12.   Third Party Contracts.  A contract that is a bond, note or
other obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from
the City but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may
not be the original underwriter, purchaser or obligee of the contract.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[13])



5.08    RESIGNATIONS.



An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a resignation
in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and
considered.  A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible
for appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was
elected, if during that time the compensation of the office has been
increased.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])



5.09    REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to
City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order.  The order
shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall
be sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with
the Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the copy, shall
be granted a public hearing before the Council on all issues connected with
the removal.  The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the
date the request is filed, unless the person removed requests a later date.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)



5.10    VACANCIES.



A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled,
at the Council’s option, by one of the two following procedures:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2])



   1.   Appointment.  By appointment, following public notice, by the
remaining members of the Council.  The appointment shall be made within
sixty (60) days after the vacancy occurs and shall be for the period until
the next regular City election unless there is an intervening special
election for the City, in which event the election for the office shall be
placed on the ballot at such special election.  If the Council chooses to
proceed under this subsection, the Council shall publish notice of the
appointment in accordance with Section 372.13 of the Code of Iowa.  If the
remaining members do not constitute a quorum of the full membership, or if a
petition is filed requesting an election, the Council shall call a special
election as provided by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2a])



   2.   Special Election.  By a special election held to fill the
office for the remaining balance of the unexpired term as provided by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2b])



(Ord. 743 – Aug. 14 Supp.)



5.11    GIFTS.



Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or
series of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a
restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly
with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of
gifts to a public official, public employee or candidate.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)



CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS



 

6.01  Nominating Method to be Used
 
6.04  Preparation of Petition and Affidavit


6.02  Nominations by Petition
 
6.05  Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals, Objections


6.03  Adding Name by Petition
 
6.06  Persons Elected



 



6.01    NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.



All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the
provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)



6.02    NOMINATIONS BY PETITION.



Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by
nomination paper or papers signed by not less than twenty-five (25) eligible
electors, residents of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)



6.03    ADDING NAME BY PETITION.



The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than by
petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)



6.04    PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT.



Nomination papers shall include a petition and an affidavit of candidacy. 
The petition and affidavit shall be substantially in the form prescribed by
the State Commissioner of Elections, shall include information required by
the Code of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5 & 45.6)



6.05    FILING, PRESUMPTION, WITHDRAWALS, OBJECTIONS.



The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of
validity thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the
effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency
of such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed
by the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)



6.06    PERSONS ELECTED.



The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on
the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])



CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT



 

7.01  Purpose
 
7.05  Operating Budget Preparation


7.02  Finance Officer
 
7.06  Budget Amendments


7.03  Cash Control
 
7.07  Accounting


7.04  Fund Control
 
7.08  Financial Reports



 



7.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules
and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.



7.02    FINANCE OFFICER.



The Clerk is the finance and accounting officer of the City and is
responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.



7.03    CASH CONTROL.



To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following
shall apply:



   1.   Deposit of Funds.  All moneys or fees collected for any
purpose by any City officer shall be deposited through the office of the
finance officer.  If any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid
to the officer by check drawn by the finance officer and approved by the
Council only upon such officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto
as required by law, ordinance or Council directive. 



   2.   Deposits and Investments.  All moneys belonging to the City
shall be promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in
amounts not exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the
Council or invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy
and State law, including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of
the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)



   3.   Petty Cash Fund.  The finance officer shall be custodian of a
petty cash fund for the payment of small claims for minor purchases,
collect-on-delivery transportation charges and small fees customarily paid at
the time of rendering a service, for which payments the finance officer shall
obtain some form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or
agent.  At such time as the petty cash fund is approaching depletion, the
finance officer shall draw a check for replenishment in the amount of the
accumulated expenditures and said check and supporting detail shall be
submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual manner for claims and
charged to the proper funds and accounts.  It shall not be used for salary
payments or other personal services or personal expenses.



   4.   Meeting Expense Fund.  There is established an maintained a
meeting expense fund to cover the cost of trips taken and meetings attended
by City officials.



7.04    FUND CONTROL.



There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in
accordance with the following: 



   1.   Revenues.  All moneys received by the City shall be credited
to the proper fund as required by law, ordinance or resolution.



   2.   Expenditures.  No disbursement shall be made from a fund
unless such disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was
properly budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council. 



   3.   Emergency Fund.  No transfer may be made from any fund to the
Emergency Fund.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])



   4.   Debt Service Fund.  Except where specifically prohibited by
State law, moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt
Service Fund to meet payments of principal and interest.  Such transfers
must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])



   5.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund.  Except where specifically
prohibited by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the
Capital Improvements Reserve Fund.  Such transfers must be authorized by the
original budget or a budget amendment.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4])



   6.   Utility and Enterprise Funds.  A surplus in a Utility or
Enterprise Fund may be transferred to any other City fund, except the
Emergency Fund and Road Use Tax Funds, by resolution of the Council.  A
surplus may exist only after all required transfers have been made to any
restricted accounts in accordance with the terms and provisions of any
revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the Utility or Enterprise
Fund.  A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the operating account or
the unrestricted retained earnings calculated in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles in excess of:



      A.   The amount of the expense of disbursements for operating
and maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three (3) months,
and




      B.   The amount necessary to make all required transfers to
restricted accounts for the succeeding three (3) months.




(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5])



   7.   Balancing of Funds.  Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the
close of each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.



7.05    OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.



The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
the following:



   1.   Proposal Prepared.  The finance officer is responsible for
preparation of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council
and adoption by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and
Council.



   2.   Boards and Commissions.  All boards, commissions and other
administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and
administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the finance officer
for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such form as
required by the Council.



   3.   Submission to Council.  The finance officer shall submit the
completed budget proposal to the Council no later than February 15 of each
year.



   4.   Council Review.  The Council shall review the proposed budget
and may make any adjustments in the budget which it deems appropriate before
accepting such proposal for publication, hearing and final adoption.



   5.   Notice of Hearing.  Upon adopting a proposed budget the
Council shall set a date for public hearing thereon to be held before March
15 and cause notice of such hearing and a summary of the proposed budget to
be published not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days before the
date established for the hearing.  Proof of such publication must be filed
with the County Auditor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])



   6.   Copies of Budget on File.  Not less than twenty (20) days
before the date that the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and
not less than ten (10) days before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make
available a sufficient number of copies of the detailed budget to meet the
requests of taxpayers and organizations, and have them available for
distribution at the offices of the Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])



   7.   Adoption and Certification.  After the hearing, the Council
shall adopt, by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and
the Clerk shall certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to
the County Auditor and the County Board of Supervisors.  The tax levy
certified may be less than, but not more than, the amount estimated in the
proposed budget.  Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of
the tax certificate must be transmitted to the County Auditor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])



7.06    BUDGET AMENDMENTS.



A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes effective
July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and purpose
specified therein until amended as provided by this section.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)



   1.   Program Increase.  Any increase in the amount appropriated to
a program must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner
as the original budget.



(IAC, 545-2.2[384, 388])



   2.   Program Transfer.  Any transfer of appropriation from one
program to another must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the
same manner as the original budget. 



(IAC, 545-2.3[384, 388])



   3.   Activity Transfer.  Any transfer of appropriation from one
activity to another activity within a program must be approved by resolution
of the Council. 



(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])




   4.   Administrative Transfers.  The finance officer shall have the
authority to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated
within a specific activity without prior Council approval. 




(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])



7.07    ACCOUNTING.



The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:



   1.   Books of Original Entry.  There shall be established and
maintained books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash
received and disbursed. 



   2.   General Ledger.  There shall be established and maintained a
general ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for
recording unappropriated surpluses.   



   3.   Checks.  Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the Clerk
following Council approval, except as provided by subsection 5 hereof. 



   4.   Budget Accounts.  There shall be established such individual
accounts to record receipts by source and expenditures by program and
activity as will provide adequate information and control for budgeting
purposes as planned and approved by the Council.  Each individual account
shall be maintained within its proper fund and so kept that receipts can be
immediately and directly compared with revenue estimates and expenditures can
be related to the authorizing appropriation.  No expenditure shall be posted
except to the appropriation for the function and purpose for which the
expense was incurred.



   5.   Immediate Payment Authorized.  The Council may by resolution
authorize the Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due,
which if not paid promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late
payment or additional interest cost.  Any such payments made shall be
reported to the Council for review and approval with and in the same manner
as other claims at the next meeting following such payment.  The resolution
authorizing immediate payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized
and may include but is not limited to payment of utility bills, contractual
obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest.



   6.   Utilities.  The finance officer shall perform and be
responsible for accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities.



7.08    FINANCIAL REPORTS.



The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports:



   1.   Monthly Reports.  There shall be submitted to the Council each
month a report showing the activity and status of each fund, program,
sub-program and activity for the preceding month.



   2.   Annual Report.  Not later than December 1 of each year there
shall be published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding
fiscal year of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and
all expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt
limit of the City for the current fiscal year.  A copy of the annual report
must be filed with the Auditor of State not later than December 1 of each
year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)



CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS



 

8.01  Purpose
 
8.06  Applications


8.02  Definitions
 
8.07  Approval


8.03  Period of Partial Exemption
 
8.08  Exemption Repealed


8.04  Amounts Eligible for Exemption
 
8.09  Dual Exemptions Prohibited


8.05  Limitations
 



 



8.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from
property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the
new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities,
warehouses and distribution centers.



8.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the
first year for which the exemption is received.



   2.   “Distribution center” means a building or structure used
primarily for the storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment
to retail outlets.  Distribution center does not mean a building or
structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily
by a manufacturer to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process,
used primarily for the storage of petroleum products, or used for the retail
sale of goods.



   3.   “New construction” means new buildings and structures and
includes new buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to
existing buildings and structures.  New construction does not include
reconstruction of an existing building or structure which does not constitute
complete replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an
existing building or structure unless the reconstruction of an existing
building or structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the
reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for
the manufacturing and processing of specific products and the reconstruction
is required for the owner of the building or structure to continue
competitively to manufacture or process those products, which determination
shall receive prior approval from the City Council of the City upon the
recommendation of the Iowa Department of Economic Development.



   4.   “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of
buildings devoted primarily to research and development activities,
including, but not limited to, the design and production or manufacture of
prototype products for experimental use, and corporate research services
which do not have a primary purpose of providing on-site services to the
public.



   5.   “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public
warehouse for the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the
Code of Iowa, except that it does not mean a building or structure used
primarily to store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at
retail.



8.03    PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION.



The actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of
industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses and
distribution centers is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation
for a period of five (5) years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)



8.04    AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION.



The amount of actual value added which is eligible to be exempt from taxation
shall be as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)



   1.   For the first year, seventy-five percent (75%) 



   2.   For the second year, sixty percent (60%)



   3.   For the third year, forty-five percent (45%) 



   4.   For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%) 



   5.   For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%)



8.05    LIMITATIONS.



The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction
constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall
not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced
below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of
the new construction added.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)



8.06    APPLICATIONS.



An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value
added for which an exemption is claimed.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)



   1.   The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of
the property with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in
which the value added is first assessed for taxation.



   2.   Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by
the Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the
nature of the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary
by the Director of Revenue.



8.07    APPROVAL.



A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior approval
for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction.  If the City
Council resolves to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold
a public hearing thereon.  Thereafter, at least thirty (30) days after such
hearing the City Council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax
exemption for new construction if the new construction is in conformance with
City zoning.  Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption
from taxation until the new construction has been completed and found to be
qualified real estate.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)



8.08    EXEMPTION REPEALED.



When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of the exemption granted
by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the City Council may
repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their
expiration.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)



8.09    DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED.



A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the
property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property
tax exemption authorized by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)



CHAPTER 9
URBAN RENEWAL



 

EDITOR’S NOTE


The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.




ORDINANCE NO.
 
ADOPTED
 
NAME OF AREA


580
 
November 1, 1999
 
Forest City Northeast Urban Renewal Project Area


581
 
November 1, 1999
 
Forest City Highway 69 South Urban Renewal Project Area


589
 
July 17, 2000
 
J Street/Highway 69 Urban Renewal Project Area


599
 
November 20, 2000
 
Woodland Knoll Urban Renewal Project Area


610
 
March 4, 2002
 
Southwest Urban Renewal Project Area


641
 
December 6, 2004
 
Forest City Prairie View Economic Development District Urban Renewal Project
Area


649
 
June 20, 2005
 
Project 1 TIF Area


650
 
June 20, 2005
 
Project 2 TIF Area


654
 
August 5, 2005
 
Forest City Urban Renewal Area/ Commercial Urban Renewal Project Area


672
 
October 2, 2006
 
Amended J Street/Highway 69 Urban Renewal Project Area


760
 
December 19, 2016
 
2016 Westown Place Urban Renewal Area


761
 
December 19, 2016
 
Forest City Urban Renewal Area


781
 
March 7, 2018
 
2018 Northeast Urban Renewal Area


794
 
April 1, 2019
 
April 2019 Addition to the Forest City Urban Renewal Area


795
 
April 1, 2019
 
April 2019 Addition to the Forest City Urban Renewal Area




 



CHAPTER 10
REVITALIZATION AREAS



 

10.01  Urban Revitalization Area
 
10.02  Commercial Revitalization Area



 



10.01    URBAN REVITALIZATION AREA.



In accordance with Chapter 404 of the Code of Iowa, a revitalization area is
established for the City, consisting of the entire area within the corporate
boundaries of the City, in the Counties of Winnebago and Hancock, Iowa, as
established on August 29, 2003.



 


EDITOR’S NOTE




Ordinance No. 421, adopted January 19, 1989, designated the Urban
Revitalization Area for the City.  Ordinance No. 477, adopted April 5, 1993,
amended the City’s Urban Revitalization Plan by extending its provisions
for six (6) additional years.  Ordinance No. 559, adopted April 6, 1998,
amended the City’s Urban Revitalization Plan by extending its provisions
for six (6) additional years.  Ordinance No. 630, adopted December 15, 2003,
amended the City’s Urban Revitalization Plan by extending provisions into
newly annexed areas.  The last abatement for said revitalization shall be as
determined in January 2004, payable in Fiscal Year 2005 – 2006.  Ordinance
No. 660, adopted October 17, 2005, amended the Forest City Residential
Revitalization Plan by extending its provisions for six (6) additional
years.  Ordinance No. 721, adopted November 21, 2011, amended the Forest
City Residential Revitalization Plan by extending its provisions for six (6)
additional years.




 



10.02    COMMERCIAL REVITALIZATION AREA.



In accordance with Chapter 404 of the Code of Iowa, the area described as:



The entire area within the corporate limits of the City of Forest City, Iowa



is hereby designated as a revitalization area, which shall be known as the
Forest City Commercial Revitalization Area of the City of Forest City, Iowa. 



 


EDITOR’S NOTE




Ordinance No. 659, adopted October 17, 2005, amended the Forest City
Commercial Revitalization Plan by extending its provisions for six (6)
additional years.  Ordinance No. 720, adopted November 21, 2011, amended the
Forest City Commercial Revitalization Plan by extending its provisions for
six (6) additional years. 




 



CHAPTER 11
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX



 

11.01  Tax Imposed
 
11.03  Collection


11.02  Definitions
 
11.04  Restrictions on Use of Revenues



 



11.01    TAX IMPOSED.



There is imposed a seven percent (7%) hotel and motel tax upon the sales
price from the renting of sleeping rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters in
a hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house, manufactured or
mobile home which is tangible personal property, or tourist court or in any
place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for
rent, whether with or without meals, except the sales price from the renting
of sleeping rooms in dormitories and memorial unions at all universities and
colleges located in the State. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec.  423A.1)



11.02    DEFINITIONS.



“Renting” and “rent,” as used in this chapter, include any kind of
direct or indirect charge for the use of sleeping rooms, apartments or
sleeping quarters.  However, the tax imposed in this chapter does not apply
to the  sales price from the renting of a sleeping room, apartment or
sleeping quarters while rented by the same person for a period of more than
thirty-one (31) consecutive days.



(Code of Iowa, Sec.  423A.1)



11.03    COLLECTION.



The tax imposed in this chapter shall be remitted by the person or company
liable for same to the State Director of Revenue in the manner required by
State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec.  423A.1)



11.04    RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF REVENUES.



The revenue derived from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be accounted
for as follows:



   1.   All revenue received by the City from the imposition of the
hotel and motel tax shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City.



   2.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the revenue derived from the
hotel and motel tax shall be spent for the acquisition of sites for, or
constructing, improving, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operating or
maintaining recreational, convention, cultural or entertainment facilities,
including, but not limited to, memorial buildings, halls and monuments, civic
centers, convention buildings, auditoriums, coliseums and parking areas or
facilities located at those recreational, convention, cultural or
entertainment facilities, or the payment of principal and interest on bonds
or other evidence of indebtedness issued by the City for those recreational,
convention, cultural or entertainment facilities, or for the promotion and
encouragement of tourist and convention business in the City and surrounding
areas.



   3.   The remaining revenues may be spent by the City for any lawful
purpose for which revenues derived from ad valorem taxes may be expended.



CHAPTER 15
MAYOR



 

15.01  Term of Office
 
15.04  Compensation


15.02  Powers and Duties
 
15.05  Voting


15.03  Appointments
 



 



15.01    TERM OF OFFICE.



The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)



15.02    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:



   1.   Chief Executive Officer.  Act as the chief executive officer
of the City and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all departments
of the City, give direction to department heads concerning the functions of
the departments, and have the power to examine all functions of the municipal
departments, their records and to call for special reports from department
heads at any time. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])



   2.   Proclamation of Emergency.  Have authority to take command of
the police and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination
that a time of emergency or public danger exists.  Within the City limits,
the Mayor has all the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])



   3.   Special Meetings.  Call special meetings of the Council when
the Mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.   



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])



   4.   Mayor’s Veto.  Sign, veto or take no action on an ordinance,
amendment or resolution passed by the Council.  The Mayor may veto an
ordinance, amendment or resolution within fourteen days after passage.  The
Mayor shall explain the reasons for the veto in a written message to the
Council at the time of the veto.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2])



   5.   Reports to Council.  Make such oral or written reports to the
Council as required.  These reports shall concern municipal affairs
generally, the municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for
Council action.



   6.   Negotiations.  Represent the City in all negotiations properly
entered into in accordance with law or ordinance.  The Mayor shall not
represent the City where this duty is specifically delegated to another
officer by law, ordinance, or Council direction.



   7.   Contracts.  Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts
on behalf of the City.



   8.   Professional Services.  Upon order of the Council, secure for
the City such specialized and professional services not already available to
the City.  In executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in
accordance with the Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State. 



   9.   Nuisances.  Issue written order for removal, at public
expense, any nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.



   10.   Absentee Officer.  Make appropriate provision that duties of
any absentee officer be carried on during such absence.



15.03    APPOINTMENTS.



The Mayor shall appoint the Mayor Pro Tem and the Mayor also appoints, with
Council approval, the following officials:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)



   1.   Police Chief



   2.   Library Board of Trustees



   3.   Board of Cemetery Trustees



   4.   Cable Television Commission



15.04    COMPENSATION.



The salary of the Mayor is three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



15.05    VOTING.



The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member of
the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4) 



CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM



 

16.01  Vice President of Council
 
16.03  Voting Rights


16.02  Powers and Duties
 
16.04  Compensation



 



16.01    VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.



The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall
serve as vice president of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])



16.02    POWERS AND DUTIES.



Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall
perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the Mayor
to perform such duties.  In the exercise of the duties of the office the
Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ or discharge from
employment, officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint,
employ or discharge without the approval of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])



16.03    VOTING RIGHTS.



The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])



16.04    COMPENSATION.



If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s
absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days or more,
the Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined
by the Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s
duties and upon the compensation of the Mayor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



CHAPTER 17
COUNCIL



 

17.01  Number and Term of Council
 
17.04  Council Meetings


17.02  Powers and Duties
 
17.05  Appointments


17.03  Exercise of Power
 
17.06  Compensation



 



17.01    NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.



The Council consists of three Council Members elected at large and one
Council Member from each of four wards as established by the Code of
Ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four years.



17.02    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the
following:



   1.   General.  All powers of the City are vested in the Council
except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])



   2.   Wards.  By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into
wards based upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards
or create new wards. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])



   3.   Fiscal Authority.  The Council shall apportion and appropriate
all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and
order payment thereof.  It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement or repairs which
may be specially assessed.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38[1])




   4.   Public Improvements.  The Council shall make all orders for
the construction of any improvements, bridges or buildings.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])



   5.   Contracts.  The Council shall make or authorize the making of
all contracts.  No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
approved by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 26.10)



   6.   Employees.  The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the
number, duties, term of office and compensation of employees or officers not
otherwise provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   7.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers.  By ordinance, the
Council shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and
other elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor
does not become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and
the Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of
any elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of
a regular City election.  A change in the compensation of Council members
becomes effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the
Council members elected at the election next following the change in
compensation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



17.03    EXERCISE OF POWER.



The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment or an ordinance in the following manner:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])



   1.   Action by Council.  Passage of an ordinance, amendment or
resolution requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. 
Passage of a motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council.  A
resolution must be passed to spend public funds in excess of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) on a public improvement project, or to accept
public improvements and facilities upon their completion.  Each Council
member’s vote on a measure must be recorded.  A measure which fails to
receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)



   2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto.  Within thirty (30) days after the
Mayor’s veto, the Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less
than two-thirds of all of the members of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])



   3.   Measures Become Effective.  Measures passed by the Council
become effective in one of the following ways:



      A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes
effective when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published,
unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.   



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])



      B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective
immediately upon signing.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])



      C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of
the motion by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])



      D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution
and the Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution
becomes effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment
becomes a law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published,
unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])



      E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment
or resolution, a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the
date of passage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance
or a summary of the ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after
the date of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within
the ordinance or amendment.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])



“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the
Council including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but
does not include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason
of a conflict of interest.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)



17.04    COUNCIL MEETINGS.



Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions
regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section 5.06 of
this Code of Ordinances.  Additional particulars relating to Council
meetings are the following:



   1.   Regular Meetings.  The regular meetings of the Council are on
the first and third Mondays of each month at 7:00 p.m. at Council chambers at
City Hall.  If such day falls on a legal holiday, the meeting is held the
following day at the same time unless a different day or time is determined
by the Council.



   2.   Special Meetings.  Special meetings shall be held upon call of
the Mayor or upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])




   3.   Quorum.  A majority of all Council members is a quorum. 




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])




   4.   Rules of Procedure.  The Council shall determine its own rules
and maintain records of its proceedings.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])



   5.   Compelling Attendance.  Any three members of the Council can
compel the attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned or duly
called meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend
at once. 



17.05    APPOINTMENTS.



The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers,
duties, compensation and term of office:



   1.   City Clerk



   2.   City Attorney



   3.   Planning and Zoning Commission



   4.   Airport Zoning Commission



   5.   Airport Commission



   6.   Zoning Board of Adjustment



17.06    COMPENSATION.



The salary of each Council member is one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK



 

18.01  Appointment and Compensation
 
18.08  Records


18.02  Powers and Duties: General
 
18.09  Attendance at Meetings


18.03  Publication of Minutes
 
18.10  Issue Licenses and Permits


18.04  Recording Measures
 
18.11  Notify Appointees


18.05  Publication
 
18.12  Elections


18.06  Authentication
 
18.13  City Seal


18.07  Certify Measures
 



 



18.01    APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.



At its first meeting in January each year the Council shall appoint by
majority vote a City Clerk to serve for a term of one year.  The Clerk shall
receive such compensation as established by resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])



18.02    POWERS AND DUTIES:  GENERAL.



The Clerk, or in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk
has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of
Ordinances and the law.



18.03    PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.



The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and within
fifteen (15) days following a regular or special meeting shall cause the
minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published.  Such publication shall
include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall
show the gross amount of the claims.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])



18.04    RECORDING MEASURES.



The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and
record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the
Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether the
measure was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 & 2])



18.05    PUBLICATION.



The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings
and official notices requiring publication as follows:



   1.   Time.  If notice of an election, hearing, or other official
action is required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be
published at least once, not less than four (4) nor more than twenty (20)
days before the date of the election, hearing or other action, unless
otherwise provided by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])



   2.   Manner of Publication.  A publication required by this Code of
Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and
having general circulation in the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])



18.06    AUTHENTICATION.



The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s
signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])



18.07    CERTIFY MEASURES.



The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district,
building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or
limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the
City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)



18.08    RECORDS.



The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:



   1.   Ordinances and Codes.  Maintain copies of all effective City
ordinances and codes for public use.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])




   2.   Custody.  Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping
of all writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless
otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   3.   Maintenance.  Maintain all City records and documents, or
accurate reproductions, for at least five (5) years except that ordinances,
resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption
or replacement of public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least
eleven (11) years following the final maturity of the bonds or obligations. 
Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or
accurate reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall be
maintained permanently.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])



   4.   Provide Copy.  Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a
copy of any record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when
it may be necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s
duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee
set by Council resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other
authorized officer, affix the seal of the City to those public documents or
instruments which by ordinance and Code of Ordinances are required to be
attested by the affixing of the seal.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7[5])



   5.   Filing of Communications.  Keep and file all communications
and petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally.  The Clerk
shall endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered
in such communications and petitions.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.09    ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.



At the direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of
committees, boards and commissions.  The Clerk shall record and preserve a
correct record of the proceedings of such meetings.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.10    ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS.



The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this
Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which
shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt
number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit and purpose
for which issued.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.11    NOTIFY APPOINTEES.



The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to
offices in the City government of their positions and the time at which they
shall assume the duties of their offices.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.12    ELECTIONS.



The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with
Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.



(Ord. 743 – Aug. 14 Supp.)



18.13    CITY SEAL.



The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the
Clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which it may be necessary
or proper to authenticate.  The City seal is circular in form, in the center
of which are the words “CORPORATE SEAL” and around the margin of which
are the words “CITY OF FOREST CITY” and “IOWA.”



CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER



 

19.01  Appointment
 
19.03  Duties of Treasurer


19.02  Compensation
 
19.04  Boards and Commissions



 



19.01    APPOINTMENT.



The City Clerk is the Treasurer and performs all functions required of the
position of Treasurer.



19.02    COMPENSATION.



The Clerk receives no additional compensation for performing the duties of
the Treasurer.



19.03    DUTIES OF TREASURER.



The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   Custody of Funds.  Be responsible for the safe custody of all
funds of the City in the manner provided by law, and Council direction. 



   2.   Record of Fund.  Keep the record of each fund separate. 



   3.   Record Receipts.  Keep an accurate record of all money or
securities received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the
date, from whom, and for what purpose received. 



   4.   Record Disbursements.  Keep an accurate account of all
disbursements, money or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what
fund paid. 



   5.   Special Assessments.  Keep a separate account of all money
received by the Treasurer from special assessments. 



   6.   Deposit Funds.  Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the
Treasurer’s custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in
depositories selected by the Council.



   7.   Reconciliation.  Reconcile depository statements with the
Treasurer’s books and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash
and investments of each fund and amounts received and disbursed.



   8.   Debt Service.  Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and
record all payments of interest and principal.



   9.   Other Duties.  Perform such other duties as specified by the
Council by resolution or ordinance. 



19.04    BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.



The City Treasurer is the Treasurer of the Park Commission, Library Board,
Cemetery Board, and Airport Commission, and pays out all money under control
of the respective boards on orders signed by the respective Chairs and
Secretaries of such boards, but receives no additional compensation for such
services.



CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY



 

20.01  Appointment and Compensation
 
20.05  Review and Comment


20.02  Attorney for City
 
20.06  Provide Legal Opinion


20.03  Power of Attorney
 
20.07  Attendance at Council Meetings


20.04  Ordinance Preparation
 
20.08  Prepare Documents



 



20.01    APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.



The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve for a
term of one year.  The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.02    ATTORNEY FOR CITY.



The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters affecting
the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court,
tribunal, commission or board.  The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend
all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.03    POWER OF ATTORNEY.



The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to
all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the
prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound
upon the same.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.04    ORDINANCE PREPARATION.



The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances which the Council may desire
and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances
before their final passage by the Council and publication.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.05    REVIEW AND COMMENT.



The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council giving an
opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to
or coming under the City Attorney’s notice.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.06    PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.



The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City
contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
Mayor, Council, City Administrator, City Clerk and department heads.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.07    ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.



The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the
Mayor or Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.08    PREPARE DOCUMENTS.



The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms
and other writings which may be required for the use of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])


Forest City, Iowa Code of Ordinances


CHAPTER 21
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES



 

21.01  Public Library
 
21.07  Nonresident Use


21.02  Library Trustees
 
21.08  Expenditures


21.03  Qualifications of Trustees
 
21.09  Annual Report


21.04  Organization of the Board
 
21.10  Injury to Books or Property


21.05  Powers and Duties
 
21.11  Theft


21.06  Contracting with Other Libraries
 
21.12  Notice Posted



 



21.01    PUBLIC LIBRARY.



The public library for the City is known as the Forest City Public Library. 
It is referred to in this chapter as the Library.



21.02    LIBRARY TRUSTEES.



The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
consists of nine resident members.  All members are to be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council. 



21.03    QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.



All members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the
City.  Members shall be over the age of eighteen (18) years.



21.04    ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.



The organization of the Board shall be as follows:



   1.   Term of Office.  All appointments to the Board shall be for
six years, except to fill vacancies.  Each term shall commence on July 1. 
Appointments shall be made every two years of one-third the total number or
as near as possible, to stagger the terms.



   2.   Vacancies.  The position of any Trustee shall be vacated if
such member moves permanently from the City and shall be deemed vacated if
such member is absent from six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the Board,
except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the City. 
Vacancies in the Board shall be filled in the same manner as an original
appointment except that the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for
which the appointment is made. 



   3.   Compensation.  Trustees shall receive no compensation for
their services. 



21.05    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:



   1.   Officers.  To meet and elect from its members a President, a
Secretary, and such other officers as it deems necessary.  The City
Treasurer shall serve as Board Treasurer, but shall not be a member of the
Board.



   2.   Physical Plant.  To have charge, control and supervision of
the Library, its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.



   3.   Charge of Affairs.  To direct and control all affairs of the
Library.



   4.   Hiring of Personnel.  To employ a librarian, and authorize the
librarian to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the
proper management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided,
however, that prior to such employment, the compensation of the librarian,
assistants and employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of
the members of the Board voting in favor thereof.



   5.   Removal of Personnel.  To remove the librarian, by a
two-thirds vote of the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the
assistants or employees for misdemeanor, incompetence or inattention to duty,
subject however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.



   6.   Purchases.  To select, or authorize the librarian to select,
and make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps,
journals, other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and
supplies for the Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.



   7.   Use by Nonresidents.  To authorize the use of the Library by
nonresidents and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service
exists.



   8.   Rules and Regulations.  To make and adopt, amend, modify or
repeal rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances
and the law, for the care, use, government and management of the Library and
the business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.



   9.   Expenditures.  To have exclusive control of the expenditure of
all funds allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys
available by gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of
all other moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals
collected under the rules of the Board.



   10.   Gifts.  To accept gifts of real property, personal property,
or mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take
the title to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and
bills of sale for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds
received by them from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.



   11.   Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts.  To enforce
the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests
accepted by the City by action against the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Ch. 661)



   12.   Record of Proceedings.  To keep a record of its proceedings.



   13.   County Historical Association.  To have authority to make
agreements with the local County historical association where such exists,
and to set apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come
into the possession of the association.  The Trustees are further authorized
to purchase necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and
protection of such articles as are in their judgment of a historical and
educational nature and pay for the same out of funds allocated for Library
purposes.



21.06    CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.



The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the
following:



   1.   Contracting.  The Board may contract with any other boards of
trustees of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation,
private or semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning,
township, or County, or with the trustees of any County library district for
the use of the Library by their respective residents. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 & Ch. 28E)



   2.   Termination.  Such a contract may be terminated at any time by
mutual consent of the contracting parties.  It also may be terminated by a
majority vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting
parties.  Such a termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors
by the governing body of a contracting party on a written petition of not
less than five percent (5%) in number of the electors who voted for governor
in the territory of the contracting party at the last general election.  The
petition must be presented to the governing body not less than forty (40)
days before the election.  The proposition may be submitted at any election
provided by law that is held in the territory of the party seeking to
terminate the contract. 



21.07    NONRESIDENT USE.



The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of
the City or County in any one or more of the following ways:



   1.   Lending.  By lending the books or other materials of the
Library to nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of
the City, or County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee. 



   2.   Depository.  By establishing depositories of Library books or
other materials to be loaned to nonresidents. 



   3.   Bookmobiles.  By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling
library so that books or other Library materials may be loaned to
nonresidents. 



   4.   Branch Library.  By establishing branch libraries for lending
books or other Library materials to nonresidents. 



21.08    EXPENDITURES.



All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of
the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library.  Expenditures
shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and
Secretary.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5)



21.09    ANNUAL REPORT.



The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of
the fiscal year.  This report shall contain statements as to the condition
of the Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount
of fines collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of
the Library during the year, together with such further information as may be
required by the Council.



21.10    INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.



It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear,
deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper,
periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging
to the Library or reading room.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



21.11    THEFT.



No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with
the intent to deprive the Library thereof.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)



21.12    NOTICE POSTED.



There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices
informing the public of the following:



   1.   Failure to Return.  Failure to return Library materials for
two months or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library
materials, or failure to return Library equipment for one month or more after
the date the person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence of
intent to deprive the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the
mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that such material or
equipment is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been made to
reclaim the materials or equipment. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)



   2.   Detention and Search.  Persons concealing Library materials
may be detained and searched pursuant to law. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)



CHAPTER 22
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION



 

22.01  Planning and Zoning Commission
 
22.04  Compensation


22.02  Term of Office
 
22.05  Powers and Duties


22.03  Vacancies
 



 



22.01    PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. 



The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission, consists of nine members, seven of whom are residents of the
City.  The resident members shall be appointed by the Council and shall not
hold any elective office in the City government.  The additional two members
of the Commission are one member of the County Board of Supervisors, or a
person designated by the Board, and one resident of the area outside the City
over which the zoning jurisdiction of the City has been extended, both
appointed by the County Board of Supervisors.  A person designated by the
Board shall also be a resident of the County in which such extended area is
located.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6, 414.23 & 392.1)



22.02    TERM OF OFFICE.



The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five years. 
The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one
year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



22.03    VACANCIES.



If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or otherwise,
a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner
as the original appointee.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



22.04    COMPENSATION.



All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



22.05    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:



   1.   Selection of Officers.  The Commission shall choose annually
at its first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and
another as Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the
Chairperson during the Chairperson’s absence or disability.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)




   2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations.  The Commission shall adopt such
rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem
necessary.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



   3.   Zoning.  The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers
and duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and
other related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council
amendments, supplements, changes or modifications, all as provided by Chapter
414 of the Code of Iowa. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)



   4.   Recommendations of Improvements.  No statuary, memorial or
work of art in a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct,
street fixtures, public structure or appurtenances, shall be located or
erected, or site therefor obtained, nor shall any permit be issued by any
department of the City for the erection or location thereof until and unless
the design and proposed location of any such improvement shall have been
submitted to the Commission and its recommendations thereon obtained, except
such requirements and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for
any such improvement when the Commission after thirty (30) days’ written
notice requesting such recommendations, shall have failed to file same.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



   5.   Review and Comment on Plats.  All plans, plats, or re-plats of
subdivision or re-subdivisions of land embraced in the City or adjacent
thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other
portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the public in the City,
shall first be submitted to the Commission and its recommendations obtained
before approval by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



   6.   Review and Comment of Street and Park Improvements.  No plan
for any street, park, parkway, boulevard, traffic-way, river front, or other
public improvement affecting the City plan shall be finally approved by the
City or the character or location thereof determined, unless such proposal
shall first have been submitted to the Commission and the Commission shall
have had thirty (30) days within which to file its recommendations thereon. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



   7.   Limitation on Entering Contracts.  The Commission shall have
no power to contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended
appropriation as approved by the Council for the present year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



CHAPTER 23
PARK COMMISSION



 



23.01  Park Board
 
23.09  Acquisition of Land


23.02  Election; Term
 
23.10  Sale or Lease of Property


23.03  Organization
 
23.11  Limited Leases


23.04  Treasurer
 
23.12  Rules and Regulations


23.05  Compensation
 
23.13  Limitation on Entering Contracts


23.06  Budget Certified
 
23.14  Swimming Pool


23.07  Jurisdiction and Authority
 
23.15  Penalties


23.08  Poles and Wires
 




 



23.01    PARK BOARD.



There shall be a Board of Park Commissioners for the City consisting of five
(5) citizens of legal age.



23.02    ELECTION; TERM.



One Commissioner shall be elected at each regular City election for a term of
six (6) years.



(Ord. 788 - Dec. 18 Supp.)



23.03    ORGANIZATION.



Within ten (10) days following the regular City election, the Commission
shall elect one of its members as Chairperson and one as Secretary.



23.04    TREASURER.



The City Treasurer is the Treasurer of the Park Commission and pays out all
moneys under the control of the Park Commission on orders signed by the
Chairperson and Secretary, but receives no compensation for such services.



23.05    COMPENSATION.



There shall be no compensation attached to the office of Park Commissioner,
and all services performed by said Commissioner shall be rendered without
compensation therefor.



23.06    BUDGET CERTIFIED.



The Park Commission shall submit to the finance officer a proposed budget and
tax levy for general park purposes for the ensuing fiscal year.  The Council
shall include such tax levy, or so much thereof as it may deem necessary, in
the levy for the General Fund of the City as certified to the County Auditor.



23.07    JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY.



The Park Commission has exclusive control of all parks and pleasure grounds
acquired by it and of any other ground owned by the City and set apart for
like purposes within or outside of the City.  All ordinances of the City
shall be in full force and effect in and over the territory occupied by such
parks.



23.08    POLES AND WIRES.



The Park Commission may regulate or forbid the erection of poles or the
stretching of wire for electric light, street, railway, or other purposes in
such parks or in or along streets or highways or over public places laid out
or controlled by it.



23.09    ACQUISITION OF LAND.



The Park Commission may acquire, subject to Council approval, real estate
within or outside the City for park purposes by donation, lease, purchase, or
condemnation, take the title to real estate in the name of the Park
Commission in trust for the public and hold it exempt from taxation.



23.10    SALE OR LEASE OF PROPERTY.



Subject to the approval of the Council, the Park Commission may sell,
exchange, or lease any real estate acquired by it which in its discretion is
unfit, not desirable, unnecessary, or not required for park purposes.



23.11    LIMITED LEASES.



The Park Commission may lease under reasonable rates and requirements a
particular park or portion thereof, as follows:



   1.   Organizations.  For a period not in excess of ten (10) days to
charitable, to fraternal and patriotic organizations for the conduct of
celebrations, anniversaries and entertainment. 



   2.   Professional Games.  For a time not to exceed six (6)
consecutive months, for the purpose of permitting the playing of professional
baseball or other professional games. 



23.12    RULES AND REGULATIONS.



The Park Commission shall have the power to make rules and regulations for
the use of park or other facilities under its control.  Such rules shall be
posted on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide
adequate notice to the public.



23.13    LIMITATION ON ENTERING CONTRACTS.



Unless prior approval is obtained from the Council, the Commission shall have
no power to contract debts, including leases, lease-purchase agreements, or
any long-term contracts, beyond the amount of its original or amended
appropriation as approved by the Council for the present year.



23.14    SWIMMING POOL.



The Commission shall have exclusive control of the City swimming pool and the
area surrounding it which is incidental to or a part of the pool.



23.15    PENALTIES.



Any person who violates a Park Commission rule or regulation which has been
approved by the Council and adopted by ordinance may be subjected to the
penalties provided for in the ordinance adopting the rule or regulation.



CHAPTER 24
AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION



 

24.01  Airport Zoning Commission
 
24.03  Powers and Duties


24.02  Terms of Office
 
24.04  Limitation on Entering Contracts



 



24.01    AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION.



There is created an Airport Zoning Commission consisting of three members who
are residents of the City and appointed by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 329.9)



24.02    TERMS OF OFFICE.



The members of the Commission are appointed for overlapping terms of five (5)
years.  Any vacancy occurring on the Airport Zoning Commission caused by
resignation or otherwise shall be filled by the Council.  All members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation except for their actual expenses
which shall be subject to approval by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 329.9)



24.03    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The Commission shall have all the powers, duties and authority vested in it
by the laws of the State, now in effect or which may be hereafter enacted,
and by resolution and ordinances of the City.



24.04    LIMITATION ON ENTERING CONTRACTS.



Unless prior approval is obtained from the Council, the Commission shall have
no power to contract debts, including leases, lease-purchase agreements, or
any long-term contracts, beyond the amount of its original or amended
appropriation as approved by the Council for the present year.



CHAPTER 25
AIRPORT COMMISSION



 

25.01  Airport Commission
 
25.06  Officers


25.02  Appointment and Term
 
25.07  Powers and Duties


25.03  Vacancies
 
25.08  Limitation on Entering Contracts


25.04  Compensation
 
25.09  Rules; Violation and Penalty


25.05  Bond
 



 



25.01    AIRPORT COMMISSION.



There shall be an Airport Commission consisting of five resident voters, each
of whom shall be a resident of the City or Winnebago or Hancock Counties. 
At least three of the members of the five-member Commission shall be
residents of the City of Forest City, Iowa.



(Ord. 692 – Jun. 09 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)



25.02    APPOINTMENT AND TERM.



Commissioners shall be appointed by the Council for staggered terms of six
years, commencing on January 1 of the year of appointment.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)



25.03    VACANCIES.



Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Council to fill out the
unexpired term for which the appointment was made. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)



25.04    COMPENSATION.



Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)



25.05    BOND.



Each Commissioner shall execute and furnish a bond in the amount of two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00), which bond shall be filed with the City Clerk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)



25.06    OFFICERS.



Every two years The Commission shall elect from its own members a Chairperson
and Secretary.  The City Treasurer shall be ex officio treasurer of the
Commission.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)



25.07    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The Commission shall have full control and management of the real and
personal property owned by the City for airport purposes, control of all
appropriations granted by the Council, including the power to establish fees,
rents, concessions and charges for use of the property and services of the
airport facilities and staff.  It shall have the power to employ a manager,
by whatever title, and such assistants and employees as it deems necessary
subject to the amounts provided for such purpose by the Council through
budgetary appropriation for airport operation, maintenance and improvement. 
The Commission shall submit to the finance officer a proposed budget and tax
levy for airport operation expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year.  Where
the Council must consider one-year or two-year future year estimates, the
Commission shall submit its estimates for those years.  The appropriations
so allocated shall be under the full and absolute control of the Commission
for purposes prescribed by law and the Clerk and Treasurer shall not pay any
claim except upon the written order of the Commission.  The Clerk shall
write the checks and keep the accounts of the airport and the Commission
shall follow the purchasing procedures set by the Council.



25.08    LIMITATION ON ENTERING CONTRACTS.



Unless prior approval is obtained from the Council, the Commission shall have
no power to contract debts, including leases, lease-purchase agreements, or
any long-term contracts, beyond the amount of its original or amended
appropriation as approved by the Council for the present year.



25.09    RULES; VIOLATION AND PENALTY.



   1.   Every person using the airport or entering upon airport
property shall comply with the rules established by the Commission.



   2.   Such rules shall be posted in two or more prominent locations
on airport property.



   3.   Following notice to a person who violates an operating rule of
the Commission or State or Federal air law, and hearing on a charge of such
violation, the Commission may deny such person charged the use of the airport
or its facilities if it is shown that the violation caused serious danger to
other users or to property, showed negligence or that there had been a
pattern of repeated violations such as to eliminate the probability of
inadvertence in committing the violation.  The denial order shall state a
term, not exceeding one year.  Such rules shall extend to the air space
above the airport, the land within the City limits and the area within two
miles of the boundaries of the airport regardless of the territorial limits
of the airport or City, as the Commission shall provide.



CHAPTER 26
BOARD OF CEMETERY TRUSTEES



 

26.01  Creation of Board; Qualifications
 
26.06  Compensation


26.02  Powers
 
26.07  Sale of Interment Rights


26.03  Limitation on Entering Contracts
 
26.08  Establishment of Trust Fund


26.04  Appointments; Vacancies
 
26.09  Perpetual Care Registry


26.05  Meetings
 



 



26.01    CREATION OF BOARD; QUALIFICATIONS.



There is created a Board of Cemetery Trustees, composed of three (3) members,
each of whom shall be of legal age and a resident of the City.



26.02    POWERS.



The management, control and operation of the municipally owned cemetery is
transferred to and vested in the Board of Trustees with full power and
authority to sell and convey burial lots, enter into agreements for the
perpetual care thereof, receive and invest funds, hire and compensate
employees to perform labor and services required, maintain and improve the
cemetery, and to have and to exercise power and authority to the extent and
in the manner provided by the laws of the State and this Code of
Ordinances.  Pursuant to Section 523I.502 of the Code of Iowa, the Board of
Trustees hereby states its willingness and intention to act as the trustee
for the perpetual maintenance of the cemetery property.  The Board of
Trustees shall manage, control and operate the cemetery all in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.501 and Sec. 523I.502)



26.03    LIMITATION ON ENTERING CONTRACTS.



Unless prior approval is obtained from the Council, the trustees shall have
no power to contract debts, including leases, lease-purchase agreements or
any long-term contracts, beyond the amount of its original or amended
appropriation as approved by the Council for the present year.  This section
shall not be construed to prohibit the trustees from entering into contracts
to sell interment rights in the municipal cemetery and collect fees and taxes
therefrom. 



(Ord. 751 – Oct. 15 Supp.)



26.04    APPOINTMENT; VACANCIES. 



The trustees are appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council at
the first regular meeting in January following each regular municipal
election.  Vacancies to the Board are filled as they occur by similar
appointment and approval.



26.05    MEETINGS. 



The Board of Trustees shall meet within ten (10) days of the regular biennial
appointment and elect a Chairperson and other officers deemed appropriate. 
The City Treasurer shall serve as the Secretary-Treasurer of the Board, but
shall not be a member of the Board.  All conveyances of property, releases
of mortgages, agreements for perpetual care and other instruments and
documents pertaining to the cemetery and its operation shall be executed by
the Chairperson and the Secretary-Treasurer of the Board.



26.06    COMPENSATION. 



There is no compensation attached to the office of Cemetery Trustee and all
services performed by said Trustees are rendered without compensation.



26.07    SALE OF INTERMENT RIGHTS. 



The sale or transfer of interment rights in the cemetery shall be evidenced
by a certificate of interment rights or other instrument evidencing the
conveyance of exclusive rights of interment upon payment in full of the
purchase price.  The agreement for interment rights shall disclose all
information required by the Iowa Cemetery Act, including the amount or
percentage of money to be placed in the perpetual care cemetery fund. 



(Ord. 751 – Oct. 15 Supp.)



26.08    ESTABLISHMENT OF TRUST FUND. 



A perpetual trust is hereby established for the municipally owned cemetery in
accordance with Iowa Code Chapter 523I, the Iowa Cemetery Act.  A restricted
fund is created, to be known and designated as the “perpetual care cemetery
fund,” which shall be funded by the deposit of an amount equal to or
greater than twenty percent of the gross selling price, or $50.00, whichever
is greater, for each sale of burial lots within the cemetery.  The fund
shall be administered in accordance with the purposes and provisions of Iowa
Code chapter 523I.



The perpetual care cemetery fund shall be maintained separate from all
operating funds of the cemetery and the principal of the fund shall not be
reduced voluntarily except as specifically permitted by the Iowa Cemetery Act
and applicable administrative regulations.



(Ord. 751 – Oct. 15 Supp.)



26.09    PERPETUAL CARE REGISTRY. 



The cemetery shall maintain a registry of individuals who have purchased
interment rights in the cemetery subject to the care fund requirements of the
Iowa Cemetery Act, including the amounts deposited in the perpetual care
cemetery fund.



(Ord. 751 – Oct. 15 Supp.)



CHAPTER 27
CITY ADMINISTRATOR



 

27.01  Office Created
 
27.03  Duties


27.02  Compensation
 
27.04  Combination with Other Offices



 



27.01    OFFICE CREATED.



The office of City Administrator is hereby created, which shall be filled by
a majority vote of Council.  The appointee shall hold office during the
pleasure of the Council and shall be subject to removal by a majority vote of
the Council. 



27.02    COMPENSATION.



The City Administrator shall receive such annual salary as the Council shall
from time to time determine by resolution and the payment shall be made
biweekly from the Treasury of the City in the manner provided for payment of
other officers and employees.



27.03    DUTIES.



The powers and duties of the City Administrator shall include the duties of
the City Clerk contained in Chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances, and the
following:



   1.   Attend all meetings of the Council unless excused by the
Council.



   2.   Attend meetings of the administrative boards and commissions of
the City as required by the Council.



   3.   Administration of all ordinances, resolutions, Council
policies, directives and procedures.



   4.   Recommend to the Council such measures as he or she deems
necessary or expedient for good government and the welfare of the City.



   5.   Prepare and administer the City’s annual operating budget.



   6.   Keep the Council fully advised as to financial and other
conditions of the City and of its future needs.



   7.   Prepare and submit to the Council annually the required budgets.



   8.   Be responsible for all bookkeeping and accounting procedures
for the City in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
Be responsible for the completion of the annual City audit through outside
contractors.



   9.   Conduct a continuous study of the City government’s operating
procedures, organizations and facilities and made recommendations for fiscal
and other policy changes to the Council whenever necessary.



   10.   Supervision of City personnel through department heads.



   11.   Employ, reclassify or discharge all employees, subject to
Council approval, subject to the provisions of the Veteran’s Preference law
and the Civil Service law, except the City Clerk, Police Chief and Fire Chief.



   12.   Supervise the official conduct and work response of all
officers and employees of the City who are appointed or employed by the City
Administrator.



   13.   Evaluate or oversee the evaluations of the performance of all
City employees.



   14.   Supervise all purchases of material and supplies and see that
such materials and supplies are received and are of a quality and character
called for and deemed necessary.



   15.   Supervise the maintenance and management of all City property.



   16.   Cooperate with any administrative agency or Municipal Utility
Board of Trustees.



   17.   Perform other duties at the Council’s direction.



   18.   Negotiations.  Represent the City in all negotiations
properly entered into in accordance with law or ordinance.  The City
Administrator shall not represent the City where this duty is specifically
delegated to another officer by law, ordinance, or Council direction.



   19.   Professional Services.  Upon order of the Council, secure for
the City such specialized and professional services not already available to
the City.  In executing the order of the Council, the City Administrator
shall act in accordance with the Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State.



   20.   Nuisances.  Issue written order for removal, at public
expense, any nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.



27.04    COMBINATION WITH OTHER OFFICES.



The Council shall designate the same person to act as both the City
Administrator and the City Clerk and fulfill the duties of both offices.



   1.   (Ch. 27. Ord. 758 – Aug. 16 Supp.)



CHAPTER 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT



 

30.01  Department Established
 
30.06  Peace Officers Appointed


30.02  Organization
 
30.07  Police Chief: Duties


30.03  Peace Officer Qualifications
 
30.08  Departmental Rules


30.04  Required Training
 
30.09  Summoning Aid


30.05  Compensation
 
30.10  Taking Weapons



 



30.01    DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



The police department of the City is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.



30.02    ORGANIZATION.



The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement
officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by
the Council.



30.03    PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.



In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement
officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards
established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)



30.04    REQUIRED TRAINING.



All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law
at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of
employment.  Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training
as required by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])



(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)



30.05    COMPENSATION.



Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.



30.06    PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED.



The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Police Chief subject to the consent
of a majority of the Council.  The Police Chief shall select, subject to the
approval of the Council, the other members of the department.   



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)



30.07    POLICE CHIEF:  DUTIES.



The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval
of the Council. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   General.  Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by
law or ordinance.



   2.   Enforce Laws.  Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations
and bring all persons committing any offense before the proper court.



   3.   Writs.  Execute and return all writs and other processes
directed to the Police Chief.




   4.   Accident Reports.  Report all motor vehicle accidents
investigated to the State Department of Transportation. 




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)



   5.   Prisoners.  Be responsible for the custody of prisoners,
including conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.



   6.   Assist Officials.  When requested, provide aid to other City
officers, boards and commissions in the execution of their official duties.



   7.   Investigations.  Provide for such investigation as may be
necessary for the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law
or ordinance.



   8.   Record of Arrests.  Keep a record of all arrests made in the
City by showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law
or City ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the
disposition of the charge.



   9.   Reports.  Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an
annual report as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor
or Council.



   10.   Command.  Be in command of all officers appointed for police
work and be responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles,
equipment and materials of the department.



30.08    DEPARTMENTAL RULES.



The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code of
Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary
for the operation of the department.



30.09    SUMMONING AID.



Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as
the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the
arrest.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)



30.10    TAKING WEAPONS.



Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items
which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have
within such person’s control to be disposed of according to law. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)



CHAPTER 31
RESERVE POLICE FORCE



 

31.01  Establishment of Force
 
31.07  No Reduction of Regular Force


31.02  Training
 
31.08  Compensation


31.03  Status of Reserve Officers
 
31.09  Benefits When Injured


31.04  Carrying Weapons
 
31.10  Liability and False Arrest Insurance


31.05  Supplementary Capacity
 
31.11  No Participation in Pension Fund or Retirement System


31.06  Supervision of Officers
 



 



31.01    ESTABLISHMENT OF FORCE.



  A force of reserve peace officers is hereby established.  A reserve peace
officer is a volunteer, non-regular, sworn member of the Police Department
who will serve with or without compensation and has regular police powers
while functioning as the Police Department’s representative, and will
participate on a regular basis in the agency’s activities, including those
of crime prevention and control, preservation of the peace and enforcement of
the law.



31.02    TRAINING.



Training for individuals appointed as reserve peace officers shall be
provided by instructors in a community college or other facility, including a
law enforcement agency, selected by the individual and approved by the law
enforcement agency and the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.  All standards and
training required under Chapter 80D of the Code of Iowa constitute the
minimum standards for reserve peace officers.  Upon satisfactory completion
of training, the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy shall certify the individual as
a reserve peace officer.  There shall be no exemptions from the personal and
training standards provided for in this chapter.



31.03    STATUS OF RESERVE OFFICERS.



Reserve peace officers shall serve as peace officers on the orders and at the
discretion of the Police Chief.  While in the actual performance of official
duties, reserve peace officers shall be vested with the same rights,
privileges, obligations and duties as any other peace officer.



31.04    CARRYING WEAPONS.



A member of the reserve force shall not carry a weapon in the line of duty
until he or she has been approved by the Council and certified by the Iowa
Law Enforcement Academy Council.  After approval and certification, a
reserve peace officer may carry a weapon in the line of duty only when
authorized by the Police Chief. 



31.05    SUPPLEMENTARY CAPACITY.



Reserve peace officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the
regular force and shall not assume full-time duties of regular peace officers
without first complying with all the requirements of regular peace officers.



31.06    SUPERVISION OF OFFICERS.



Reserve peace officers shall be subordinate to the Police Chief, shall not
serve as peace officers unless under the direction of the Police Chief, and
shall wear a uniform prescribed by the Police Chief, unless that superior
officer designates alternate apparel for use when engaged in assignments
involving special investigations, civil process, court duties, jail duties
and the handling of mental patients.  The reserve peace officer shall not
wear an insignia of rank.



31.07    NO REDUCTION OF REGULAR FORCE.



There shall be no reduction of the authorized size of the regular law
enforcement department of the City because of the establishment or
utilization of reserve peace officers.



31.08    COMPENSATION.



While performing official duties, each reserve peace officer shall be
considered an employee of the City and shall be paid a minimum of $1.00 per
year.  The Council may provide additional monetary assistance for the
purchase and maintenance of uniforms and equipment used by reserve peace
officers.



31.09    BENEFITS WHEN INJURED.



Hospital and medical assistance and benefits, as provided in Chapter 85 of
the Code of Iowa, shall be provided by the Council to members of the reserve
force who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties.



31.10    LIABILITY AND FALSE ARREST INSURANCE.



Liability and false arrest insurance shall be provided by the City to members
of the reserve force while performing official duties in the same manner as
for regular peace officers.



31.11    NO PARTICIPATION IN PENSION FUND OR RETIREMENT SYSTEM.



This chapter shall not be construed to authorize or permit a reserve peace
officer to become eligible for participation in a pension fund or retirement
system created by the laws of the State and of which regular peace officers
may become members.



CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT



 

35.01  Establishment and Purpose
 
35.08  Constitution


35.02  Organization
 
35.09  Accidental Injury Insurance


35.03  Training
 
35.10  Liability Insurance


35.04  Compensation
 
35.11  Calls Outside Fire District


35.05  Election of Officers
 
35.12  Mutual Aid


35.06  Fire Chief: Duties
 
35.13  Authority to Cite Violations


35.07  Obedience to Fire Chief
 



 



35.01    ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.



A volunteer fire department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish
fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire
prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there
is no other established agency.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)



35.02    ORGANIZATION.



The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and
personnel as may be authorized by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



35.03    TRAINING.



All members of the department shall meet the minimum training standards
established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in
regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])



35.04    COMPENSATION.



Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



35.05    ELECTION OF OFFICERS.



The department shall elect a Fire Chief and such other officers as its
constitution and bylaws may provide.  In case of absence of the Fire Chief,
the officer next in rank shall be in charge and have and exercise all the
powers of Fire Chief.



35.06    FIRE CHIEF:  DUTIES.



The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or
ordinance, including but not limited to the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   Enforce Laws.  Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire
prevention and the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of
fires.



   2.   Technical Assistance.  Upon request, give advice concerning
private fire alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and
exits and development of fire emergency plans.



   3.   Authority at Fires.  When in charge of a fire scene, direct an
operation as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue
operation, investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas
leak, or other hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary
in the reasonable performance of the department’s duties.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)



   4.   Control of Scenes.  Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel
from approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle,
vessel or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the
Fire Department.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)



   5.   Authority to Barricade.  When in charge of a fire scene, place
or erect ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street,
alley, right-of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or
emergency so as to prevent accidents or interference with the fire fighting
efforts of the Fire Department, to control the scene until any required
investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the fire or
other emergency.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)



   6.   Command.  Be charged with the duty of maintaining the
efficiency, discipline and control of the Fire Department.  The members of
the Fire Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the
Fire Chief.



   7.   Property.  Exercise and have full control over the disposition
of all fire apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or
belonging to the Fire Department.



   8.   Notification.  Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or
property damage in excess of $200,000 has occurred as a result of a fire, or
if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division
immediately.  For all other fires causing an estimated damage of $50.00 or
more or emergency responses by the Fire Department, file a report with the
Fire Marshal’s Division within ten (10) days following the end of the
month.  The report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the
name of the owners and occupants of the property at the time of the fire, the
value of the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of
the fire as determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics, and
circumstances concerning the fire incidents. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)



   9.   Right of Entry.  Have the right, during reasonable hours, to
enter any building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the
purpose of making such investigation or inspection which under law or
ordinance may be necessary to be made and is reasonably necessary to protect
the public health, safety and welfare.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)



   10.   Recommendation.  Make such recommendations to owners,
occupants, caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire
hazards. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)




   11.   Assist State Fire Marshal.  At the request of the State Fire
Marshal, and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of
duties by investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.4)



   12.   Records.  Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department
personnel, fire fighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and
apparatus, the number of responses to alarms, their cause and location, and
an analysis of losses by value, type and location of buildings.



   13.   Reports.  Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an
annual report of the status and activities of the department as well as such
other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.



35.07    OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.



No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Chief.



35.08    CONSTITUTION.



The department shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they deem calculated
to accomplish the object contemplated.



35.09    ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE.



The Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for
worker’s compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of
hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention for volunteer fire fighters
injured in the performance of their duties as fire fighters whether within or
outside the corporate limits of the City.  All volunteer fire fighters shall
be covered by the contract. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)



35.10    LIABILITY INSURANCE.



The Council shall contract to insure against liability of the City or members
of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of and
resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the
corporate limits of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)



35.11    CALLS OUTSIDE FIRE DISTRICT.



The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the
Fire District if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists and
that such action will not endanger persons and property within the Fire
District.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])



35.12    MUTUAL AID.



Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department may enter
into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments. 
Copies of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])



35.13    AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.



Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa
may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for
violations of state and/or local fire safety regulations. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)



CHAPTER 36
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS



 

36.01  Purpose
 
36.05  Notifications


36.02  Definitions
 
36.06  Police Authority


36.03  Cleanup Required
 
36.07  Liability


36.04  Liability for Cleanup Costs
 



 



36.01    PURPOSE.



In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety and welfare from
the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are
promulgated to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal and
cleanup of hazardous substance spills within the City limits.



36.02    DEFINITIONS.



For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect,
control, identify, analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove or dispose of a
hazardous substance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])



   2.   “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the
actual, imminent or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous
substance onto the land, into a water of the State or into the atmosphere
which creates an immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety
or to the environment.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])



   3.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of
substances that presents a danger to the public health or safety and
includes, but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or
flammable, or that is an irritant or that generates pressure through
decomposition, heat, or other means.  “Hazardous substance” may include
any hazardous waste identified or listed by the administrator of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as
amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic
pollutant listed under section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous substance designated under
Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January
1, 1977, or any hazardous material designated by the Secretary of
Transportation under the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])



   4.   “Responsible person” means a person who at any time
produces, handles, stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a
hazardous substance, the release of which creates a hazardous condition,
including bailees, carriers, and any other person in control of a hazardous
substance when a hazardous condition occurs, whether the person owns the
hazardous substance or is operating under a lease, contract, or other
agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous substance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])



36.03    CLEANUP REQUIRED.



Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping,
spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the hazardous
substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the
environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters,
including ground waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to
be remedied by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as
feasible to an acceptable, safe condition.  The costs of cleanup shall be
borne by the responsible person.  If the responsible person does not cause
the cleanup to begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and
circumstances of the incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give
reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition, said
notice setting a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the
City will proceed to procure cleanup services and bill the responsible person
for all costs associated with the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished
within the deadline.  In the event that it is determined that immediate
cleanup is necessary as a result of the present danger to the public health,
safety and welfare, then no notice shall be required and the City may proceed
to procure the cleanup and bill the responsible person for all costs
associated with the cleanup.  If the bill for those services is not paid
within thirty (30) days, the City Attorney shall proceed to obtain payment by
all legal means.  If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the
City to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the Council and
immediately seek any State or Federal funds available for said cleanup.



36.04    LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.



The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City for all of the
following:



   1.   The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents
of the City as a result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up
a hazardous substance involved in a hazardous condition.



   2.   The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the
City to evacuate people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition
caused by the person.



   3.   The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to,
destruction of, or loss of City property, including parks and roads,
resulting from a hazardous condition caused by that person, including the
costs of assessing the injury, destruction or loss.



   4.   The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or
the agents of the City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous
condition caused by that person.



(Ord. 697 – Sep. 09 Supp.)



36.05    NOTIFICATIONS.



   1.   A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or
disposing of a hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of
Natural Resources and the Police Chief of the occurrence of a hazardous
condition as soon as possible but not later than six (6) hours after the
onset of the hazardous condition or discovery of the hazardous condition. 
The Police Chief shall immediately notify the Department of Natural
Resources. 



   2.   Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall
notify the Police Department, which shall then notify the Department of
Natural Resources.



36.06    POLICE AUTHORITY.



If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer or an
authorized representative may:



   1.   Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site
of a hazardous condition, and



   2.   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of
a hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.



No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under
this section.



36.07    LIABILITY.



The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries,
or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the
responsible person as defined in Section 36.02(4).



CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE



 

40.01  Assault
 
40.04  Unlawful Assembly


40.02  Harassment
 
40.05  Failure to Disperse


40.03  Disorderly Conduct
 



 



40.01    ASSAULT.



No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:



   1.   Pain or Injury.  Any act which is intended to cause pain or
injury to, or which is intended to result in physical contact which will be
insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to
execute the act.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])



   2.   Threat of Pain or Injury.  Any act which is intended to place
another in fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful,
injurious, insulting, or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to
execute the act.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])



However, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts, and such
other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other
activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable
incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk
or serious injury or breach of the peace, the act is not an assault. 
Provided, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts is employed
by a school district or accredited nonpublic school, or is an area education
agency staff member who provides services to a school or school district, and
intervenes in a fight or physical struggle, or other disruptive situation
that takes place in the presence of the employee or staff member performing
employment duties in a school building, on school grounds or at an official
school function regardless of the location, the act is not an assault,
whether the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is
between students or other individuals if the degree and the force of the
intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the
safety of those assembled.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)



40.02    HARASSMENT.



No person shall commit harassment.



   1.   A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate,
annoy or alarm another person, the person does any of the following:



      A.   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph,
writing or via electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a
manner likely to cause the other person annoyance or harm.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)



      B.   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary
device in or near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or
railroad car, or boat occupied by the other person.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)




      C.   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or
to be delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or
consent.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)



      D.   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a
law enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity,
knowing that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a
criminal act, knowing the same did not occur.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)



   2.   A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and
without legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with
the intent to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person.  As used in
this section, unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact”
means an encounter in which two or more people are in visual or physical
proximity to each other.  “Personal contact” does not require a physical
touching or oral communication, although it may include these types of
contacts.



40.03    DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



No person shall do any of the following:



   1.   Fighting.  Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any
public place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that
participants in athletic contests may engage in such conduct which is
reasonably related to that sport.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1])



   2.   Noise.  Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any
residence or public building which causes unreasonable distress to the
occupants thereof. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[2])



   3.   Abusive Language.  Direct abusive epithets or make any
threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is
likely to provoke a violent reaction by another.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[3])



   4.   Disrupt Lawful Assembly.  Without lawful authority or color of
authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct
intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[4])



   5.   False Report of Catastrophe.  By words or action, initiate or
circulate a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe,
knowing such report to be false or such warning to be baseless.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[5])



   6.   Disrespect of Flag.  Knowingly and publicly use the flag of
the United States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a
symbol of the United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that
such use will provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. 
As used in this subsection:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[6])



      A.   “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external
appearance.



      B.   “Defile” means to intentionally make physically
unclean.



      C.   “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material
designed to be flown from a pole or mast.



      D.   “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so
as to make imperfect.



      E.   “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate
or trample.



      F.   “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or
intentionally cause a machine, vehicle or animal to tread upon.



   7.   Obstruct Use of Street.  Without authority or justification,
obstruct any street, sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent
to prevent or hinder its lawful use by others.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[7])



   8.   Funeral or Memorial Service.  Within 500 feet of the building
or other location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or
within 500 feet of a funeral procession or burial:



      A.   Make loud and raucous noise which causes unreasonable
distress to the persons attending the funeral or memorial service or
participating in the funeral procession.



      B.   Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture
which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a
violent reaction by another.



      C.   Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral
procession or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral,
memorial service, funeral procession or burial.



This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during and
within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession or
burial.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)



   9.   Fireworks within City Limits.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to possess, discharge, fire or use any firecrackers, rockets,
torpedoes, roman candles or other fireworks designed or intended for
pyrotechnic display or any pistols, canes, cannons or other appliances using
blank cartridges, except for permitted displays by members of an organization
sponsoring a lawful pyrotechnics exposition approved by the City Council. 
The Council, by resolution, may promulgate requirements for approval of a
lawful pyrotechnics exposition.



(Ord. 740 – Jul. 14 Supp.)



40.04    UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.



It is unlawful for three or more persons to assemble together, with them or
any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any of
them will commit a public offense.  No person shall willingly join in or
remain part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to
believe it is such.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2)



40.05    FAILURE TO DISPERSE.



A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or
persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to
disperse.  No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to
obey.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3) 



CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



 

41.01  Distributing Dangerous Substances
 
41.08  Barbed Wire and Electric Fences


41.02  False Reports to or Communications with Public Safety Entities
 
41.09  Discharging Weapons


41.03  Refusing to Assist Officer
 
41.10  Throwing and Shooting


41.04  Harassment of Public Officers and Employees
 
41.11  Urinating and Defecating


41.05  Interference with Official Acts
 
41.12  Fireworks


41.06  Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators
 
41.13  Standing, Loitering and Obstructing


41.07  Antenna and Radio Wires
 
41.14  Providing False Identification Information



 



41.01    DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.



No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any
corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person
delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes
reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or
animals from the place where the substance is deposited.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)



41.02    FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.



No person shall do any of the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)



   1.   Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire
department, a law enforcement authority or other public safety entity,
knowing that the information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a
criminal act knowing the act did not occur.



   2.   Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that
he or she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency
information or assistance. 



   3.   Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement
officer who enters the information on a citation.



41.03    REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.



Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to
render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make
an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required.  No person shall unreasonably and without lawful
cause, refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)



41.04    HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or
employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)



41.05    INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.



No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to be
a peace officer, emergency medical care provider or fire fighter, whether
paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act which is within the scope of
the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency medical care provider
or fire fighter, or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or
execution by any authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order
of any court.  The terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this
section do not include verbal harassment unless the verbal harassment is
accompanied by a present ability and apparent intention to execute a verbal
threat physically. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)



41.06    ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.



No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice
box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such
refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings
on premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended
and so accessible to children.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)



41.07    ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.



It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio
wires or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground or public building without written consent of the
Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])



41.08    BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.



It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose
land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless
such land consists of ten (10) acres or more and is used as agricultural land.



41.09    DISCHARGING WEAPONS.



   1.   It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns,
revolvers, pistols, guns or other firearms of any kind within the City limits
except by written consent of the Council.



   2.   No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless
manner.



41.10    THROWING AND SHOOTING.



It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks or missiles of any kind
or to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB guns
or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, public way, public ground or public building, without written
consent of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])



41.11    URINATING AND DEFECATING.



It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk,
street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building,
including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway,
doorway or window thereof, or onto any public or private land.



41.12    FIREWORKS.



The sale, use or exploding of fireworks within the City is subject to the
following:



   1.   Definition.  The term “fireworks” includes any explosive
composition, or combination of explosive substances, or articles prepared for
the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation, and specifically includes blank
cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, or other
fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive or
flammable compound, or other device containing any explosive substance.   



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)



   2.   Regulations.  It is unlawful for any person to use or explode
any fireworks; provided the City may, upon application in writing, grant a
permit for the display of fireworks by a City agency, fair associations,
amusement parks and other organizations or groups of individuals approved by
City authorities when such fireworks display will be handled by a competent
operator.  No permit shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or
sponsoring organization has filed with the City evidence of insurance in the
following amounts:



      A.   Personal Injury:   $ 250,000 per person.



      B.   Property Damage:   $ 50,000



      C.   Total Exposure:   $ 1,000,000



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)



   3.   Exceptions.  This section does not prohibit the sale by a
resident, dealer, manufacturer or jobber of such fireworks as are not
prohibited; or the sale of any kind of fireworks if they are to be shipped
out of State; or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theatre,
or for signal purposes in athletic sports or by railroads or trucks for
signal purposes, or by a recognized military organization.  This section
does not apply to any substance or composition prepared and sold for
medicinal or fumigation purposes. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)



   4.   Any person who intends to sell fireworks within the City must
inform the City Clerk or Administrator of the location where the sales are to
occur. The location must comply with Zoning and Fire District Ordinances.



(Ord. 767 – Jun. 17 Supp.)



41.13    STANDING, LOITERING AND OBSTRUCTING.



   1.   Standing, Loitering and Obstructing Generally.  Without lawful
business or reasonable cause:



      A.   No person shall congregate, stand, loaf or loiter upon
any street, sidewalk, bridge or prevent persons passing or attempting or
desiring to pass thereon.



      B.   No person shall congregate, stand, loaf or loiter in or
in front of any hall, lobby, doorway, passage or entrance of any public
building, theater, hotel, eating house, lodging house, office building,
store, shop, office or factory or other like building so as to obstruct such
place or hinder or prevent person walking along or into or out of such place
or attempting or desiring to do so.



      C.   No person shall sit upon or lean upon or against any
railing or other barrier about any area, entrance, basement or window to
obstruct the light or prevent passage of persons or tenants occupying the
building to which such area, entrance, basement or window belongs.



      D.   No person shall stand, loaf, loiter, or remain in or in
the immediate vicinity of or frequent a public transportation terminal,
whether publicly or privately owned, unless there present with intent to use
or to accompany or meet a person using the public transportation there
offered or to use one or some of the accessory convenience facilities
operated at such terminal for the use of travelers.



      E.   No person shall congregate, stand, loaf, or remain in any
parking garage or parking lot, whether publicly or privately owned so as to
interfere with the property of others or with any person's ability to use the
services afforded by the garage or lot, unless present there with the intent
to park or use any other services afforded by the garage or lot.



      F.   No person shall congregate, stand, loiter or loaf while
using property other than for its intended use, unless said use is with the
authorization of the owner or the City.



The provisions of this subsection apply to persons within and outside of
motor vehicles.



   2.   Loitering on Public Property.  Without lawful business or
reasonable cause:  No persons shall collect, assemble or group together and,
after being so collected, assembled or grouped together, stand or loiter on
any sidewalk, parking or any street comer or at any other place in the City
to the hindrance or obstruction to free passage of any person passing on or
along any sidewalk or street in the City.  The provisions of this subsection
apply to persons within and outside of motor vehicles.



   3.   Loitering Near Government Buildings.  Without lawful business
or reasonable cause:



      A.   No person shall congregate, stand, loaf or loiter in or
in front of or around any school or other public building occupied in whole
or in part by any governmental subdivision, including any agency, body,
department, office, board or commission and the like thereof, so as to
obstruct, hinder, prevent or disrupt the normal functions carried on therein
or thereat or so as to obstruct, hinder or prevent persons passing by or into
or out of the school or other public building or attempting or desiring to do
so.



      B.   Nothing contained in paragraph A of this subsection shall
be held to prohibit peaceful picketing, public speaking, the ordinary conduct
of a legitimate business, or other lawful expressions of opinion not in
contravention of other laws.



The provisions of this subsection apply to persons within and outside of
motor vehicles.



   4.   Vagrancy.  Persons who ask for or receive any compensation,
gratuity or reward for practicing fortune-telling, palmistry or clairvoyance;
persons who keep a place where lost or stolen property is concealed; persons
practicing or soliciting prostitution or keeping a house of prostitution; and
common drunkards found in any place where intoxicating liquors are sold or
kept for sale, or in an intoxicating condition, are guilty of vagrancy.



   5.   Penalty.  Any person found guilty of a violation of any of the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty
provisions of this Code of Ordinances.  Each day that a violation is allowed
to continue shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.  At the
discretion of the City Attorney or Police Chief, any violation of the
provisions of this section may be pursued as a municipal infraction according
to the terms of Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances in lieu of criminal
prosecution.



41.14    PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.



No person shall knowingly provide false identification information to anyone
known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider,
or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that
is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer,
emergency medical care provider, or firefighter.



(Ord. 708 – Oct. 10 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)



CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY



 

42.01  Trespassing
 
42.04  Unauthorized Entry


42.02  Criminal Mischief
 
42.05  Fraud


42.03  Defacing Proclamations or Notices
 
42.06  Theft



 



42.01    TRESPASSING.



It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the property of
another.  As used in this section, the term “property” includes any
land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle or other temporary or permanent
structure whether publicly or privately owned.  The term “trespass”
means one or more of the following acts:



(Code of Iowa Sec. 716.7 and 716.8)



   1.   Entering Property without Permission.  Entering upon or in
property without the express permission of the owner, lessee, or person in
lawful possession with the intent to commit a public offense or to use,
remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place thereon or therein anything
animate or inanimate.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])



   2.   Entering or Remaining on Property.  Entering or remaining upon
or in property without justification after being notified or requested to
abstain from entering or to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee,
or person in lawful possession, or by any peace officer, magistrate, or
public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance of the
property.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])



   3.   Interfering with Lawful Use of Property.  Entering upon or in
property for the purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering with the
lawful use of the property by others.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2c])



   4.   Using Property Without Permission.  Being upon or in property
and wrongfully using, removing therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or
placing thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate, without the implied
or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2d])



None of the above shall be construed to prohibit entering upon the property
of another for the sole purpose of retrieving personal property which has
accidentally or inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the
property of another, provided that the person retrieving the property takes
the most direct and accessible route to and from the property to be
retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is possible, and does not unduly
interfere with the lawful use of the property.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[3])



42.02    CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.



It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally
damage, deface, alter or destroy property.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



42.03    DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.



It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down,
or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law
of the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement or
notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or
by order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



42.04    UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY.



No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building,
premises or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said
building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public.  When
open to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also
constitutes an unauthorized entry.



42.05    FRAUD.



It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8) 



42.06    THEFT.



It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of
the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1) 



CHAPTER 43
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA



 

43.01  Purpose
 
43.04  Determining Factors


43.02  Controlled Substance Defined
 
43.05  Possession of Drug Paraphernalia


43.03  Drug Paraphernalia Defined
 
43.06  Manufacture, Delivery or Offering For Sale



 



43.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with intent to
use, manufacture and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.



43.02    CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED.



The term “controlled substance” as used in this chapter is defined as the
term “controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform Controlled
Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is
hereafter amended.



43.03    DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED.



The term “drug paraphernalia” as used in this chapter means all
equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for
use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing,
containing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.  It includes, but is not
limited to:



   1.   Growing Kits.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for
use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any
species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.



   2.   Processing Kits.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for
use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or
preparing controlled substances.



   3.   Isomerization Devices.  Isomerization devices used, intended
for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance.



   4.   Testing Equipment.  Testing equipment used, intended for use,
or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength,
effectiveness or purity of controlled substances.



   5.   Scales.  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or
designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.



   6.   Diluents.  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose, used, intended for
use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances.



   7.   Separators; Sifters.  Separation gins and sifters used,
intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in
otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana.



   8.   Mixing Devices.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and
mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding
controlled substances.



   9.   Containers.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other
containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small
quantities of controlled substances.



   10.   Storage Containers.  Containers and other objects used,
intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled
substances.



   11.   Injecting Devices.  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other
objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting
controlled substances into the human body.



   12.   Ingesting-Inhaling Device.  Objects used, intended for use,
or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin,
marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:



      A.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic
pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured
metal bowls;



      B.   Water pipes;



      C.   Carburetion tubes and devices;



      D.   Smoking and carburetion masks;



      E.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning
materials, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand;



      F.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



      G.   Chamber pipes;



      H.   Carburetor pipes;



      I.   Electric pipes;



      J.   Air driven pipes;



      K.   Chillums;



      L.   Bongs;



      M.   Ice pipes or chillers.



43.04    DETERMINING FACTORS.



In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be considered in
addition to all other logically relevant factors:



   1.   Statements.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of
the object concerning its use.



   2.   Prior Convictions.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or
of anyone in control of the object under any State or federal law relating to
any controlled substance.



   3.   Proximity To Violation.  The proximity of the object, in time
and space, to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.



   4.   Proximity to Substances.  The proximity of the object to
controlled substances.



   5.   Residue.  The existence of any residue of controlled
substances on the object.



   6.   Evidence of Intent.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the
intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to
persons whom he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the
object to facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.



   7.   Innocence of an Owner.  The innocence of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not
prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as
drug paraphernalia.



   8.   Instructions.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with
the object concerning its use.



   9.   Descriptive Materials.  Descriptive materials accompanying the
object which explain or depict its use.



   10.   Advertising.  National and local advertising concerning its
use.



   11.   Displayed.  The manner in which the object is displayed for
sale.



   12.   Licensed Distributor or Dealer.  Whether the owner, or anyone
in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items
to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco
products.



   13.   Sales Ratios.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio
of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.



   14.   Legitimate Uses.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses
for the object in the community.



   15.   Expert Testimony.  Expert testimony concerning its use.



43.05    POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.



43.06    MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY OR OFFERING FOR SALE.



It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver,
manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia,
intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or
knowing that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation
of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.



CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION



 

45.01  Persons Under Legal Age
 
45.04  Open Containers on Street


45.02  Public Consumption or Intoxication
 
45.05  Possession of Kegs in Residentially Zoned Areas


45.03  Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
 
45.06  Consumption



 



45.01    PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.



As used in this section, “legal age” means twenty-one (21) years of age
or more.



   1.   A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or
attempt to purchase or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine or
beer in their possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine or
beer given or dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and
with the knowledge, presence and consent of the parent or guardian, for
beverage or medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a
physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a
person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages, wine, and beer during
the regular course of the person’s employment by a liquor control licensee,
or wine or beer permittee under State laws.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])



   2.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s
age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic
beverage, wine or beer from any licensee or permittee.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])



45.02    PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.



   1.   As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:



      A.   “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5
of the Code of Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section
232.19 of the Code of Iowa.



      B.   “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood,
breath, or urine to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a
qualified person using devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of
Public Safety.



      C.   “Peace Officer” means the same as defined in Section
801.4 of the Code of Iowa.



      D.   “School” means a public or private school or that
portion of a public or private school which provides teaching for any grade
from kindergarten through grade twelve.



   2.   A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or
beer upon the public streets or highways.  A person shall not use or consume
alcoholic liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor
control license.  A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors,
wine or beer on public school property or while attending any public or
private school-related function.  A person shall not be intoxicated or
simulate intoxication in a public place. 



   3.   When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public
intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person
that the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own
expense.  If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for
testing a sample of a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood
alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be
offered the person arrested.  In a prosecution for public intoxication,
evidence of the results of a chemical test performed under this subsection is
admissible upon proof of a proper foundation.  The percentage of alcohol
present in a person’s blood, breath, or urine established by the results of
a chemical test performed within two hours after the person’s arrest on a
charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of alcohol
present at the time of arrest.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)



45.03    OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.



(See Section 62.07 of this Code of Ordinances.)



45.04    OPEN CONTAINERS ON STREET.



Any person on a public street, sidewalk or place who has in his or her
possession any bottle, can or vessel containing any alcoholic liquor, wine or
beer and said bottle, can or vessel is open and the contents thereof can be
consumed shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor.



45.05    POSSESSION OF KEGS IN RESIDENTIALLY ZONED AREAS.



   1.   Limitation.  No more than one (1) keg may be possessed within
or on the premises on which is located any dwelling unit or lodging house
located in a residentially zoned area within the City.  No dwelling owner or
lessee shall possess or allow any other person to possess a keg contrary to
this section.



   2.   Application for Permit.  Any person desiring to obtain a
permit to possess more than one keg shall fill out an application provided by
the Police Chief setting forth the applicant’s full name, address,
telephone number, the address within the City where the applicant will be
possessing the kegs, and the reason or reasons why more than one keg should
be permitted.  In addition, the applicant shall be required to provide proof
of identify and age in the form of a valid Iowa driver’s license or
identification card, or valid driver’s license from another jurisdiction. 
Falsifying any information requested on the permit application shall
constitute a violation of this section.  The application shall be presented
to the City Council for approval.



   3.   Exceptions.  Any person or premises licensed under any other
provision of State law or local ordinance may possess more than one keg and
is specifically exempted from the provisions of this section.



   4.   Every person who purchases at retail any keg outside the City
and transports such keg to any location within the City for consumption shall
register his or her name and address and the other information required by
this section with the City Police Department. 



45.06    CONSUMPTION.



   1.   Misrepresentation of Age.  A person under legal age shall not
misrepresent the person’s age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting
to purchase any alcoholic liquor, alcoholic beverage, beer or wine from any
licensee or permittee.



   2.   Unlawful Consumption.  It is unlawful for a person under legal
age to consume any alcoholic liquor, alcoholic beverage, wine or beer.



   3.   Public Appearance.  It is unlawful for a person under legal
age to appear in public after consuming any alcoholic liquor, alcoholic
beverage, beer or wine.



   4.   Penalties.      



      A.   A violation of this subsection may be prosecuted either
in the jurisdiction where the violation occurs or the jurisdiction where
evidence of the consumption is observed.



      B.   A violation of this subsection is a simple misdemeanor,
punishable of a fine of not less than sixty -five dollars ($65) but not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500).



(Sec. 45.06 - Ord. 800 - July 19 Supp.)



CHAPTER 45A
SOCIAL HOST



 

45A.01 Purpose
 
45A.05 Exceptions


45A.02  Definitions
 
45A.06  Enforcement


45A.03 Affirmative Duties
 
45A.07 Penalties


45A.04  Prohibitions
 
45A.08  Jurisdiction



 



45A.01    PURPOSE.  The Forest City-City Council intends to protect the
interest, welfare, health, and safety within the City of Forest City by
prohibiting the services to and consumption of alcoholic beverages by persons
under the age of twenty-one (21) at premises located in the City.  The City
Council finds that the occurrence of social gatherings at premises where
alcoholic beverages are served to or consumed by persons under the age of
twenty-one (21) is harmful to such persons themselves and a threat to public
welfare, health, and safety.  The City Council further finds that persons
under the age of twenty-one (21) often obtain alcoholic beverages at such
gatherings and that persons who are in control of such premises know or have
reason to know of such service and/or consumption and will be more likely to
ensure that alcoholic beverages are neither served nor consumed by persons
under the age of twenty-one (21) at these gatherings.  Based on these
findings, the City Council has deemed it necessary to enact the following
regulations in the City of Forest City.

45A.02    DEFINITIONS. 



1.   Alcohol.  “Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of
ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin or any other distilled
spirits including dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by
whatever process produced.



2.   Alcoholic beverage.  “Alcoholic beverage” means alcohol,
spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol,
spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of
alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when
diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.



3.   Emergency Responders.  “Emergency Responders” means
firefighters, law enforcement officers, emergency medical service personnel,
and other personnel having emergency response duties.



4.   Enforcement Services.  “Enforcement Services” means the salaries
and benefits of emergency responders for the amount of time actually spent
responding to or remaining at an event, gathering, or party and
administrative costs attributable to the incident; the actual costs for
medical treatment for any injured emergency responder and the costs of
repairing any damage to equipment or vehicles.



5.   Event.  Gathering.  Party.  “Event, gathering, or party” means
any group of three (3) or more persons who have assembled or gathered
together for a social occasion or other activity.



6.   Juvenile.  “Juvenile” means a person under the age of eighteen
(18).



7.   Legal Age.  “Legal age” means twenty-one (21) years of age or
more.



8.   Parent.  “Parent” means any persons having legal custody of a
juvenile: (1) as a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent; (2) as a
legal guardian; (3) as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order
of the court.



9.   Person.  “Person” means any individual the age of eighteen (18)
or older, partnership, corporation, or any association of one or more
individuals.



10.   Possession or Control.  “Possession or control” means actual
possession or constructive possession based on facts, which permit the
inference of intent to possess or control alcoholic beverages.



11.   Premises.  "Premises" means any home, yard, farm, field, land,
apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, other dwelling unit, hall or
meeting room, garage, barn, park, tent, camper/RV, or any other place
conducive to assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a permanent or
temporary basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically or an event,
gathering, or party and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without
permission or compensation.



12.   Public Place.  “Public place” means the same as defined in Iowa
Code Section 123.3(27).



13.   Social Host.  “Social host” means any person (see subsection 9
of this section) who aids, allows, entertains, organizes, supervises,
controls or permits an event, gather, or party.  This includes, but is not
limited to: (1) the person(s) who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise has
control of the premises where the event, gathering, or party takes place; (2)
the person(s) in charge of the premises; or (3) the person(s) responsible for
organizing the event, gathering, or party.  This Chapter does not apply to a
social host who is a juvenile, however if the social host is a juvenile and
the parent(s) of the juvenile knows or reasonably should know of the event,
gather, or party and knows or reasonably should know that the consumption of
alcohol is occurring, the parent(s) shall be liable for violations of the
Chapter.



14.   Underage Person.  “Underage person” means any person under the
age of twenty-one (21).



45A.03    AFFIRMATIVE DUTIES.  It is the duty of the social host of an
event, gathering, or party to take all reasonable steps to prevent alcoholic
beverages from being possessed or consumed by underage persons on the
premises.  Reasonable steps include, but are not limited to:



1.   Controlling underage persons’ access to alcoholic beverages;



2.   Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages;



3.   Verifying the age of persons being served, in the possession of, or
consuming alcoholic beverages at the event, gathering, or party by inspecting
drivers’ licenses or other government-issued identification cards;



4.   Supervising the activities of underage persons at the party; and



5.   Notifying law enforcement of underage possession or consumption of
alcoholic beverages and allowing law enforcement to enter the premises for
the purpose of stopping the possession of consumption by underage persons.




45A.04    PROHIBITIONS. 




1.   It is unlawful for any social host of an event, gathering, or party
on the social host’s premises to knowingly permit or allow underage persons
to consume alcoholic beverages, or knowingly permit or allow underage persons
to possess alcoholic beverages on the premises, whether or not the social
host is present on the premises.



2.   It is unlawful for any social host to host an event, gathering, or
party on premises when the person knows or reasonably should know that an
underage person has consumed an alcoholic beverage, or possess an alcoholic
beverage with the intent to consume it, and the person fails to take
reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption by the underage
person. A social host who hosts such an event, gathering, or party does not
have to be present at the time the prohibited act occurs.



3.   A person or persons under the legal age shall not purchase or attempt
to purchase, or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer
in their possession on control. (As set out in Iowa Code Section
123.47(2)).  A person under the legal age who has consumed alcoholic liquor,
wine, or beer shall be presumed to have had the same in his or her possession
or control prior to its consumption.



4.   A social host has an affirmative defense if the social host took
reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of alcohol or
notified law enforcement and allowed law enforcement to enter the premises
for the purpose of stopping illegal activities.



45A.05    EXCEPTIONS. 



1.   This chapter shall not apply to:



A.   Conduct solely between an underage person and his or her parents
while present in the parents’ household;



B.   Legally protected religious observances; or



C.   Situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of
alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of employment.



2.   The exceptions outlined in Subsection (1) of this section shall not
apply under circumstances in which the underage person leaves the home,
religious gathering, or place of employment and subsequently violates Iowa
Code Section 123.46(2), Consumption or intoxication in public places.



45A.06    ENFORCEMENT.  The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced
by the Forest City Police Department.  The Forest City Police Department
shall have primary but not exclusive enforcement responsibility for the
chapter.



45A.07    PENALTIES.   



1.   Violations of Section 45A.04(1)and (2) are declared to be City
infractions punishable by civil penalty.  A seven hundred and fifty dollar
($750) civil penalty shall be imposed for a social host’s first offense. 
A one thousand dollar ($1,000) civil penalty shall be imposed for a social
host’s second or subsequent offense.  The City may also seek reimbursement
for enforcement services provided by emergency responders related to the
event, gathering, or party.



2.   A person who violates Section 45A.01(3) commits the following:



A.   A simple misdemeanor, a scheduled violation under Iowa Code Section
805.8, punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250)
for the first offense.



B.   A second offense shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine
of not more than five hundred dollars ($500).  In addition to any other
applicable penalty, a person in violation of Section 45A.04(2) shall choose
between either completing a substance abuse evaluation or the suspension of
the person’s motor vehicle operating privileges for a period not to exceed
one year.  (As set out in Iowa Code Section 123.47(3)(a)(2)).



C.   A third or subsequent offense shall be a simple misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500) and the
suspension of the person’s motor vehicle operating privileges for a period
not to exceed one year.  (As set out in Iowa Code Section 123.47(3)(a)(3)).



D.   The court may, in its discretion, order the person who is under the
legal age to perform community service work under Iowa Code Section 909.3A,
of an equivalent value to the fine imposed under this section.  (As set out
in Iowa Code Section 123.47(3)(b)).



E.   In determining if a violation charged is a second or subsequent
offense, conviction for violation of this section, Iowa Code Section 123.47,
or an ordinance of any city or county in the State of Iowa that substantially
corresponds to this section of Iowa Code Section 123.47, shall be counted as
previous offenses.



45A.08    JURISDICTION.  The provisions of this Chapter shall apply
throughout Forest City, Iowa.



(Ch. 45A -  Ord. 803- Oct. 19 Supp.)



CHAPTER 46
MINORS



 

46.01  Curfew
 
46.03  Contributing to Delinquency


46.02  Cigarettes and Tobacco
 



 



46.01    CURFEW.



   1.   Purpose.  The Council has determined that a curfew for minors
is necessary to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare
of the City and specifically to achieve the following purposes:



      A.   To reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of
adults responsible for minors;



      B.   To protect the public from the illegal acts of minors
committed individually and in groups and/or gangs after the curfew hour;



      C.   To protect minors from criminal activity and improper
influences by individuals and groups and/or gangs that prevail in public
places after the curfew hour.



   2.   Definitions.  For use in this section, the following terms are
defined:



      A.   “Knowingly” means knowledge which a responsible adult
should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor
in that responsible adult’s custody.  It is intended to continue to hold
the neglectful or careless adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable
standard of adult responsibility through an objective test.  It is therefore
no defense that an adult responsible for a minor was completely indifferent
to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of the minor.



      B.   “Minor” means any unemancipated person under the age
of eighteen (18) years.



      C.   “Non-secured custody” means custody in an unlocked
multipurpose area, such as a lobby, office or interrogation room which is not
designed, set aside or used as a secure detention area, and the person
arrested is not physically secured during the period of custody in the area;
the person is physically accompanied by a law enforcement officer or a person
employed by the facility where the person arrested is being held; and the use
of the area is limited to providing non-secured custody only while awaiting
transfer to an appropriate juvenile facility or to court, for contacting of
and release to the person’s parents or other responsible adult or for other
administrative purposes; but not for longer than six (6) hours without the
oral or written order of a judge or magistrate authorizing the detention.  A
judge shall not extend the period of time in excess of six hours beyond the
initial six-hour period.



      D.   “Public place” includes shopping areas, parking lots,
parks, playgrounds, schools (except during normal school hours or during
school-sponsored activities), streets, alleys and sidewalks dedicated to
public use; and also includes such parts of buildings and other premises
whether publicly or privately owned which are used by the general public or
to which the general public is invited commercially for a fee or otherwise;
or in or on which the general public is permitted without specific
invitation; or to which the general public has access.  For purposes of this
section, a vehicle or other conveyance is considered to be a public place
when in the areas defined above.



      E.   “Responsible adult” means a parent, guardian or other
adult specifically authorized by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to
have custody or control of a minor.



      F.   “Unemancipated” means unmarried and/or still under
the custody or control of a responsible adult.



   3.   Curfew Established. 



      A.   No minor under 16 years of age shall be in any public
place during the following times:



         (1)   Sunday through Thursday, 10:00 p.m. through 6:00
a.m. each day.



         (2)   Friday and Saturday, 11:00 p.m. through 6:00 a.m.
each day.



      B.   No minor 16 or 17 years of age shall be in any public
place during the following times:



         (1)   Sunday through Thursday, 12:00 midnight through
6:00 a.m.



         (2)   Friday and Saturday, 1:00 a.m. through 6:00 a.m.



   4.   Exceptions.  The following are exceptions to the curfew:



      A.   The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.



      B.   The minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor
resides or on either side of the place where the minor resides.



      C.   The minor is present at or is traveling between home and
one of the following, allowing reasonable travel time for events outside of
the City:



         (1)   Minor’s place of employment, within one hour
after the end or before the beginning of work;



         (2)   Minor’s place of religious activity, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of the religious activity;



         (3)   Governmental or political activity, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of the activity;



         (4)   Professional entertainment, with proof of
attendance, within one hour after the end of the activity.



         (5)   School activity, within one hour after the end or
before the beginning of the activity;



         (6)   Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration,
sit-in or meeting of an association for the advancement of economic,
political, religious or cultural matters, or for any other activity protected
by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, within one hour after the
end or before the beginning of the activity.



      D.   The minor is on an emergency errand for a responsible
adult;



      E.   The minor’s business, trade or occupation (in which the
minor is permitted by law to be engaged) requires the presence of the minor
in the public place.



   5.   Responsibility of Adults.  It is unlawful for any responsible
adult knowingly to permit or to allow a minor to be in any public place in
the City within the time periods prohibited by this section unless the
minor’s presence falls within one of the above exceptions.



   6.   Enforcement Procedures.



      A.   Determination of Age.  In determining the age of the
juvenile and in the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth
certificate or driver’s license, a law enforcement officer on the street
shall, in the first instance, use his or her best judgment in determining age.



      B.   Grounds for Arrest; Conditions of Custody.  Grounds for
arrest are that the person refuses to sign the citation without
qualification; persists in violating the ordinance; refuses to provide proper
identification or to identify himself or herself; or constitutes an immediate
threat to the person’s own safety or to the safety of the public.  A law
enforcement officer who arrests a minor for a curfew violation may keep the
minor in custody either in a shelter care facility or in any non-secured
setting.  The officer shall not place bodily restraints, such as handcuffs,
on the minor unless the minor physically resists or threatens physical
violence when being taken into custody.  A minor shall not be placed in
detention following a curfew violation unless pursuant to an order of the
court.



      C.   Notification of Responsible Adult.  After a minor is
taken into custody, the law enforcement officer shall notify the adult
responsible for the minor as soon as possible.  The minor shall be released
to the adult responsible for the minor upon the promise of such person to
produce the minor in court at such time as the court may direct.  If a minor
is issued a citation to appear for a violation of this section, a law
enforcement officer shall notify the adult responsible for the minor as soon
as possible, within 24 hours of the violation.



   7.   Penalties.



      A.   Responsible Adult’s First Violation.  In the case of a
first violation by a minor, the Police Chief shall, by certified mail or by
personal service, send to the adult responsible for the minor, written notice
of the violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in
full enforcement of the curfew ordinance against both the responsible adult
and minor, with applicable penalties.



      B.   Responsible Adult’s or Minor’s Second Violation. 
Any violation of the provisions of this section by a minor or a responsible
adult is a simple misdemeanor.  Upon conviction, the person shall be
punished by a fine, as fixed by the court, or by performance of community
service as ordered by the court.



46.02    CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.



It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to smoke, use,
possess, purchase or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products or
cigarettes.  Possession of cigarettes or tobacco products by a person under
eighteen years of age shall not constitute a violation of this section if
said person possesses the cigarettes or tobacco products as part of the
person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a
valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa and lawfully offers for
sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)



46.03    CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.



It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under eighteen (18)
years of age to commit any act of delinquency.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)



CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS



 

47.01  Purpose
 
47.08  Unlicensed Sales


47.02  Use of Drives Required
 
47.09  Amplified Music


47.03  Fires
 
47.10  Permit Required for Assemblies


47.04  Littering
 
47.11  Display of Permit


47.05  Parks Closed
 
47.12  Obstructing Permitted Activities


47.06  Camping
 
47.13  Riding on Tennis Courts


47.07  Dogs in Parks
 



 



47.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park facilities
by the general public by establishing rules and regulations governing the use
of park facilities.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)



47.02    USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED.



No person shall drive any car, cycle or other vehicle, or ride or lead any
horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or
roadways therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the
City.



47.03    FIRES.



No fires shall be built, except in a place provided therefor, and such fire
shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be immediately
used by some other party.



47.04    LITTERING.



No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter or foreign
substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that purpose.



47.05    PARKS CLOSED.



No person, except those camping in designated areas, shall enter or remain
within any park between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:30 a.m.



47.06    CAMPING.



No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in portions prescribed
or designated by the Council, and the City may refuse camping privileges or
rescind any and all camping privileges for cause.



   1.   Camping Fees.  The Park Board shall have the exclusive right
to set camping fees for designated areas in which to camp, including
electrical and non-electrical hookups for camping, and shall post the
designated areas as such. 



   2.   Camping in Automobiles Prohibited.  It is expressly prohibited
to use the facilities designated for camping or any other facility of the
park for the purpose of camping when the only vehicle or protection from the
elements is an automobile.



   3.   Camping Limited.  No person shall be allowed to camp in a park
for more than fourteen consecutive days.



47.07    DOGS IN PARKS. 



No person shall bring a dog or other domestic animal into any park except on
a leash not to exceed six feet in length, or permit such dog or other
domestic animal brought into any park by such person to disturb, interfere
with, bite or assault any person or party occupying any park.  No person
bringing a dog or other domestic animal into any park shall allow such dog or
animal to defecate in the park unless such person immediately removes such
defecation from the park or disposes of it in receptacles provided for trash
and litter.



47.08    UNLICENSED SALES. 



No person shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall any
person station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation,
sale or display of any such article or thing in any park, except a regularly
licensed concessionaire or other person acting under an official permit of
the Park Board.  In addition, no person shall within any park or on its
borders announce, advertise or call the public’s attention in any way to
any article or service for sale or hire.



47.09    AMPLIFIED MUSIC. 



No person shall conduct any musical concert, play upon any amplified
instrument or set up or use any communication system in a park without first
obtaining an official permit from the Park Board.



47.10    PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ASSEMBLIES. 



No person shall hold or attempt to hold any meeting, assembly, demonstration,
celebration, parade, rally, religious worship or any sponsored entertainment,
social, recreational or athletic function without first obtaining an official
permit from the Park Board.



47.11    DISPLAY OF PERMIT. 



Any person requiring an official permit issued by the Park Board shall
produce the permit and exhibit it upon request.



47.12    OBSTRUCTING PERMITTED ACTIVITIES.



No person shall disturb or interfere with any person or party occupying any
park under the authority of an official permit of the Park Board.



47.13    RIDING ON TENNIS COURTS.



No person shall bicycle, roller blade, skate board or roller skate on the
tennis courts located within the Forest City Recreational Park. 



CHAPTER 48
CONTROL OF MOTORIZED VEHICLES AND ANIMALS IN RECREATION AREAS



 

48.01  Purpose
 
48.04  Exemption


48.02  Definitions
 
48.05  Signs


48.03  Acts Prohibited
 



 



48.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to control motorized vehicles and animals
being ridden or driven in the Tim Coffey Recreational Area and other areas
within the City.



48.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “All-terrain vehicle” is defined in Chapter 75 of this Code
of Ordinances.



   2.   “Animal” means any animal, whether domesticated or wild,
which is of sufficient size to be ridden or driven.



   3.   “Driven” means connecting to a trailer, buggy, wagon, sled
or any other apparatus by harness, ropes, straps or any other means for the
purpose of either pushing or pulling said trailer, buggy, wagon, sled or
other apparatus.



   4.   “Motor vehicle” means any self-propelled vehicle requiring
a license for highway operation or any self-propelled vehicle used for
recreational purposes, whether license or unlicensed, including (but not
limited to) snowmobile, trail bikes, minibikes, motorcycles, mopeds,
motorized bicycles, motor scooters, go-carts, golf carts or other all-terrain
vehicles.



   5.   “Motorized wheelchair” means any wheelchair which is
propelled by means other than human power or propulsion and operated by a
handicapped person.



   6.   “Operate” means to ride in or on and control the operation
of a motor vehicle or propel a motor vehicle.



   7.   “Owner” means a person other than a lien holder having the
title to a motor vehicle and lawfully entitled to the use or possession
thereof.



   8.   “Tim Coffey Recreational Area” means the area within the
City bounded by the Winnebago River, by Secor Avenue, by the former Chicago
Northwestern Railroad right-of-way and by a line described as follows:



A tract of land located in part of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of the
Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of Section Twenty-six (26) Township Ninety-eight
North (T98N) Range Twenty-four West (R24W) of the Fifth Prime Meridian (5th
P.M.) Winnebago County, Iowa, described as follows:  commencing at the
Northeast Corner of said SE¼ SE¼ Section 26-98-24; thence N 89°31¢00² W
along the North Line of said SE¼ SE¼ Section 26-98-24, 1206.18 feet to a
point on the northerly right-of-way line of the abandoned Chicago and
Northwestern Railroad (formerly the Minneapolis and St. Louis Railroad);
thence S 20°45¢39² E along the northerly right-of-way line of said
railroad, 167.44 feet to a point of tangency of a 1096.28 foot radius curve
concave northeasterly; thence southeasterly 359.23 feet along said
right-of-way line through a central angle of 18°46¢30²; thence continuing
southeasterly 209.68 feet along said right-of-way line through a central
angle of 10°57¢29² to the point of beginning; thence S 39°30¢22² W
100.00 feet to a point on the southerly right-of-way line of said railroad;
thence S 36°18¢40² W 258.00 feet to an iron monument on the northeasterly
bank of the Winnebago River; thence continuing S 36°18¢40² W 60 feet, more
or less, to the centerline of the Winnebago River.



48.03    ACTS PROHIBITED.



No motor vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, or an animal which is being ridden or
driven is permitted and it is unlawful for any person to operate or ride or
drive the same within the Tim Coffey Recreational Area except snowmobiles
over that portion of the Tim Coffey Recreational Area located on the
abandoned railroad right-of-way from the cul-de-sac at the end of Pleasant
Street to the intersection of Secor Avenue and said abandoned railroad
right-of-way or within the following described areas:



   1.   Bounded by the Winnebago River, a line extended from the north
boundary of the Indian Springs Second Subdivision west across the abandoned
Chicago and Northwestern Railroad to the Winnebago River, the Indian Spring
Second Subdivision, and a line described as follows:



A tract of land located in part of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of the
Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of Section Twenty-six (26), Township Ninety-eight
North (T98N) Range Twenty-four West (R24W) of the Fifth Prime Meridian (5th
P.M.), Winnebago County, Iowa, described as follows:  commencing at the
northeast corner of said SE¼ SE¼ Section 26-98-24; thence N 89°31¢00² W
along the north line of said SE¼ SE¼ Section 26-98-24, 1206.18 feet to a
point on the northerly right-of-way line of the abandoned Chicago and
Northwestern Railroad (formerly the Minneapolis and St. Louis Railroad);
thence S 20°45¢39² E along the northerly right-of-way line of said
railroad, 167.44 feet to a point of tangency of a 1096.28 foot radius curve
concave northeasterly; thence southeasterly 359.23 feet along said
right-of-way line through a central angle of 18°46¢30² to the point of
beginning; thence S 39°22¢34² W 100.00 feet to a point on the southerly
right-of-way line of said railroad; thence S 39°22¢34² W, 137.20 feet to
an iron monument on the northeasterly bank of the Winnebago River; thence
continuing S 39°22¢34² W 45 feet, more or less, to the centerline of the
Winnebago River.



   2.   The East Half (E½) of the abandoned Chicago and Northwestern
Railroad right-of-way between a line extended from the north boundary of the
Indian Springs Second Subdivision west to the Winnebago River and the north
City limits.




   3.   The twenty (20) feet immediately adjacent and parallel to the
Winnebago River over the following described property, to-wit: 




      A tract of land located in part of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼)
of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of Section Twenty-six (26), Township
Ninety-eight North (T98N), Range Twenty-four West (R24W) of the Fifth Prime
Meridian (5th P.M.), Winnebago County, Iowa, described as follows: 
Commencing at the northeast corner of said SE¼ SE¼ Section 26-98-24; thence
N 89°31¢00² W along the north line of said SE¼ SE¼ Section 26-98-24,
1206.18 feet to a point on the northerly right-of-way line of the abandoned
Chicago and Northwestern Railroad (formerly the Minneapolis and St. Louis
Railroad); thence S 20°45¢39² E along the northerly right-of-way line of
said railroad, 167.44 feet to a point of tangency of a 1096.28 foot radius
curve concave northeasterly; thence southeasterly 359.23 feet along said
right-of-way line through a central angle of 18°46¢30² to the point of
beginning; thence continuing southeasterly 209.68 feet along said
right-of-way line through a central angle of 10°57¢29²; thence S
39°30¢22² W, 100.00 feet to a point on the southerly right-of-way line of
said railroad; thence S 36°18¢40² W, 258.00 feet to an iron monument on
the northeasterly bank of the Winnebago River; thence continuing S
36°18¢40² W 60 feet, more or less, to the centerline of the Winnebago
River; thence northwesterly along the centerline of said Winnebago River to a
point on a line which bears N 39°22¢34² E through the point of beginning;
thence N 39°22¢34² E 40 feet, more or less, to an iron monument on the
northeasterly bank of said Winnebago River; thence continuing N 39°22¢34²
E 237.20 feet to the point of beginning and containing 1.69 acres more or
less.



   4.   Bounded by “J” Street, U.S. Highway 69, the Winnebago River
and a line parallel and 100 feet westerly and southerly from the centerline
of the Winnebago River.



48.04    EXEMPTION.



The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to emergency vehicles,
motorized wheelchairs, non-governmental vehicles operated at the discretion
of the Director of the Forest City Parks and Recreation Department or motor
vehicles operated by or at the direction of the City within the course and
scope of official duties.



48.05    SIGNS.



The Director of the Parks and Recreation Department is hereby authorized to
erect signs in such places as the Department deems appropriate, but in any
event, signs shall be placed at all the possible entrances for the walking
path located within the Tim Coffey Recreational Area and the other areas
herein and any other areas which may be added later.  Said signs shall
provide notice of the provisions in this chapter prohibiting the operation of
motor vehicles within the Tim Coffey Recreational Area.  It is unlawful for
any person to post, mutilate or remove any such sign provided for in this
chapter, over which said person had no right, title, interest or license.



CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE



 

50.01  Definition of Nuisance
 
50.07  Request for Hearing


50.02  Nuisances Enumerated
 
50.08  Abatement in Emergency


50.03  Nuisances Prohibited
 
50.09  Abatement by City


50.04  Nuisance Abatement
 
50.10  Collection of Costs


50.05  Notice to Abate: Contents
 
50.11  Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement


50.06  Method of Service
 
50.12  Failure to Abate



 



50.01    DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.



Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to
interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is
a nuisance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)



50.02    NUISANCES ENUMERATED.



The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions which are
deemed to be nuisances in the City:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)



   1.   Offensive Smells.  Erecting, continuing or using any building
or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture,
which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or
other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or
property of individuals or the public.



   2.   Filth or Noisome Substance.  Causing or suffering any offal,
filth or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the
prejudice of others.



   3.   Junk and Junk Vehicles.  Maintaining any accumulations of
refuse, junk or inoperable vehicles and/or equipment, except in a junkyard
operated under City permit.  (See also Chapter 51 and Chapter 124)



   4.   Impeding Passage of Navigable River.  Obstructing or impeding
without legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor or
collection of water.



   5.   Water Pollution.  Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or
impure the water of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the
same from its natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.



   6.   Blocking Public and Private Ways.  Obstructing or encumbering,
by fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places or burying grounds.



   7.   Billboards.  Billboards, signboards and advertising signs,
whether erected and constructed on public or private property, which so
obstruct and impair the view of any portion or part of a public street,
avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track
as to render dangerous the use thereof.  (See also Section 62.08)



   8.   Dangerous Buildings.  All buildings, walls and other
structures which have been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise to such an
extent that the same endanger the safety of the public.  (See also Chapter
145)



   9.   Solid Waste Disposal.  Any use of property or storage or
disposal of any materials and substances of any nature whatever on such
property which creates an unsanitary or unsafe condition on such property, or
which endangers the free use and enjoyment of property by adjoining owners,
or which creates any condition injurious to the public health, safety or
comfort.  (See Chapter 105)



   10.   Storing of Flammable Junk.  Depositing or storing of
flammable junk, such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by
dealers in such articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a
building of fireproof construction.  (See also Chapter 51)



   11.   Air Pollution.  Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly
ash.  (See also Chapter 105)



   12.   Weeds, Brush.  Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush,
unkept lawns or other noxious growths upon any property in the City.



   13.   Dutch Elm Disease.  Trees infected with Dutch Elm Disease. 
(See also Chapter 151)



   14.   Airport Air Space.  Any object or structure hereafter erected
within one thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly
established airport or landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial
navigation including take-off and landing, unless such object or structure
constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the same is
located.  (See also Chapter 175)



   15.   Houses of Ill Fame.  Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose
of prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the
Code of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as
defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or
houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are
carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.



   16.   Overhanging Signs.  Any sign, marquee or awning which is in
an unsafe condition or which overhangs any roadway or which overhangs any
sidewalk less than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk surface; or any
advertisement or sign affixed to any building, wall, fence, sidewalk or
street or other private or public property without permission of the owner
thereof.



   17.   Construction and Repair of Buildings.  All buildings erected,
repaired or altered or any premises used in violation of this Code of
Ordinances or the laws of the State.



   18.   Traffic Signals.  All unauthorized signs, signals, markings
or devices which purport to be or may be mistaken as official traffic control
devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway
crossing.



   19.   Overhanging Limbs of Trees.  All limbs of trees which project
over a public sidewalk less than nine (9) feet above the surface thereof or
less than thirteen (13) feet above the surface of a public street.  (See
also Chapter 151)



   20.   Wires.  All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds
which are strung less than fifteen (15) feet above the surface of the street
or ground.



   21.   Wells and Open Excavations.  All abandoned wells and cisterns
not securely covered secured from public use and all open and unguarded pits,
excavations or unused basements freely accessible from any public street,
alley or sidewalk.



   22.   The making available of food, salt, mineral blocks or other
products for ingestion by wild or stray animals, except that the following
actions shall not be considered a nuisance:



      A.   Elevated bird/squirrel feeders providing seed, grain,
fruit, worms or suet for birds or squirrels.



      B.   Standing crops planted and left standing as food plots
for wildlife.



      C.   Grain or other feed scattered or distributed solely as a
result of normal agricultural, gardening, or soil stabilization practices.



      D.   Standing, flooded, or manipulated natural vegetation or
food/seed deposited by natural vegetation.



(Ord. 715 – Feb. 11 Supp.)



50.03    NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance,
public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter
or State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)



50.04    NUISANCE ABATEMENT.



Whenever the Mayor or other authorized municipal officer finds that a
nuisance exists, such officer shall cause to be served upon the property
owner a written notice to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time after
notice. † 2



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.05    NOTICE TO ABATE:  CONTENTS.



The notice to abate shall contain:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



   1.   Description of Nuisance.  A description of what constitutes
the nuisance.



   2.   Location of Nuisance.  The location of the nuisance.



   3.   Acts Necessary to Abate.  A statement of the act or acts
necessary to abate the nuisance.



   4.   Reasonable Time.  A reasonable time within which to complete
the abatement.



   5.   Assessment of City Costs.  A statement that if the nuisance or
condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within
the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against such
person.



50.06    METHOD OF SERVICE.



The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or sent by certified mail to
the property owner.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.07    REQUEST FOR HEARING.



Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the Council as
to whether a nuisance exists.  A request for a hearing must be made in
writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time stated in the notice, or
it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be abated
as ordered.  The hearing will be before the Council at a time and place
fixed by the Council.  The findings of the Council shall be conclusive and,
if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a
reasonable time under the circumstances.



50.08    ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY.



If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing
maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may perform any action
which may be required under this chapter without prior notice.  The City
shall assess the costs as provided in Section 50.10 after notice to the
property owner under the applicable provisions of Sections 50.04, 50.05 and
50.06 and hearing as provided in Section 50.07.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.09    ABATEMENT BY CITY.



If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to
abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping
an accurate account of the expense incurred.  The itemized expense account
shall be filed with the Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the
City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.10    COLLECTION OF COSTS.



The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense incurred by certified
mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate,
and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one month,
the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs
shall then be collected with, and in the same manner, as general property
taxes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.11    INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT.



If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00), the City may permit the assessment to be paid in
up to ten (10) annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with
the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited property
under State law.



(Ord. 731 – Sep. 12 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)



50.12    FAILURE TO ABATE.



Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or refuse to
abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified in
the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of Ordinances.



 


Notes

2 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  A suggested form of notice for the abatement of
nuisances is included in the appendix of this Code of Ordinances.  Caution
is urged in the use of this administrative abatement procedure, particularly
where cost of abatement is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to
whether or not a nuisance does in fact exist.  If compliance is not secured
following notice and hearings, we recommend you review the situation with
your attorney before proceeding with abatement and assessment of costs. 
Your attorney may recommend proceedings in court under Chapter 657 of the
Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.



CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES



 

51.01  Definitions
 
51.04  Exceptions


51.02  Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited
 
51.05  Notice to Abate


51.03  Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance
 



 



51.01    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any
other non-ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper,
trash, rubber, debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled
vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or
appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or
discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or
hardware.  Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is
not considered junk.



   2.   “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage
with the County Treasurer or unlicensed and which has any of the following
characteristics:



      A.   Broken Glass.  Any vehicle with a broken or cracked
windshield, window, headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken
glass.



      B.   Broken, Loose or Missing Part.  Any vehicle with a
broken, loose or missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel or trunk
lid.



      C.   Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects.  Any vehicle
which has become the habitat for rats, mice, or snakes, or any other vermin
or insects.



      D.   Flammable Fuel.  Any vehicle which contains gasoline or
any other flammable fuel.



      E.   Inoperable.  Any motor vehicle which lacks an engine or
two or more wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle
totally inoperable, or which cannot be moved under its own power or has not
been used as an operating vehicle for a period of thirty (30) days or more.



      F.   Defective or Obsolete Condition.  Any other vehicle
which, because of its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way
constitutes a threat to the public health and safety.



Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding
that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.



   3.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street,
excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks, and includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile,
truck, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination
thereof.



51.02    JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any
private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk
vehicle.



51.03    JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.



It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private
property, unless excepted by Section 51.04, constitutes a threat to the
health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of
Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa.  If any junk or junk vehicle is kept upon
private property in violation hereof, the owner of or person occupying the
property upon which it is located shall be prima facie liable for said
violation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])



51.04    EXCEPTIONS.



The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk vehicle
stored within a garage or other enclosed structure.



51.05    NOTICE TO ABATE.



Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in
violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five (5) days initiate
abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])



CHAPTER 52
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



 

52.01  Title
 
52.05  Definitions


52.02  Purpose
 
52.06  Maintenance Standards


52.03  Interpretation
 
52.07  Violations


52.04  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
 



 



52.01   TITLE.



This ordinance may be referred to as the “Property Maintenance Code”, and
is herein referred to as “this Code”.



52.02   PURPOSE.



The purpose of this Code is to protect the public health, safety, welfare,
esthetics and property values by establishing minimum standards for
maintenance, appearance, condition, and occupancy, and for essential
utilities, facilities, and other physical components and conditions to make
residential premises fit for human habitation, and to make non-residential
premises fit for use according to the purpose for which they were developed;
by fixing certain responsibilities and duties upon the owners and managers,
and distinct and separate responsibilities and duties upon the occupants; by
authorizing and establishing penalties for violations; and providing for
proper repair, demolition, or vacation of premises which do not comply with
this Code.



52.03   INTERPRETATION.



This provision of this Code shall be interpreted and applied as minimum
requirements, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal for any other
power granted by the Code of Iowa.  Nothing in this Code shall be construed
to abrogate the Federal or State Constitutions, nor to grant power to the
City that are otherwise reserved by or for Federal and State government.



52.04   ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



It is not the intent of this Code to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or
issued pursuant to law.  Where two or more provisions apply the higher
standard shall prevail.



52.05   DEFINITIONS.



Words used in the Code shall have the same meaning as that defined by the
Zoning Ordinance, unless otherwise defined by this Code.



   1.   Abandoned Building.  Any building or portion of a building
under construction which has stood with an incomplete exterior shell for more
than one year, or any completed building or portion thereof which has stood
unoccupied for longer than six (6) months, and which is unsecured or has
Housing Code or Building Code violations.



   2.   Deterioration.  A state of conditions caused by lack of
maintenance or excessive use, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling,
peeling paint, rusting, or other evidence of physical decay or neglect.



   3.   Enforcement Officer.  The Mayor, Council, Police Officer, City
Administrator, Appointed Supervisors of the City’s Public Works Departments
or other City staff as may be assigned.



   4.   Exposed to Public View.  Any premises or any part thereof
which may be lawfully viewed by the public or from adjoining premises.



   5.   Exterior.  Yards and other open outdoor spaces on premises,
and the external surfaces of any structure.



   6.   Extermination.  The control and elimination of insects,
rodents and vermin.



   7.   Infestation.  The presence of insects, rodents, vermin, or
other pests on the premise to the extent that they constitute a health
hazard, are deemed by an Enforcement Officer to be in threat of spreading to
adjoining premises, or are exposed to public view.



   8.   Junk.  All old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other
non-ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rages, batteries, paper, trash,
rubber, debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles,
machinery and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances,
iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass,
tin ware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware.  Neatly
stacked firewood located on a side yard or rear yard is not considered junk.



   9.   Nuisance.  Physical conditions that are dangerous or
detrimental to the health or safety of persons on or near the premises where
the conditions exist, or anything that is injurious to the senses or
interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.



   10.   Owner.  Any person who alone, jointly, or severally with
others, holds legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof.



   11.   Premises.  A lot, parcel, tract or plot of land, contiguous
and under common ownership or control, together with the buildings and
structures thereon.



   12.   Public Authority.  Any officer or any department or branch of
the City, County, or State charged with regulating health, fire, zoning,
building regulations, public safety or other activities concerning property
in the City.



   13.   Refuse.  Any material that has lost its value for the
original purpose for which it was created or manufactured, or for its
resigned use, whether putrescible or non-putrescible, combustible or
non-combustible, which is not securely stored in a building or legal outdoor
storage yard for prompt disposal or resale, including, but not limited to
junk; paper or cardboard; plastic, metals; glass; yard clippings, leaves,
woody vegetative trimmings, and other plant wastes which have not been
properly composted; vegetable or animal waste resulting from handling,
processing, storage, preparation, serving or consumption of food crockery;
bedding, furniture, or appliances; offal; rubbish; ashes or incinerator
residue; construction debris; accumulation of animal feces; dead animals; or
wastes from commercial or industrial processes.



   14.   Responsible party.  Any person having possession, charge,
care, or control of real or personal property, whether with or without the
knowledge and consent of the owner, including without limitation any one or
more of the following:  owner, agent, property manager, contract purchaser,
mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or
tenant, or any other person, firm or corporation exercising apparent control
over a property.



52.06   MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.



   1.   General.  The exterior of every premises and structure shall
be maintained in good repair, to the end that the premises and each structure
thereon will be preserved; adjoining properties protected from blighting
influences; and safety and fire hazards eliminated.



   2.   Maintenance of Premises.  Each and every premise shall be kept
free of all nuisances, health, safety, and fire hazards, unsanitary
conditions, and infestation.  It shall be the duty of the responsible party
to keep the premises free of all said conditions and to promptly remove and
abate same, which include but are not limited to the following declared
nuisances:



      A.   Weeds or grasses allowed to grow to a height greater than
eight (8) inches on the average, or any accumulation of dead weeds or grass
that are exposed to public view, on any non-farm property.  This provision
shall not apply to prairies, wetlands, or similar area of naturalized
perennial vegetation which are certified by an Enforcement Officer to not
constitute a nuisance.



      B.   No person shall permit garbage or recyclable materials to
accumulate longer than a garbage collection cycle or recyclable cycle upon
premises owned or occupied by him or her if such accumulation would violate
the purpose of this Chapter; nor shall any person deposit any garbage or
recyclable materials upon any other premises unless such person has been
authorized by the owner of the premises to deposit such materials there.



      C.   Any structure, which is in such a dilapidated condition
that it is unfit for human habitation or the use for which it was
constructed; kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the
health of people residing therein or in the vicinity thereof; or any
structure defined as that is defined as abandoned or a public nuisance by
Chapter 657A, Code of Iowa.



      D.   Any nuisance as defined herein or described as such by
Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa.



      E.   Any alteration, modification, or obstruction which
prevents, obstructs or impedes the normal flow of runoff from adjacent lands,
or any alteration or modification which substantially concentrates or
increases the flow of water onto an adjoining premises to the extent of
damaging or saturating such premises.



      F.   Conditions which are conducive to the accumulation of
weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rodent
harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or
conditions on a premise which constitutes a fire, health or safety hazard.



      G.   Fences or retaining walls that are not structurally sound
or which are deteriorating, as may be evidenced by leaning or loose
elements. 



   3.   Building Maintenance.  All buildings shall be maintained to be
weather and water tight.  Broken windows, holes in roofs, and missing siding
shall be replaced with similar materials to maintain the weather and water
tight properties of the structure.  All wood including floor boards,
decking, subfloors, joists, rafters, roof sheathing, and siding shall be
replaced when missing, rotted or damaged.  Materials and practices used in
reconstruction and residing shall be of standard quality ad appearance
commensurate with the character of house or building.  Their appearance, as
judged under prevailing appraisal practices and standards.  Owners or
responsible parties shall not use materials which would depreciate the value
of adjoining premises or the neighborhood.  Painted surfaces shall be
maintained or repainted so that an individual wall surface does not have
peeling or missing paint in areas in excess of fifty percent (50%) of that
individual surface area.



52.07   VIOLATIONS.



   1.   Inspection Report.  Whenever the Mayor or other authorized
City Officer (Zoning Administrative Officer) is informed that a nuisance or
other condition exists which is listed in this chapter, the Mayor or other
authorized City Officer shall provide that an inspection report be prepared
within a reasonable time and given to the Mayor and Council.  The report
shall contain, but not be limited to:



      A.   A legal description of the property and a site map, if
applicable.



      B.   A description of the nuisance and conditions that exist
that caused the nuisance designation to be applied.



      C.   A statement of the acts necessary to abate the nuisance
or condition.



      D.   A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement.



      E.   An estimate of the cost to abate the nuisance.  If the
abatement notice is regarding a dilapidated or junk building, the inspection
report shall compare the cost of abatement with a project cost of
reconstruction of the structure.



   2.   Abatement of Nuisance or Condition.



      A.   Voluntary Abatement.  The objective of this Code being
the abatement of violations, person violating this Code shall, except in
emergency situations, be given notice of the violation and allowed a
reasonable amount of time to voluntarily remedy the violation before action
to assess costs or penalties for committing a municipal infraction are
undertaken.  Consideration will be given to evidence of a good faith effort
to correct the violation; whether an imminent health or safety hazard exists;
whether the person has previously been notified of or charged with violations
of a similar nature; and other factors.



      B.   Emergency Condition.  If the Enforcement Officer judges
that an emergency exists which creates a dangerous and imminent health or
safety hazard to person, property or the general public which requires
immediate action, the City may order such action as may be necessary to meet
the emergency.  Any orders issued pursuant to this paragraph shall be
effective immediately or in the time and manner prescribed in the order
itself.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



      C.   Procedure.  Whenever Enforcement Officer finds that a
nuisance or other condition that is listed in this chapter exists, the
Enforcement Officer has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis
whether to utilize the nuisance abatement procedure described in Chapter 50
of this Code or the municipal infraction procedure described in Chapter 4 of
this code.



   3.   Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice.  Any nuisance, public
or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this section:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



      A.   Contents of Notice to Property Owner.  The notice to
abate shall contain:



         (1)   A legal description of the property and a site
map, if applicable.



         (2)   A description of the nuisance and conditions that
exist that caused the nuisance designation to be applied.



         (3)    A statement of the acts necessary to abate the
nuisance or condition.



         (4)    A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.



         (5)    An estimate of the cost to abate the nuisance. 
If the abatement notice is regarding a dilapidated or junk building, the
notice shall compare the cost of abatement with a project cost of
reconstruction of the structure.



         (6)    A statement that if the nuisance or condition is
not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time
prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against the property
owner.



      B.   Method of Service.  When service of a notice to abate is
required, the following methods of service shall be deemed adequate:



         (1)   By personal service upon the person or persons in
possession of the property in violation or the owner of the property upon
which the nuisance exists.



         (2)   If, after reasonable effort, personal service
cannot be made, service shall be made by sending the notice by certified
mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of person or persons
in possession of the property.



      C.   Request for Hearing.  Any person ordered to abate a
nuisance may have a hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance
exists.  A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to
the Administrator within the time stated in the notice, or it will be
conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as
ordered.  The hearing will be before the Council at a time and place fixed
by the Council.  The findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a
nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable
time under the circumstances.



      D.   Abatement by City.  If the person notified to abate a
nuisance or condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may
perform the required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the
expense incurred.  The itemized expense account shall be filed with the
Administrator, who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



      E.   Collection of Costs.  The Administrator shall send a
statement of the total expense incurred by certified mail or by service in
the manner of an original notice to the property owner who has failed to
abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has
not been paid within one month, the Administrator shall certify the costs to
the County Treasurer, and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the
same manner as, general property taxes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])




      F.   Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement.  If the amount
expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds one hundred dollars
($100.00), the City may permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten (10)
annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same interest
rates provided for assessments against benefited property under State law.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)



      G.   Failure to Abate.  Any person causing or maintaining a
nuisance who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the
reasonable time required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation
of this Code of Ordinances.



   4.   Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure.  In lieu of the
abatement procedures set forth in Chapter 50, the requirements of this
chapter may be enforced under the procedures applicable to municipal
infractions as set forth in Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.



(Ch. 52 added by Ord. 765 – May 17 Supp.)



CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL



 



55.01  Definitions
 
55.11  Traps


55.02  Number and Type Permitted
 
55.12  Dangerous Animals


55.03  Licensing of Dogs and Cats
 
55.13  Vicious Animals


55.04  Urban Chickens
 
55.14  Investigation


55.05  Permits for Urban Chickens
 
55.15  Rabies Vaccinations


55.06  Animal at Large
 
55.16  Animal Bites


55.07  Tethering of Animals
 
55.17  Care of Animals


55.08  Releasing Animals
 
55.18  Animal Sanitation


55.09  Damage or Interference
 
55.19  Interference with Police Service Animal


55.10  Annoyance or Disturbance
 
55.20  Keeping of Pit Bull Dogs




 



55.01    DEFINITIONS.



The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.



   1.   "Animal" means dogs and cats and every other animate being
other than humans.



   2.   "At large" means any animal found off the premises of its owner
and not on a leash under the control of a competent person, restrained within
a vehicle, or housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel.



   3.   "Cat" means both male and female animals of the cat family
(Felis Catus), whether neutered or not.



   4.   "Chicken" means a member of the subspecies Gallus Gallus
Domesticus, a domestic fowl.



   5.   "Coop" means any cage, enclosure, or structure used for housing
and protecting livestock from weather and predators, whether stationary or
capable of movement.



   6.   "Dangerous animal" includes any animal which is not naturally
tamed or gentle; or which is of a wild nature or disposition; or which is
capable of killing or inflicting serious injury upon human beings and having
known tendencies, individually or as a species, to do so; or which, because
of its size or other characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life
or property if it is not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure
quarters, including, but not limited to, the following animals, which are
deemed as dangerous per se: bears, wolves, lions, tigers, ,panthers,
elephants, bison, poisonous snakes and spiders, alligators, crocodiles,
anacondas, pythons, boa constrictors,, and piranhas.



   7.   "Dog" means both male and female animals of the canine species,
whether neutered or not.



   8.   "Health department and health officer" means the Winnebago
County and Hancock County Health Departments, its directors and employees.



   9.   "Kennel" means a licensed facility authorized to contain four
or more dogs and/or cats.



   10.   "Livestock" means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine,
equine, ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas, emus; farm deer as
defined in Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa; or poultry. (Code of Iowa, Sec.
717.1)



   11.   "Neutered" refers to a surgical procedure that has been
performed on a dog or cat that renders it incapable of siring or bearing
offspring.



   12.   "Owner" means any person, firm, association or corporation
owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an animal.



   13.   "Police service animal" means an animal used by a peace
officer in the performance of the officer's duties, whether or not the animal
is on duty.



   14.   "Rear yard" means a yard extending across the full width of
the lot and measured between the rear lot line and the structure or any
projections other than uncovered steps, balconies, or eaves. On both corner
lots and interior lots the opposite end of the lot from the front yard shall
be considered the rear yard.



   15.   "Single-Family Dwelling" means any building that contains only
one dwelling unit used, intended, rented, leased, let, or hired to be
occupied for residential purposes.



   16.   "Urban Chicken" means a chicken kept on a tract of land
pursuant to a permit issued under the terms of this chapter.



   17.   "Vicious animal" means any animal, except for a dangerous
animal per se, that has attacked, bitten, or clawed a person while running at
large and the attack was unprovoked, or any animal that has exhibited vicious
tendencies in present or past conduct, including,, but not limited to, such
that said animal (a) has bitten more than one person during the animal's
lifetime; or (b) has bitten one person on two or more occasions during the
animal's lifetime; or (c) has attacked any domestic animal or fowl without
provocation, causing injury or death while off the property of the owner.



55.02    NUMBER AND TYPE PERMITTED. 



   1.   Licensed animals, not to exceed six in number per
household/property, where dogs and cats are owned and maintained in
compliance with this chapter. Exceptions can be granted through an
application and City Council approval. This limit does not pertain to
licensed facilities. Exceptions may be revoked if complaint(s) filed are
found to be valid.



   2.   The young produced by any pets permitted herein may be
maintained with parent animals for a period not to exceed twelve weeks.



   3.   It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City
except in compliance with the City's zoning regulations or by the provisions
of this chapter.



55.03    LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS.



   1.   Licensing Agent. The City Clerk is designated as the official
agent of the City for the purpose of issuing City dog and cat licenses and
collecting fees therefore pursuant to the provisions of this section.



   2.   Licensing Requirements.



      A.   Residents of the City who own an animal, or take
ownership of an animal, over six months old shall procure a City dog or cat
license from the City Clerk within sixty days of acquiring the pet.



      B.   Fees.



         (1)   The lifetime fee for a license shall be sixty
dollars ($60). This fee shall be reduced by twenty-five dollars ($25) if
animal is spayed or neutered and/or twenty-five dollars ($25) if animal is
microchipped.



         (2)   If the owner prefers to pay annually, the fee for
a license shall be ten dollars ($10) for spayed or neutered animal; and
twenty dollars ($20) for an unaltered animal.



      C.   Upon payment of the license fee set forth above, the City
Clerk shall issue to the owner a license which shall contain the name of the
owner, the owner's place of residence, and a description of the dog or cat.
The City Clerk shall keep a duplicate of each license issued as a public
record.



      D.   Upon issuance of the license, the City Clerk shall
deliver or mail to the owner a metal tag stamped with the number of the
license and the City's name, and the word "lifetime" or "annual".



      E.   Proof of rabies vaccination must be provided at time of
registration.



   3.   Display of Tag. The tag as described in paragraph E of
subsection 2 of this section shall be attached by the owner to a substantial
collar during the term of the license, and must be worn by the animal
whenever it is not indoors, in a fenced yard or fenced kennel within the city
limits.



   4.   Duplicate Tag. Upon the filing of an affidavit that the license
has been lost or destroyed, the owner may obtain another tag upon payment of
five dollars ($5.00) to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall enter in the
license and record the new number assigned.



   5.   Removal of License Tags. It is unlawful for any person who is
not the owner or the agent of such owner or an employee of the City or its'
agent, acting in an official capacity, to remove a license tag from a dog or
cat.



55.04    URBAN CHICKENS.



   1.   Number of Chickens. Urban Chickens not to exceed six (6) in
number per one single-family residential property for the benefit of the
owner or lessee of said property.



   2.   Hens only. It shall be unlawful to keep roosters within the
city limits.



   3.   Enclosures required. Urban Chickens must be kept in a Coop or
penned area consistent with customary animal husbandry practices at all
times. Urban Chickens shall be secured within a Coop during non-daylight
hours.



   4.   Enclosure requirements. Coops shall be constructed of sturdy
materials and shall be kept well maintained. Pens shall consist of sturdy
wire fencing of a type customarily designed for and used to enclose chickens.



   5.   Location of Enclosures. Coops and pens shall be limited to the
rear yard of the property, with a minimum of ten feet distance from any and
all property lines.



   6.   Non-Commercial Use. Owner shall not engage in the breeding of
chickens, egg production, or fertilizer production for commercial purposes.



55.05    PERMITS FOR URBAN CHICKENS.



   1.   Permit Agent. The City Clerk may issue Permits pursuant to the
provisions of this section.



   2.   Fees Collected. The City Clerk is designated as the official
agent of the City for collecting fees therefor pursuant to the provisions of
this section.



   3.   Permit Requirements.



      A.   Residents of the City wanting to own Urban Chickens, or
take ownership in Urban Chickens, shall procure a City Urban Chicken Permit
prior to raising, harboring, or keeping Urban Chickens within the city
limits, except in Compliance with the City's Zoning Regulations.



      B.   The fee for a permit shall be twenty dollars ($20) per
year for each Single-Family Residential Property.



      C.   Upon payment of the license fee set forth above and the
requirements of this chapter being met, the City Clerk may issue to the owner
a permit which shall contain the name of the owner, the owner's place of
residence, and the number of chickens.



      D.   Permits shall be valid for a period of one year unless
revoked pursuant to any violation of this ordinance.



      E.   A permit may be denied due to any nuisance condition or
unresolved violations of any ordinance, unpaid utility bill, or outstanding
invoices or liens on the property.



   4.   Rental Properties. Written verification of the consent of the
owner of the parcel of land for which the permit is sought, if the applicant
is not the owner, and is instead tenant, lessee or otherwise authorized to
reside at and use the property, must be provided prior to permit being issued.



   5.   Inspection. Residents seeking a permit or those who have a
permit grant the City, with due notice, the right to enter onto the property
to inspect the Coop and penned area to check compliance of this chapter.



55.06    ANIMAL AT LARGE.



   1.   At Large Prohibited. It is unlawful for any owner to allow an
animal to run at large within the corporate limits of the City.



   2.   Impoundment and Ticketing.



      A.   An animal found at large may be seized and impounded; or,
at the discretion of the Mayor or Police Officer, the owner may be served a
citation and/or complaint to appear before the district associate court to
answer charges made thereunder.



      B.   If an impounded animal is returned to its owner, the
owner shall pay the cost of the impoundment. Animal will be held within the
city at a cost of $75 for up to 72 hours. After 72 hours, the animal may be
transported to a shelter that has space, and fees may vary.



55.07  TETHERING OF ANIMALS.



No person shall confine, stake or otherwise tie or fasten an animal within
the corporate limits of the City in such place or in such manner as will
permit such animal to pass unto, over or across any of the public sidewalks,
streets, or alleys, or onto the property of another, block mailboxes or
utility meters within the incorporated limits of the City.



55.08    RELEASING ANIMALS.



No person shall aid or cause any animal, whether owned by such person or not,
to escape confinement or impoundment whether such confinement or impoundment
be upon such person's property or that of another, by opening any gate, door
or window, by making an opening in any fence enclosure or structure, or by
unleashing such animal.



55.09    DAMAGE OF INTERFERENCE.



It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to
pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference
with, the premises.



55.10    ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.



It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to
cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or persons by frequent
and habitual howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise; or by running after or
chasing persons, bicycles, automobiles, or other vehicles.



55.11  TRAPS.



   1.   No person may set traps in the City for the purpose of
apprehending wild or domesticated animals. This section does not prohibit:
(a) trapping mice, rats or other household vermin; or (b) setting of traps to
destroy moles and other underground pests so long as the traps used may be
triggered only by subsurface action; or (c) setting of traps in the line of
duty by the Mayor or Police Officer or with written permission from and under
the supervision of the Mayor or Police Officer or licensed pest control
operators.



   2.   The owner or person in lawful possession and control of any
premises may utilize live traps to apprehend animals on any premises,
regardless of the zone, if such animals constitute a nuisance due to the
destruction of property, and if the method and location of such trapping is
approved by the Mayor or Police Officer.



55.12    DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   1.    No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any dangerous animal
as a pet, or act as a temporary custodian for such animal, or keep, shelter,
or harbor such animal for any purpose or in any capacity within the City.



   2.    This prohibition does not apply to the keeping of dangerous
animals in the following circumstances:



      A.   The keeping of dangerous animals in a bona fide
educational institution, museum or other place where they are kept as live
specimens for the public to view, or for the purpose of instruction or study;



      B.    The keeping of dangerous animals for exhibition to the
public by circus, carnival, exhibit, show, or pet shop;



      C.    The keeping of dangerous animals in a bona fide,
licensed veterinarian hospital for treatment.



55.13    VICIOUS ANIMALS.



No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any vicious animal within the
Corporate City Limits except for in the following circumstances:



   1.   Animals under the control of a Law Enforcement or Military
Agency



   2.   Guard dogs upon the approval of the Council. Guard dogs must be
kept within a structure or fixed enclosure at all times, and any guard dog
found at large may be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter. Any premises guarded by a guard dog shall be
prominently posted with a sign containing the wording "Guard Dog," "Vicious
Dog" or words of similar import.



55.14    INVESTIGATION.



   1.   In the event that a dangerous animal or vicious animal is found
at large upon public property, park property, public right-of-way, or the
property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to person
and property, such animal may, in the discretion of the Mayor or Police
Officer, be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The City shall be
under no duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous animal or
vicious animal found at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner
of such animal prior to its destruction.



   2.   Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping,
sheltering, or harboring a vicious animal or dangerous animal on premises in
the City, the Mayor or Police Officer shall cause the matter to be
investigated.



   3.   After investigation, if the facts indicate that the person
named in the complaint is keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous or
vicious animal within the City, the Mayor or Police Officer shall order the
person to remove such animal within three (3) days of receipt of such an
order.



   4.   Such order shall contain a finding that the animal is vicious
or dangerous, a description of the animal, a description of the acts relied
upon in determining the animal is vicious, a statement to the owner to safely
remove the animal from the city limits within three (3) days or destroy the
animal with three (3) days of receiving order, a copy of this section, and a
statement advising the owner of the right to request a hearing.



   5.   Such order and notice shall not be required where such animal
has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any person, in which
case the Mayor of Police Officer shall cause the animal to be immediately
seized and impounded or destroyed if seizure and impoundment are not possible
without risk of serious physical harm or death to any person.



   6.   This order shall be sent by certified mail or delivered in
person.



   7.   Any owner advised that the owner's animal is declared vicious
or dangerous may, upon request, appeal to the Council. A request for hearing
must be made in writing and delivered to the office of the City Clerk within
three (3) days of receipt of the order or it will be conclusively presumed
that the animal is vicious or dangerous. The Appeal shall be heard before the
Council at a time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council
shall be conclusive.



55.15    RABIES VACCINATIONS.



   1.   Every owner of a dog or cat shall obtain a rabies vaccination
for such animal. It is unlawful for any person to own or have an animal in
said person's possession, six months of age or over, which has not been
vaccinated against rabies. Animals kept in State or Federally licensed
kennels and not allowed to run at large are not subject to these vaccination
requirements. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)



   2.   An owner of a dog or cat shall, upon request of the Winnebago
County and Hancock County Health Officers or Police Officer, display a
current vaccination record signed by a licensed veterinarian.



55.16    ANIMAL BITES.



   1.   Any dog or cat which is suspected of having rabies, or which
has bitten a person or other animal, shall be impounded and confined, either
at the residence of the owner of said animal, or under the supervision of a
licensed veterinarian, for observation. The confinement period shall be ten
(10) days. At the completion of the confinement period, the owner shall
present the confined animal to a licensed veterinarian. The veterinarian
shall then examine the animal, and a copy of the veterinarian's report shall
be given to the local health officer or Police Officer. All fees for such
impoundment, observation, and examination shall be the sole responsibility of
the owner of such animal.



      A.   Any such animal impounded under the provisions of this
section shall be humanely destroyed upon determination that such animal is
infected with rabies. It is the duty of the Veterinarian to report to the
local board of health the existence of any animal known or suspected to be
suffering from rabies.



      B.   It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or
other animal which has bitten or attacked a person or any person having
knowledge of such bite or attack to report this act to a local health officer
of Police Officer.



      C.   This section does not apply if a police service dog or a
horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in performance of its
duties has bitten a person.



55.17  CARE OF ANIMALS.



   1.   Animal Neglect. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or
confines, in any place, an animal, excluding livestock to fail to supply the
animal during confinement with a sufficient quantity of food or water, or to
fail to provide a confined dog or cat with adequate shelter, or to torture,
deprive of necessary sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by any
means which causes unjustified pain, distress or suffering. (Code of Iowa,
Dec. 717B.3)



   2.   Livestock Neglect. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or
confines livestock in any place to fail to provide the livestock with care
consistent with customary animal husbandry practices or to deprive the
livestock of necessary sustenance or to injure or destroy livestock by any
means which causes pain or suffering in a manner inconsistent with customary
animal husbandry practices. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)



   3.   Abandonment of Cats and Dogs. A person who has ownership or
custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except the person
may deliver the cat or dog to another person who will accept ownership and
custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog to an animal shelter or
pound. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)



55.18    ANIMAL SANITATION.



   1.   Sanitation of Premises. All structures, pens, coops or yards
wherein animals are kept or housed shall be well maintained and regularly and
thoroughly cleaned, and all debris, refuse, manure or other offensive
materials removed as often as is necessary to maintain such premises in a
clean and sanitary condition at all times, devoid of vermin and free from
offensive odors. The health officer or Police Officer may inspect, or cause
to be inspected, any structure or premises, and issue any such order as may
be necessary to enforce the provisions of this section, and any other
relevant pertinent rule, regulation or ordinance.



   2.   Refuse Containers. All refuse and manure and any materials
conducive to vermin or which may create any offensive odors, removed from
such structure or such premises as aforesaid, shall be placed in suitable
tight containers until completely removed from the premises, which containers
must be covered with a tightly fitted vermin-proof cover, and such refuse
then entirely removed from the premises or actually turned under the surface
of the soil in such a manner as to avoid offensive odors, vermin, or any
other menace to the public health.



   3.   Sanitation off Premises. It is prohibited for any person to
permit or allow an animal owned by that person or under that person's custody
or control to defecate upon public property, park property, public
right-of-way, or the property of another, unless such person shall
immediately thereafter clean up, remove, and dispose of the feces so
deposited.



55.19    INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE SERVICE ANIMAL.



   1.   A person who knowingly and willfully or maliciously torments,
strikes, administers a nonpoisonous desensitizing substance to, or otherwise
interferes with a police service animal, without inflicting serious injury on
the dog, commits a simple misdemeanor.



   2.   This section does not apply to a peace officer or veterinarian
who terminates the life of such a dog for the purpose of relieving the dog of
undue pain or suffering, or to a person who justifiably acts in defense of
self or another.



55.20  KEEPING OF PIT BULL DOGS.



   1.   Keeping Prohibited. It is unlawful to keep, harbor, own or in
any way possess within the corporate limits of the City a Pit Bull Dog as
defined in section 2 of this ordinance.



   2.   Definition. "Pit Bull Dog" is defined to mean:



      A.   The Bull Terrier breed of dog.



      B.   The Staffordshire Bull Terrier breed of dog.



      C.   The American Pit Bull Terrier breed of dog.



      D.   The American Staffordshire Terrier breed of dog.



      E.   Dogs of mixed breeds are known as Pit Bulls, Pit Bull
dogs or Pit Bull Terriers.



      F.   Any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of
being predominately of the breeds of Bull Terrier, Staffordshire Bull
Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier-known as Pit Bulls, Pit Bull dogs or Pit
Bull Terrier, or any combination of any of these breeds.



      G.   If DNA testing is necessary to prove breed of dog, and
the test is negative to the "pit bull" breeds listed above, the City shall
pay for the testing. If the testing is completed and the test is positive for
any of the "pit bull" breeds listed above, the dog owner shall pay for the
cost of the testing.



   3.   Exceptions. A Pit Bull dog used as a guide dog or a signal dog
shall be exempt from this section. A guide dog, signal dog, shall be defined
as a dog trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual
with a disability; including, but not limited to, guiding individuals with
impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or
sounds, providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, or
fetching dropped items.



***Penalties for violations pertaining to this Chapter, please refer to
section 1.14 of the Forest City Code of Ordinances.



(Ch. 55  Ord. 792 - Feb. 19 Supp.)



CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE



 

60.01  Title
 
60.05  Traffic Accidents:  Reports


60.02  Definitions
 
60.06  Peace Officer’s Authority


60.03  Administration and Enforcement
 
60.07  Obedience to Peace Officers


60.04  Power to Direct Traffic
 
60.08  Parades Regulated



 



60.01    TITLE.



Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as
the “Forest City Traffic Code.”



60.02    DEFINITIONS.



Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law,
such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by
reference.  Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)



   1.   “Business District” means the territory described as
follows:



      From the intersection of 4th Street and “G” Street, then west
to the intersection of “G” Street and 6th Street, then north to the
intersection of “I” Street and 6th Street, then west to the location of
the intersection of the vacated “I” Street and vacated 7th Street, then
north to the intersection of 7th Street and the alley in Block 30, then east
through the alley of Block 30, Block 31 and Block 32 to the intersection of
said alley and 4th Street, then south to the intersection of 4th Street and
“K” Street, then east to the intersection of “K” Street and Central
Street, then south to the intersection of Central Street and “I” Street,
then west to the intersection of “I” Street and 4th Street, then south to
the intersection of 4th Street and “G” Street, to the place of beginning.



   2.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.



   3.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or
regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.



   4.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and
including a highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district,
where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on such a highway for a
distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by dwellings or by
dwellings and buildings in use for business.



   5.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to and
including a highway for a distance of two hundred (200) feet in either
direction from a school house.



   6.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.



   7.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of
movement.



   8.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting
of a vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a peace officer or traffic control sign or signal.



   9.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not
included in the business, school or residence districts.



   10.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals,
markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or
erected for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.



   11.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any
person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway,
street, or alley.



60.03    ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor vehicles and
law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



60.04    POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.



A peace officer, and, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the
fire department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws.  In the
event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])



60.05    TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: REPORTS.



The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the City
shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation.  A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)



60.06    PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.



A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the
driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic
violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle
with reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or other
manifest of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the
registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or
permit of such vehicle.  A peace officer having probable cause to stop a
vehicle may require exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage
card issued for the vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)



60.07    OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.



No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control, or regulate traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)



60.08    PARADES REGULATED.



No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as provided
herein:



   1.   “Parade” Defined.  “Parade” means any march or
procession of persons or vehicles organized for marching or moving on the
streets in an organized fashion or manner or any march or procession of
persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the public as a parade.



   2.   Permit Required.  No parade shall be conducted without first
obtaining a written permit from the Mayor.  Such permit shall state the time
and date for the parade to be held and the streets or general route
therefor.  Such written permit granted to the person organizing or
sponsoring the parade shall be permission for all participants therein to
parade when such participants have been invited by the permittee to
participate therein.  No fee shall be required for such permit.



   3.   Parade Not A Street Obstruction.  Any parade for which a
permit has been issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully
participating therein, shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets
notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.



   4.   Control by Police and Fire Fighters.  Persons participating in
any parade shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions
in the performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members
of the fire department.



CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES



 

61.01  Installation
 
61.04  Standards


61.02  Crosswalks
 
61.05  Compliance


61.03  Traffic Lanes
 



 



61.01    INSTALLATION.



The Street Superintendent shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic
control devices when and as required under this Traffic Code or under State
law or emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the duration of an
emergency or temporary condition as traffic conditions may require to
regulate, guide or warn traffic.  The Street Superintendent shall keep a
record of all such traffic control devices.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)



61.02    CROSSWALKS.



The Street Superintendent is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the
Council by resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate
traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions,
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and
at such other places as traffic conditions require.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)



61.03    TRAFFIC LANES.



The Street Superintendent is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on
street pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent
with the traffic code of the City.  Where such traffic lanes have been
marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or
refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except
when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful
turning movement.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)



61.04    STANDARDS.



Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)



61.05    COMPLIANCE.



No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic
control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the
exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under
Section 321.231 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)



CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



 

62.01  Violation of Regulations
 
62.07  Open Containers in Motor Vehicles


62.02  Play Streets Designated
 
62.08  Obstructing View at Intersections


62.03  Vehicles on Sidewalks
 
62.09  Reckless Driving


62.04  Clinging to Vehicle
 
62.10  Careless Driving


62.05  Quiet Zones
 
62.11  Engine Braking


62.06  Tampering with Vehicle
 



 



62.01    VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.



Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of
a peace officer or direction of a fire department officer during a fire, or
who fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa
statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road
is in violation of this section.  These sections of the Code of Iowa are
adopted by reference and are as follows:



   1.   Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration
provisions.



   2.   Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited;
exception.



   3.   Section 321.37 – Display of plates.



   4.   Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations
prohibited.



   5.   Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.



   6.   Section 321.91 – Penalty for abandonment.



   7.   Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.



   8.   Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.



   9.   Section 321.174 – Operators licensed.



   10.   Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired
license.



   11.   Section 321.180 – Instruction permits.



   12.   Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons
aged fourteen through seventeen.



   13.   Section 321.193 – Restricted licenses.



   14.   Section 321.194 – Special minor’s licenses.



   15.   Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and
nonoperator’s identification card.



   16.   Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or
nonoperator’s identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.



   17.   Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or
nonoperator’s identification card by underage person to obtain cigarettes
or tobacco products.



   18.   Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.



   19.   Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.



   20.   Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.



   21.   Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.



   22.   Section 321.223 – License inspected.



   23.   Section 321.224 – Record kept.



   24.   Section 321.232 – Radar jamming devices; penalty.



   25.   Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles.



   26.   Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility
devices.



   27.   Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.



   28.   Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.



   29.   Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.



   30.   Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs or
signals; unlawful possession.



   31.   Section 321.262 – Damage to vehicle.



   32.   Section 321.263 – Information and aid.



   33.   Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.



   34.   Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.



   35.   Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized
bicycles.



   36.   Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device
while driving; text-messaging.



   37.   Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.



   38.   Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.



   39.   Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.



   40.   Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated
structures.



   41.   Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways;
exceptions.



   42.   Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.



   43.   Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.



   44.   Section 321.302 – Overtaking and otherwise.



   45.   Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.



   46.   Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.



   47.   Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.



   48.   Section 321.307 – Following too closely.



   49.   Section 321.308 – Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance
requirements.



   50.   Section 321.309 – Towing; convoys; drawbars.



   51.   Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.



   52.   Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.



   53.   Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.



   54.   Section 321.314 – When signal required.



   55.   Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.



   56.   Section 321.316 – Stopping.



   57.   Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.



   58.   Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different
highways.



   59.   Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.



   60.   Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.



   61.   Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield
intersection.



   62.   Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.



   63.   Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.



   64.   Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency
vehicles.



   65.   Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.



   66.   Section 321.329 – Duty of driver – pedestrians crossing or
working on highways.



   67.   Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.



   68.   Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.



   69.   Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.



   70.   Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.



   71.   Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal of train.



   72.   Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings;
posting warning.



   73.   Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.



   74.   Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.



   75.   Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.



   76.   Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.



   77.   Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.



   78.   Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.



   79.   Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.



   80.   Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by
hazardous material.



   81.   Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.



   82.   Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.



   83.   Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.



   84.   Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.



   85.   Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.



   86.   Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.



   87.   Section 321.372 – School buses.



   88.   Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped
vehicles.



   89.   Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.



   90.   Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.



   91.   Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.



   92.   Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.



   93.   Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.



   94.   Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized
bicycles.



   95.   Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.



   96.   Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.



   97.   Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.



   98.   Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.



   99.   Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.



   100.   Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.



   101.   Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.



   102.   Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.



   103.   Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.



   104.   Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.



   105.   Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.



   106.   Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.



   107.   Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.



   108.   Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.



   109.   Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.



   110.   Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.



   111.   Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.



   112.   Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.



   113.   Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.



   114.   Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or
permitted.



   115.   Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.



   116.   Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.



   117.   Section 321.422 – Red light in front.



   118.   Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.



   119.   Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch and control requirements.



   120.   Section 321.431 – Performance ability.



   121.   Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.



   122.   Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles and bells prohibited.



   123.   Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.



   124.   Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.



   125.   Section 321.437 – Mirrors.



   126.   Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.



   127.   Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.



   128.   Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.



   129.   Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.



   130.   Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.



   131.   Section 321.444 – Safety glass.



   132.   Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use
required.



   133.   Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.



   134.   Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety regulations.



   135.   Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation.



   136.   Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.



   137.   Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.



   138.   Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles; permits.



   139.   Section 321.457 – Maximum length.



   140.   Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.



   141.   Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.



   142.   Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.



   143.   Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.



   144.   Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight.



   145.   Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.



   146.   Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity;
reregistration.



   147.   Section 321.20B – Proof of Security against Liability
(Driving Without Insurance).



(Ord. 752 – Jan. 16 Supp.)



62.02    PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED.



The Police Chief shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a
play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the
roadway indicating and helping to protect the same.  Whenever authorized
signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no
person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except
drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such
closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in
driving upon any such street or portion thereof.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)



62.03    VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.



The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area
except at a driveway.



62.04    CLINGING TO VEHICLE.



No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all
passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation.  No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, in-line skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself
or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.



62.05    QUIET ZONES.



Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.



62.06    TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE.



It is unlawful for any person, either individually or in association with one
or more other persons, to willfully injure or tamper with any vehicle or
break or remove any part or parts of or from a vehicle without the consent of
the owner.



62.07    OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.



   1.   Drivers.  A driver of a motor vehicle upon a public street or
highway shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an open
or unsealed bottle, can, jar, or other receptacle containing an alcoholic
beverage.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284)



   2.   Passengers.  A passenger in a motor vehicle upon a public
street or highway shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor
vehicle an open or unsealed bottle, can, jar or other receptacle containing
an alcoholic beverage. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284A)



As used in this section “passenger area” means the area of a motor
vehicle designed to seat the driver and passengers while the motor vehicle is
in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a
passenger while in their seating positions, including the glove
compartment.  An open or unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic
beverage may be transported in the trunk of the motor vehicle.  An unsealed
receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported behind the
last upright seat of the motor vehicle if the motor vehicle does not have a
trunk.



62.08    OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.



It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other object to
obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a
clear view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets.  Any
such obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty
may be abated in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.



62.09    RECKLESS DRIVING.



No person shall drive any vehicle in such manner as to indicate a willful or
a wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.277)



62.10    CARELESS DRIVING.



No person shall intentionally operate a motor vehicle on a street or highway
in any one of the following ways:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.277A)



   1.   Creating or causing unnecessary tire squealing, skidding or
sliding upon acceleration or stopping.



   2.   Simulating a temporary race.



   3.   Causing any wheel or wheels to unnecessarily lose contact with
the ground.



   4.   Causing the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway.



62.11    ENGINE BRAKING.



   1.   No person shall use an engine brake while operating a motor
vehicle. "Engine brake" means the use or operation of any mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in the braking, decompression, or deceleration of any
motor vehicle which results in the unreasonably loud, raucous, unusual, or
explosive noise from such vehicle.



   2.   Emergency vehicles are exempt from the application of this
section unless on an emergency call.



(Ord. 728 – Sep. 12 Supp.)



CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS



 

63.01  General
 
63.04  Special Speed Zones


63.02  State Code Speed Limits
 
63.05  Minimum Speed


63.03  Parks, Cemeteries and Parking Lots
 
63.06  Controlled Access Facilities



 



63.01    GENERAL.



Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful
and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper,
having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any
other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any
street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a stop
within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)



63.02    STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.



The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the Code of
Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically
designated otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.



   1.   Business District – twenty (20) miles per hour.



   2.   Residence or School District– twenty-five (25) miles per hour.



   3.   Suburban District – forty-five (45) miles per hour.



63.03    PARKS, CEMETERIES AND PARKING LOTS.



A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in any public park, cemetery
or parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is
unlawful.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])



63.04    SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.



In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of Transportation, or
whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section 63.02 is greater
or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any
intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street system, the
Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed
limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location.  The following
special speed zones have been established:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)



   1.   Special 20 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of twenty (20)
miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or
parts thereof.



      A.   “G” Street between 11th Street and John K. Hanson
Drive.



      B.   (Repealed by Ordinance 782 – July 18 Supp.)



      C.   (Repealed by Ordinance 782 – July 18 Supp.)



      D.   “I” Street from Cathedral Oaks 1,035 feet west to a
point 235 feet east of Spring Valley Road. 



      E.   School Street from 125 feet north of “I” Street to
dead end (parking lot).



      F.   “J” Street from 550 feet west of North Best Street to
School Street.



      G.   “K” Street from 115 feet west of North Best Street to
115 feet west of 11th Street.



      H.   “L” Street from 115 feet west of North Best Street to
155 feet east of 11th Street.



      I.   Hale Lane from 100 feet west of North Best Street to dead
end (parking lot).



   2.   Special 25 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of twenty-five
(25) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or
parts thereof.



      A.   “O” Street from Clark Street to the intersection of
Halverson, “O” Street and North 13th Street.



      B.   Halverson Street, west from the intersection of “O”,
Halverson Street and North 13th Street to the west City limits.



      C.   Cathedral Oaks from “I” Street to Westgate Drive.



      D.   John K. Hanson Drive beginning 150 feet south of Indian
Avenue, thence north to the intersection of “I” Street.



      E.   Westgate Drive from John K. Hanson Drive, thence
northwest to the intersection of Spring Valley Road.



      F.   Nerum Drive North and Nerum Drive West from Hancock
County Road B-14 to Quail Avenue.



      G.   Wild Rose Drive from its west intersection with 340th
Street northerly, westerly, easterly and southerly back to its east
intersection with 340th Street.



      H.   All of Cattail Drive from its intersection with Wild Rose
Drive to its terminus.



      I.   John K. Hanson Drive from the Winnebago Hancock County
line, thence southwest to the intersection of John K. Hanson Drive and
Winnebago Way, thence south to Hancock County Road B-14 Drive.



(Ord. 723 – Jan. 12 Supp.)



   3.   Special 35 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of thirty-five
(35) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or
parts thereof.



      A.   Eastbound lane of “I” Street between Spring Valley
Road and a point 170 feet west of Anderson Drive.



      B.   Westbound lane of “I'” Street between Spring Valley
Road and a point 50 feet east of Hillhaven Drive.



      C.   County Road B-14 between. 4th Street and a point 2,040
feet east of Spring Valley Road.



      D.   South Golf Course Road from the intersection of U.S.
Highway No. 69 and East “J” Street to Dellwood Drive and Pilot Knob Road.



      E.   North Golf Course Road from Iowa Highway No. 9 to East
“J” Street.



      F.   East “J” Street from Golf Course Road to the east
corporation limits of the City.



      G.   Pilot Knob Road from the intersection of Country Club
Road and Dellwood Drive to the east corporation limits of the City.



      H.   Sage Drive from its intersection with 340th Street, also
known as Pilot Knob Road, south, southeasterly and east to the intersection
of Sage Drive with Sage Avenue.



(Ord. 700 – Oct. 09 Supp.)



   4.   Special 45 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of forty-five
(45) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or
parts thereof.



      A.   Spring Valley Road between “I” Street and County Road
B-14.



      B.   County Road B-14 beginning at a point 2040 feet east of
Spring Valley Road, thence west to the corporation limits of the City.



   5.   Special Speed Zones on U.S. Highway 69.  The following speed
limits shall be enforced upon U.S. Highway 69 within the City limits as
follows:



      A.   A speed in excess of 50 MPH is unlawful beginning at a
point 400 feet south of the intersection of U.S. Highway 69 and Hancock
County Road B-14 east to a point 2,000 feet south of the intersection of U.S.
Highway 69 and Hancock County Road B-14 west.



      B.   A speed in excess of 45 MPH is unlawful beginning at a
point 2,000 feet south of the intersection of U.S. Highway 69 and County Road
B-14 West to a point 1,200 feet south of the intersection of U.S. Highway 69
and “J” Street.



      C.   A speed in excess of 35 MPH is unlawful beginning at a
point 1,200 feet south of the intersection of U.S. Highway 69 and “J”
Street to a point 100 feet south of the intersection of U.S. Highway 69 and
Woodland Drive.



      D.   A speed in excess of 45 MPH is unlawful beginning at a
point 100 feet south of the intersection of U.S. Highway 69 and Woodland
Drive to a point 500 feet north of the intersection of U.S. Highway 69 and
Sunset Drive.



63.05    MINIMUM SPEED.



A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)



63.06    CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES.



Speed limits on controlled access facilities are as specified in Chapter 140
of this Code of Ordinances.



CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS



 

64.01  Turning at Intersections
 
64.03  Left Turn for Parking


64.02  U-turns
 
64.04  Right Turn Only



 



64.01    TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.



The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)



   1.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be
made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.



   2.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering
the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the
intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.



   3.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way
street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest
the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where
it enters the intersection.  A left turn from a one-way street into a
two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the
street being entered upon leaving the intersection.



The Police Chief may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic
conditions require, that a different course from that specified above be
traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or
signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an
intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or
signs.



64.02    U-TURNS.



It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection;
however, U-turns are prohibited within the business district, at the
following designated intersections and at intersections where there are
automatic traffic signals.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])



   1.   At the intersection of the east end of the Post Office alley
and North Clark Street.



64.03    LEFT TURN FOR PARKING.



No person shall make a left hand turn, crossing the centerline of the street,
for the purpose of parking on said street.



64.04    RIGHT TURN ONLY.



The westbound lane of Iowa Highway 9 shall be right turn only at the
intersection of Iowa Highway 9 and U.S. Highway 69.



CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED



 

65.01  Through Streets – Stop
 
65.06  Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk


65.02  Stop Required
 
65.07  Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed


65.03  Four-Way Stop Intersections
 
65.08  Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks


65.04  Yield Required
 
65.09  Official Traffic Controls


65.05  School Stops
 



 



65.01    THROUGH STREETS – STOP.



Every driver of a vehicle shall stop, unless a yield is permitted by this
chapter, before entering an intersection with the following designated
through streets.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)



   1.   U.S. Highway No. 69 from the south City limits to “J”
Street;



   2.   U.S. Highway No. 69 from the intersection with Highway 9 to the
north City limits.



65.02    STOP REQUIRED.



Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)



   1.   Sunset Drive.  Vehicles traveling east on Sunset Drive shall
stop at U.S. 69.



   2.   Woodland Drive.  Vehicles traveling east on Woodland Drive
shall stop at U.S. 69.



   3.   Pleasant Street.  Vehicles traveling east on Pleasant Street
shall stop at U.S. 69.



   4.   Golf Course Road.  Vehicles traveling north on Golf Course
Road shall stop at Iowa 9.



   5.   Golf Course Road.  Vehicles traveling south on Golf Course
Road shall stop at East “J” Street.



   6.   Golf Course Road.  Vehicles traveling north on Golf Course
Road shall stop at East “J” Street.



   7.   East “J” Street.  Vehicles traveling east on East “J”
Street shall stop at Golf Course Road.



   8.   East “J” Street.  Vehicles traveling west on East “J”
Street shall stop at Golf Course Road.



   9.   Airport Road.  Vehicles traveling west on Airport Road shall
stop at U.S. 69.



   10.   County Road B-14.  Vehicles traveling east on County Road
B-14 shall stop at 4th Street.



   11.   Spring Valley Road.  Vehicles traveling on South Spring
Valley Road shall stop at County Road B-14.



   12.   Indian Avenue.  Vehicles traveling west on Indian Avenue
shall stop at Spring Valley Road.



   13.   Winnebago Way.  Vehicles traveling west on Winnebago Way
shall stop at Spring Valley Road.



   14.   Cresthaven Court.  Vehicles traveling west on Cresthaven
Court shall stop at Spring Valley Road.



   15.   Westgate Drive.  Vehicles traveling west on Westgate Drive
shall stop at Spring Valley Road.



   16.   Hillhaven Drive.  Vehicles traveling north on Hillhaven Drive
shall stop at West “I” Street.



   17.   Anderson Drive.  Vehicles traveling north on Anderson Drive
shall stop at West “I” Street.



   18.   West School Street.  Vehicles traveling south on West School
Street shall stop at West “I” Street.



   19.   West “K” Street.  Vehicles traveling on West “K”
Street shall stop at North 11th Street.



   20.   West “L” Street.  Vehicles traveling on West “L”
Street shall stop at North 11th Street.



   21.   North 13th Street.  Vehicles traveling south on North 13th
Street shall stop at West “O” Street.



   22.   North Best Street.  Vehicles traveling on North Best Street
shall stop at West “O” Street.



   23.   East “O” Street.  Vehicles traveling east on East “O”
Street shall stop at Secor Avenue.



   24.   Forest Avenue.  Vehicles traveling west on Forest Avenue
shall stop at Secor Avenue.



   25.   North 4th Street.  Vehicles traveling on North 4th Street
shall stop at East “L” Street.



   26.   4th Street.  Vehicles traveling on 4th Street shall stop at
“J” Street.



   27.   Central Street.  Vehicles traveling on Central Street shall
stop at “J” Street.



   28.   “K” Street.  Vehicles traveling on “K” Street shall
stop at Clark Street.



   29.   West “I” street.  Vehicles traveling on West “I”
Street shall stop at 4th Street.



   30.   “I” Street.  Vehicles traveling east on “I” Street
shall stop at Clark Street.



   31.   “A” Street.  Vehicles traveling on “A” Street shall
stop at 4th Street.



   32.   South Clark Street.  Vehicles traveling south on South Clark
Street shall stop at Park Street.



   33.   Drive from Swimming Pool.  Vehicles traveling northwest on
the drive from the swimming pool shall stop at East Park Street.



   34.   Forest Drive.  Vehicles traveling south on Forest Drive shall
stop at East Park Street.



   35.   North 4th Street.  Vehicles traveling north on North 4th
Street shall stop at East “O” Street.



   36.   County Road B-14 (Crystal Lake Blacktop).  Vehicles traveling
east on B-14 shall stop at U.S. Highway No. 69.



   37.   South 4th Street.  Vehicles traveling south on South 4th
Street shall stop at B-14 (Crystal Lake Blacktop).



   38.   B-14 (Crystal Lake Blacktop).  Vehicles traveling east on
B-14 (Crystal Lake Blacktop) shall stop at Chicago-Northwestern Railway
tracks.



   39.   East “O” Street.  Vehicles traveling east on East “O”
Street shall stop at North 4th Street.



   40.   East “L” Street.  Vehicles traveling east on East “L”
Street shall stop at North 4th Street.



   41.   Cathedral Oaks.  Vehicles traveling north on Cathedral Oaks
shall stop at West “I” Street.



   42.   Acorn Drive.  Vehicles traveling west on Acorn Drive shall
stop at U.S. Highway No. 69.



   43.   West “I” Street.  Vehicles traveling east on West “I”
Street shall stop at South 8th Street.



   44.   “I” Street.  Vehicles traveling west on “I” Street
shall stop at 6th Street.



   45.   North 6th Street.  Vehicles traveling on North 6th Street
shall stop at West “M” Street.



   46.   North 6th Street.  Vehicles traveling on North 6th Street
shall stop at West “L” Street.



   47.   North 7th Street.  Vehicles traveling on North 7th Street
shall stop at West “L” Street.



   48.   North 7th Street.  Vehicles traveling south on North 7th
Street shall stop at West “J” Street.



   49.   4th Street.  Vehicles traveling north on 4th Street shall
stop at “L” Street.



   50.   Cathedral Oaks.  Vehicles traveling south on Cathedral Oaks
shall stop at Westgate Drive.



   51.   Stonebridge Drive.  Vehicles traveling east on Stonebridge
Drive shall stop at Westgate Drive.



   52.   Stonebridge Drive.  Vehicles traveling west on Stonebridge
Drive shall stop at Winnebago Way.



   53.   West “G” Street.  Vehicles traveling west on West “G”
Street shall stop at John K. Hanson Drive.



   54.   South 11th Street.  Vehicles traveling on South 11th Street
shall stop at West “G” Street.



   55.   North 7th Street.  Vehicles traveling on North 7th Street
shall stop at West “K” Street.



   56.   North 9th Street.  Vehicles traveling on North 9th Street
shall stop at West “L” Street.



   57.   North 13th Street.  Vehicles traveling north on North 13th
Street shall stop at West “O” Street.



   58.   6th Street.  Vehicles traveling on 6th Street shall stop at
West “J” Street.



   59.   East “J” Street.  Vehicles traveling on East “J”
Street shall stop at Central Street if light is flashing red for trucks
entering from Central Street.



   60.   North West Street.  Vehicles traveling south on North West
Street shall stop at East “J” Street.



   61.   Westhaven Drive.  Vehicles traveling north on Westhaven Drive
shall stop at Winnebago Way.



   62.   School Street.  Vehicles traveling west on School Street
shall stop at North 6th Street.



   63.   Sunrise Drive.  Vehicles traveling west on Sunrise Drive
shall stop at Highway 69.



   64.   Hospital Drive.  Vehicles traveling south on Hospital Drive
shall stop at Highway 9.



   65.   9th Street.  Vehicles traveling north on 9th Street shall
stop at “G” Street.



   66.   Chapel Street.  Vehicles traveling south on Chapel Street
shall stop at “G” Street.



   67.   7th Street.  Vehicles traveling on 7th Street shall stop at
“G” Street.



   68.   6th Street.  Vehicles traveling on 6th Street shall stop at
“G” Street.



   69.   Clark Street.  Vehicles traveling on Clark Street shall stop
at “G” Street.



   70.   “G” Street.  Vehicles traveling on “G” Street shall
stop at 4th Street.



   71.   Central Street.  Vehicles traveling on Central Street shall
stop at “G” Street.



   72.   “G” Street.  Vehicles traveling east on “G” Street
shall stop at U.S. Highway 69.



   73.   Nerum Drive.  Vehicles traveling west on Nerum Drive West
shall stop at Quail Avenue.



   74.   Nerum Drive.  Vehicles traveling north on Nerum Drive North
shall stop at Hancock County B-14.



   75.   Wild Rose Drive.  Vehicles traveling south on Wild Rose Drive
shall stop at its east intersection with 340th Street.



   76.   Wild Rose Drive.  Vehicles traveling south on Wild Rose Drive
shall stop at its west intersection with 340th Street.



   77.   Indian Avenue.  Vehicles traveling west on Indian Avenue
shall stop at Spring Valley Road.



   78.   John K. Hanson Drive.  Vehicles traveling south on John K.
Hanson Drive shall stop at the intersection of John K. Hanson Drive and the
entrance to the Forest City Aquatic Center.



(Ord. 683 – Jun. 08 Supp.)



   79.   John K. Hanson Drive.  Vehicles traveling east on John K.
Hanson Drive shall stop at the intersection of John K. Hanson Drive and the
entrance of the Forest City Aquatic Center.



(Ord. 683 – Jun. 08 Supp.)



   80.   Forest City Aquatic Center Driveway.  Vehicles traveling west
on Forest City Aquatic Center Driveway shall stop at the intersection of the
Forest City Aquatic Center Driveway and John K. Hanson Drive.



(Ord. 683 – Jun. 08 Supp.)



   81.   John K. Hanson Drive.  Vehicles traveling south on John K.
Hanson Drive shall stop at the intersection of John K. Hanson Drive and
Hancock County B-14.



(Ord. 724 – Jan. 12 Supp.)



   82.   North Best Street.  Vehicles traveling north on North Best
Street shall stop at West “K” Street.



(Ord. 746 – Jan. 15 Supp.)



   83.   Bob Johnson Drive.  Vehicles traveling Southwesterly on Bob
Johnson Drive shall stop at the intersection of Bob Johnson Drive and
Westgate Drive.



(Ord. 771 – Oct. 17 Supp.)



   84.   Vehicles traveling on North 11th Street shall stop at West "J"
Street.



   85.   Vehicles traveling North and South on Central Street shall
stop at East "E" Street.



(Ord. 789 - Dec. 18 Supp.)



   86.   North 8th Street. Vehicles traveling on North 8th Street shall
stop at West "L" Street.



(Ord. 791 - Feb. 19 Supp.)



   87.    West I Street.  Vehicles traveling on East "I" Street shall
stop at School Street Monday through Friday, 1 hour before school starts and
1 hour after school is out.



(Ord. 799 - May 19 Supp.)



65.03    FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.



Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following designated
four-way stop intersections:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)



   1.   “L” Street and Clark Street;



   2.   “K” Street and 6th Street;



   3.   “K” Street and 4th Street;



   4.   “J” Street and Clark Street;



   5.   Park Street and 4th Street;



   6.   “O” Street and 11th Street;



   7.   “G” Street and 8th Street;



   8.   John K. Hanson Drive and West “I” Street;



   9.   Clark Street and “O” Street;



   10.   “I” Street and Spring Valley Road;



   11.   Indian Avenue and Winnebago Way;



   12.   John K. Hanson Drive, Best Street and “J” Street;



   13.   9th Street and “K” Street;



   14.   “G” Street and 6th Street;



   15.   340th Street, Dellwood Drive, and South Golf Course Road;



   16.   Stonebridge Drive and Lawnsdale Court;



   17.   6th Street and West “J” Street.



65.04    YIELD REQUIRED.



Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in accordance with the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)



   1.   North 10th Street.  Vehicles traveling on North 10th street
shall yield at West “K” Street.



   2.   North 8th Street.  Vehicles traveling on North 8th Street
shall yield at West “K” Street.



   3.   East “L” Street.  Vehicles traveling west on East “L”
Street shall yield at Secor and North 4th Street.



   4.   Repealed by Ord. 791 - Feb. 19 Supp.



   5.   North 10th Street.  Vehicles traveling on North 10th Street
shall yield at West “L” Street.



   6.   North Best Street.  Vehicles traveling south on North Best
Street shall yield at West “L” Street.



   7.   West “M” Street.  Vehicles traveling on West “M”
Street shall yield at North 11th Street.



   8.   North 6th Street.  Vehicles traveling north on North 6th
Street shall yield at “M” Street.



   9.   “M” Street.  Vehicles traveling on “M” Street shall
yield at North Clark Street.



   10.   East “M” Street.  Vehicles traveling east on East “M”
Street shall yield at North 4th Street.



   11.   East “N” Street.  Vehicles traveling east on East “N”
Street shall yield at North 4th Street.



   12.   “N” Street.  Vehicles traveling on “N” Street shall
yield at North Clark Street.



   13.   West “N” Street.  Vehicles traveling on West “N”
Street shall yield at North 11th Street.



   14.   North 10th Street.  Vehicles traveling on North 10th Street
shall yield at West “O” Street.



   15.   North 9th Street.  Vehicles traveling on North 9th Street
shall yield at West “O” Street.



   16.   North 8th Street.  Vehicles traveling on North 8th Street
shall yield at West “O” Street.



   17.   North 7th Street.  Vehicles traveling on North 7th Street
shall yield at West “O” Street.



   18.   North 6th Street.  Vehicles traveling north on North 6th
Street shall yield at West “O” Street.



   19.   North 4th Street.  Vehicles traveling south on North 4th
Street shall yield at East “O” Street.



   20.   Repealed by Ord. 746 – Jan. 15 Supp.



   21.   Repealed by Ord. 789 - Dec. 18 Supp.



   22.   10th Street.  Vehicles traveling on 10th Street shall yield
at West “J” Street.



   23.   9th Street.  Vehicles traveling on 9th Street shall yield at
West “J” Street.



   24.   8th Street.  Vehicles traveling on 8th Street shall yield at
West “J” Street.



   25.   East “I” Street.  Vehicles traveling east on East “I”
Street shall yield at South Central Street.



   26.   East “I” Street.  Vehicles traveling west on East “I”
Street shall yield at South Clark Street.



   27.   East “E” Street.  Vehicles traveling on East “E”
Street shall yield at South 4th Street.



   28.   East “E” Street.  Vehicles traveling west on East “E”
Street shall yield at Clark Street.



   29.   “C” Street.  Vehicles traveling on “C” Street shall
yield at South Clark Street.



   30.   East “C” Street.  Vehicles traveling on East “C”
Street shall yield at 4th Street.



   31.   East “B” Street.  Vehicles traveling on East “B”
Street shall yield at 4th Street.



   32.   “B” Street.  Vehicles traveling on “B” Street shall
yield at South Clark Street.



   33.   South 7th Street.  Vehicles traveling on South 7th Street
shall yield at West “B” Street.



   34.   South 6th Street.  Vehicles traveling on South 6th Street
shall yield at West “B” Street.



   35.   “A” Street.  Vehicles traveling on “A” Street shall
yield at South Clark Street.



   36.   Oakridge Drive.  Vehicles traveling south on Oakridge Drive
shall yield at Westgate Drive.



   37.   Sunland Drive.  Vehicles traveling west on Sunland Drive
shall yield at Oakridge Drive.



   38.   Sunland Drive.  Vehicles traveling east on Sunland Drive
shall yield at Hillhaven Drive.



   39.   Oakridge Drive.  Vehicles traveling east on Oakridge Drive
shall yield at Hillhaven Drive.



   40.   Walnut Street.  Vehicles traveling north on Walnut Street
shall yield at Sunset Drive.



   41.   Sunset Drive.  Vehicles traveling east on Sunset Drive shall
yield at 165th Avenue.



   42.   South 4th Street.  Vehicles traveling west on South 4th
Street shall yield at B-14 (Crystal Lake Blacktop).



   43.   Woodland Drive.  Vehicles traveling north on Woodland Drive
shall yield at Walnut Street.



   44.   Walnut Street.  Vehicles traveling south on Walnut Street
shall yield at Woodland Drive.



   45.   North 8th Street.  Vehicles traveling on North 8th Street
shall yield at West “M” Street.



   46.   South 11th Street.  Vehicles traveling on South 11th Street
shall yield at West “I” Street.



   47.   South 10th Street.  Vehicles traveling south on South 10th
Street shall yield at West “I” Street.



   48.   South 9th Street.  Vehicles traveling south on South 9th
Street shall yield at West “I” Street.



   49.   Chapel Street.  Vehicles traveling on Chapel Street shall
yield at West “I” Street.



   50.   South 9th Street.  Vehicles traveling north on South 9th
Street shall yield at West “G” Street.



   51.   West “C” Street.  Vehicles traveling west on West “C”
Street shall yield at South 7th Street.



   52.   West “A” Street.  Vehicles traveling west on West “A”
Street shall yield at South 6th Street.



   53.   Hillhaven Drive.  Vehicles traveling south on Hillhaven Drive
shall yield at Westgate Drive.



   54.   Westgate Drive.  Vehicles traveling southeasterly on Westgate
Drive shall yield at John K. Hanson Drive.



   55.   Indian Avenue.  Vehicles traveling east on Indian Avenue
shall yield at John K. Hanson Drive.



   56.   Hancock County Road B-14.  Vehicles traveling on Hancock
County Road B-14 shall yield at the Union Pacific Railroad Crossing.



   57.   Winnebago Way.  Vehicles traveling south on Winnebago Way
shall yield at the intersection at John K. Hanson Drive.



(Ord. 724 – Jan. 12 Supp.)



65.05    SCHOOL STOPS.



   1.   Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., from August 15
through June 15, both inclusive, or when school is in session, every driver
of a vehicle approaching the following school crossing zones shall bring the
vehicle to a full stop before crossing from either side of the following
intersections and thereafter shall proceed in a careful and prudent manner
until the vehicle shall have passed through such school crossing zone.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)



      A.   On “K” Street from the intersection of 11th Street
west to the intersection of West School Street.



      B.   On “I” Street from Cathedral Oaks west to Spring
Valley Road.



   2.   There shall be no through traffic on streets designated in this
subsection between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on all days when the
Forest City public high school is in session.



      A.   “K” Street from Best Street west to the intersection
with West School Street.



      B.   “L” Street from Best Street west and south to the
intersection with “K” Street.



      C.   West School Street from “J” Street north to the
intersection with “K” Street.



65.06    STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.



The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the
sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when
able to do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is
entering.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)



65.07    STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.



Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.



65.08    YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS.



Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of
a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need be,
to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or
within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)



65.09    OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS.



Every driver shall observe and comply with the directions provided by
official traffic control signals at the following intersections:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)



   1.   Intersection of U.S. Highway 69 and Iowa Highway 9 and Secor
Avenue;



   2.   Intersection of U.S. Highway 69 and East “J” Street;



   3.   On West “I” Street 250 feet west of the intersection of
Hillhaven Drive and “I” Street for traffic traveling east and west;



   4.   On South 4th Street 930 feet south of the intersection of Park
Street and 4th Street for traffic traveling north and south.



CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS



 

66.01  Temporary Embargo
 
66.03  Load Limits on Bridges


66.02  Permits for Excess Size and Weight
 
66.04  Weight Restrictions on City Bridges; Permit



 



66.01    TEMPORARY EMBARGO.



If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of
deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets
will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an
amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets
so designated by such signs.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472)



66.02    PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.



The Police Chief may, upon application and good cause being shown therefor,
issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or
move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load
exceeding the maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets
or bridges named in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City
and for which the City is responsible for maintenance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E.1)



66.03    LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.



Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less than
the maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving
the bridge, the Council may cause to be posted and maintained signs on said
bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn
drivers of such maximum load limits, and no person shall drive a vehicle
weighing, loaded or unloaded, upon said bridge in excess of such posted limit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)



66.04    WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS ON CITY BRIDGES; PERMIT.



   1.   General Requirements.  Any vehicle with a gross weight less
than 96,000 pounds on seven axles or gross weight less than 90,000 pounds on
five axles is permitted to travel over a City bridge.



   2.   Permit Requirements.  No vehicle with a gross weight over the
restrictions as enumerated in subsection 66.04(1) is permitted to travel over
a bridge in the City unless a permit from the Forest City Chief of Police has
been issued to the owner of said vehicle. 



   3.   Application of Permit.  To obtain a permit, a person must do
the following:



      A.   Submit an application on forms approved by the Forest
City Chief of Police to the Forest City Chief of Police at least 10 days
before the use of the bridge;



      B.   Pay a non-refundable fee of $250.00.



   4.   Permit Issue.  The permit will be issued only in the event
that the engineer approves the permit and certifies the bridge is
structurally able to hold the load that is to travel over the bridge.



   5.   Permitted Use.  The use of the bridge will be in compliance
with any restrictions approved by the engineer.



(Ord. 706 – Oct. 10 Supp.)



CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS



 

67.01  Walking in Street
 
67.03  Pedestrian Crossing


67.02  Hitchhiking
 
67.04  Use Sidewalks



 



67.01    WALKING IN STREET.



Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk on the
left side of the street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)



67.02    HITCHHIKING.



No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)



67.03    PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.



Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)



67.04    USE SIDEWALKS.



Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along
and upon an adjacent street.



CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC



68.01    ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.



Upon the following streets and alleys vehicular traffic, other than permitted
cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction when appropriate
signs are in place.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[4])



   1.   School Street shall be westbound only from Clark Street to a
point 88 feet east of the west line of Lot Three (3), Block 47, Forest City,
Iowa.



   2.   Methodist Alley shall be eastbound only from South Clark Street
to South 4th Street.



   3.   Harrison Alley shall be southbound only from East “J”
Street to East “K” Street.



   4.   Kelly’s Court shall be southbound only for its entire length.



CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS



 



69.01  Park Adjacent to Curb
 
69.12  Parking Limited to Two Hours


69.02  Park Adjacent to Curb - One-way Street
 
69.13  Snow Removal


69.03  Angle Parking
 
69.14  Snow Routes


69.04  Angle Parking – Manner
 
69.15  Fire Lanes


69.05  Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal
 
69.16  Controlled Access Facilities


69.06  Parking Prohibited
 
69.17  Off-Street Parking Area


69.07  Persons with Disabilities Parking
 
69.18  Law Enforcement Parking


69.08  No Parking Zones
 
69.19  Law Enforcement Parking Lot


69.09  All Night Parking Prohibited
 
69.20  Permitted Overnight Parking


69.10  Truck Parking Limited
 
69.21  J Street Residential Parking Permit


69.11  Parking Limited to 15 Minutes
 




 



69.01    PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.



No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement
and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of
the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of
angle parking and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



69.02    PARK ADJACENT TO CURB – ONE-WAY STREET.



No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way
street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the
direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the
vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except
as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



69.03    ANGLE PARKING.



Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



   1.   South Clark Street on the west side from West “J” Street to
West “I” Street;



   2.   West “J” Street on the south side from Clark Street to
South 6th Street;



   3.   North 4th Street on the west side from East “K” Street to
East “L” Street;



   4.   North 6th Street on the west side from West “K” Street to
West “L” Street.



69.04    ANGLE PARKING – MANNER.



Upon those streets or portions of streets which have been signed or marked
for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an
angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as
indicated by such signs and markings.  No part of any vehicle, or the load
thereon, when parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into
the roadway more than a distance of sixteen (16) feet when measured at right
angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



69.05    PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.



No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than forty-eight
(48) hours, unless otherwise limited under the provisions of this chapter, or
for any of the following principal purposes:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   1.   Sale.  Displaying such vehicle for sale;



   2.   Repairing.  For lubricating, repairing or for commercial
washing of such vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an
emergency;



   3.   Advertising.  Displaying advertising;



   4.   Merchandise Sales.  Selling merchandise from such vehicle
except in a duly established market place or when so authorized or licensed
under this Code of Ordinances.



69.06    PARKING PROHIBITED.



No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:



   1.   Crosswalk.  On a crosswalk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])



   2.   Center Parkway.  On the center parkway or dividing area of any
divided street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   3.   Mailboxes.  Within twenty (20) feet on either side of a
mailbox which is so placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of
mail from vehicles on the roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   4.   Sidewalks.  On or across a sidewalk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])



   5.   Driveway.  In front of a public or private driveway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])



   6.   Intersection.  Within an intersection or within ten (10) feet
of an intersection of any street or alley.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])




   7.   Fire Hydrant.  Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])



   8.   Stop Sign or Signal.  Within ten (10) feet upon the approach
to any flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located
at the side of a roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])



   9.   Railroad Crossing.  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail
of a railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not
exhibiting a red light.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])



   10.   Fire Station.  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway
entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the
entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance
when properly sign posted.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])



   11.   Excavations.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])




   12.   Double Parking.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped
or parked at the edge or curb of a street.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])



   13.   Hazardous Locations.  When, because of restricted visibility
or when standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving
traffic, or when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause
curbs to be painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing
signs.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])



   14.   Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings.  A space of
fifty (50) feet is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any
theatre, auditorium, hotel having more than twenty-five (25) sleeping rooms,
hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or other building
where large assemblages of people are being held, within which space, when
clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or
stopped except in taking on or discharging passengers or freight, and then
only for such length of time as is necessary for such purpose.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)



   15.   Alleys.  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten
(10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in
such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a vehicle parked in any
alley which is eighteen (18) feet wide or less; provided said vehicle is
parked to deliver goods or services.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   16.   Ramps.  In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on
public or private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or
ramp.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])



   17.   In More Than One Space.  In any designated parking space so
that any part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes
beyond the markings designating such space.



69.07    PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.



The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of persons
with disabilities parking spaces:



   1.   Establishment.  Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall
be established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of
Iowa and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18.  No unauthorized person shall
establish any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first
obtaining Council approval.



   2.   Improper Use.  The following uses of a persons with
disabilities parking space, located on either public or private property,
constitute improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit, which
is a violation of this Code of Ordinances:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])



      A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons
with disabilities parking permit;



      B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or
being transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa;



      C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under
Section 321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.



   3.   Wheelchair Parking Cones.  No person shall use or interfere
with a wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:



      A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking
permit must comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A(1) of the Code of
Iowa when utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.



      B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking
cone which is properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A(1) of
the Code of Iowa.



   4.   Spaces Designated.  The following parking spaces within the
City limits shall be designated as handicapped parking:



      A.   The first parking space on the north side of the alley in
Block 34 immediately adjacent to and west of Clark Street.



      B.   The first parking space on the west side of Clark Street
immediately adjacent to and south of the intersection of the alley in Block
34 with Clark Street.



      C.   The first parking space on the west side of Clark Street
immediately north of the alley in Block 63.



      D.   The first two parking spaces on the east side of Clark
Street, south of the intersection of Clark Street and “G” Street.



      E.   The first parking space on the north side of “K”
Street immediately adjacent to and east of the alley in Block 33.



      F.   The first parking space on the north side of the alley in
Block 34 immediately adjacent to and west of Clark Street.



      G.   The first parking space on the east side of Clark Street
in Block 48 immediately adjacent to and south of “K” Street.



      H.   The parking stall on the west side of 4th Street, 120
feet north of the intersection of “J” Street and 4th Street.



      I.   The parking stall located in the Northwest Corner of the
Municipal Parking Lot located in the South 33 feet of Lot 3, Block 33,
Original Town, Forest City, Iowa.



      J.   The first parking stall on the north side of “L”
Street west of the intersection of North Clark Street and “L” Street. 
    (Ord. 745 – Oct. 14 Supp.)



      K.   Two parking stalls in the alley in Block 49 between Clark
Street and 4th Street, on the north side of said alley beginning 39 feet west
of the intersection of said alley and Clark Street and to terminate 79 feet
west of the intersection of said alley with Clark Street.



      L.   The parking stall on the east side of Clark Street in
Block 49 immediately south of the intersection of Clark Street and “J”
Street.



      M.   The first parking stall located on the north side of
“L” Street immediately east of the intersection of Clark Street and
“L” Street.



      N.   A parking stall located in the parking lot on the north
side of City Hall, said parking stall will be two (2) feet west of the
northeast corner of City Hall.



      O.   The parking space on the south side of West “I”
Street 100 feet east of the intersection of 6th Street and “I” Street.



      P.   The parking space on the south side of West “I”
Street 130 feet east of the intersection of 6th Street and “I” Street.



      Q.   The parking space on the east side of 6th Street 120 feet
south of the intersection of “I” Street and 6th Street.



      R.   The south side of “J” between Clark Street and 4th
Street, beginning 124 feet west of the centerline of 4th Street and ending
164 feet west of the centerline of 4th Street.



(Ord. 725 – Jul. 12 Supp.)



      S.   On the west side of Clark Street from the center of the
Alley between 6th Street and South Clark Street, thence running directly
south 62 feet.



(Ord. 744 – Oct. 14 Supp.)



      T.   Three parking stalls on the east side of John K. Hanson
Drive from the south sidewalk of the Boman Fine Arts Center No Parking Zone
(see Section 69.08(43)) to G Street.



(Ord. 802 - Aug. 19 Supp.)



69.08    NO PARKING ZONES.



No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following
specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace
officer or traffic control signal.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   1.   On the north side of “G” Street from 6th Street to 7th
Street;



   2.   On the south side of “I” Street from 8th Street west to
10th Street;



   3.   On the north side if “K” Street between 7th Street and 8th
Street;



   4.   On the north side of “L” Street from 4th Street west 132
feet to the middle of the block;



   5.   On the east side of 6th Street from “L” Street to “M”
Street;



   6.   On Chapel Street between “G” Street and “I” Street;



   7.   On the west and south sides of Westhaven Drive from the
northwestern intersection of Winnebago Way to the southeastern intersection
of Winnebago Way;



   8.   On the east, northeasterly and north side of Winnebago Way from
Indian Avenue to Spring Valley Road;



   9.   On the northeasterly side of Stonebridge Drive from Winnebago
Way to Westgate Drive;



   10.   On the southwesterly side of Westgate Drive from Stonebridge
Drive to Spring Valley Road;



   11.   On the east and southeasterly side of Hillhaven Drive from
Westgate Drive to “I” Street;



   12.   On the northeasterly side of Sunland Way from Oakridge Drive
to Hillhaven Drive;



   13.   On the east and south side of Oakridge Drive from Westgate
Drive to Hillhaven Drive;



   14.   On the north side of “I” Street from 10th Street to School
Street;



   15.   On the west side of Best Street from “I” Street to “J”
Street;



   16.   On both sides of 4th Street from “J” Street to County Road
B-14, except parking will be allowed on the west side of 4th Street from
“I” Street to “E” Street from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. on Sundays;



   17.   On the south side of “M” Street from 10th Street to Clark
Street;



   18.   On the south side of “J” Street from John K. Hanson Drive
to 6th Street;



   19.   On the north side of “J” Street from 6th Street to 7th
Street;



   20.   On the west side of Central Street from “J” to “I”
Street;



   21.   On both sides of 8th Street from “J” Street to “I”
Street;



   22.   On the east side of 8th Street from “I” Street to “G”
Street;



   23.   On the north side of “I” Street from 4th Street to Clark
Street;



   24.   On both sides of Chapel Street from “J” Street to “I”
Street;



   25.   On the west side of 9th Street from “J” Street north to a
point 120 feet south of “I” Street, from 2:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. every
day of the week;



   26.   On the north side of “I” Street from 9th Street west to
11th Street from 2:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. every day of the week;



   27.   On both sides of 10th Street from “J” Street to “I”
Street;



   28.   On the south side of “G” Street from 4th Street to Clark
Street;



   30.   On the west side of 6th Street from “G” Street to “I”
Street;



   29.   On the west side of 6th Street 140 feet south to alley;



   31.   On the north side of “G” Street from 7th Street to 11th
Street;



   32.   On the east side of 7th Street from 75 feet north of Park
Street to 200 feet north of Park Street;



   33.   On the south side of Indian Avenue from John K. Hanson Drive
to Spring Valley Road;



   34.   In the alleys between 9th Street and 10th Street; “J”
Street and “I” Street on both sides;



   35.   On the west side of Sweetgrass Lane south of Pleasant Street
to a point 400 feet south of the intersection of Sweetgrass Lane and Pleasant
Street;



   36.   On the east side of 7th  Street between “J” Street and
“L” Street;



   37.   Passenger cars only will be allowed to park on the north side
of “J” Street from a point 35 feet east of the north/south crosswalk at
the intersection of 4th Street and “J” Street, thence east to a point 20
feet west of the alley; all other vehicles are prohibited from parking on
“J” Street in this area;



   38.   On the west side of Cathedral Oaks;



   39.   On the north side of “G” Street from 7th Street west to
11th Street;



   40.   On both sides of “G” Street from 6th Street to 7th Street;



   41.   On the south side of School Street from Clark Street to 6th
Street;



   42.   On the south side of the alley between Clark Street and 6th
Street in Block 34;



   43.   43.   On the west side and south side of John K. Hanson
Drive from the South sidewalk of the Boman Fine Arts Center to Westgate
Drive, then on the east side of John K. Hanson Drive from Westgate Drive to
Indian Avenue; there shall be no parking on the east or west side of John K.
Hanson Drive from the south cross walk of the Boman Fine Arts Center to "I"
Street;



(Ord. 786 - Dec. 18 Supp.)



   44.   On the west side of West Street from “L” Street to 30 feet
south of “L” Street;



   45.   On the east side of West Street from “L” Street to 20 feet
south of “L” Street;



   46.   On the north side of “O” Street from 6th Street to 11th
Street, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. each day;



   47.   On the north side of “J” Street from 7th Street to 11th
Street, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. each day;



   48.   On the east side of Sweetgrass Lane from Pleasant Street to a
point 400 feet south of Pleasant Street, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. each day;



   49.   On both sides of Clark Street from “L” Street to “I”
Street, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.;



   50.   On the west side of 4th Street commencing at “K” Street
proceeding one-half the distance to “J” Street, between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 5:00 a.m.;



   51.   On the north side of “J” Street from Clark Street to 6th
Street, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.;



   52.   On both sides of “J” Street from Clark Street to 4th
Street, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.;



   53.   On the north side of “J” Street from 4th Street to
one-half the distance to Central Street, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m.;



   54.   On the south side of “J” Street from Central Street to
one-half the distance to 4th Street, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00
a.m.;



   55.   On both sides of “K” Street from 4th Street to 6th Street,
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.



   56.   On the north side of “K” Street beginning 275 feet west of
the intersection of “K” Street and the intersection of North Best Street,
thence continuing for another 225 feet to the intersection of “K” Street
and West School Street from the hours of 8:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, from September 1 until June 10 each year;



   57.   On the south side of “K” Street beginning 190 feet west of
the intersection of “K” Street and the intersection of North Best Street,
thence continuing for another 300 feet to the intersection of “K” Street
and West School Street from the hours of 8:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, from September 1 until the June 10 each year;



   58.   On the east side of West School Street at the intersection of
“K” Street and the intersection of West School Street, thence north for
190 feet from said intersection, from the hours of 8:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, from September 1 until June 10 each year;



   59.   On both sides of “J” Street from the intersection of
“J” Street and Central Street, thence east to the intersection of “J”
Street and U.S. Highway 69;



   60.   On both sides of “O” Street from Best Street west to 11th
Street;



   61.   On the south side of “O” Street from 11th Street to 6th
Street;



   62.   On both sides of “O” Street from Clark Street to 6th
Street;



   63.   On the south side of “O” Street from Clark Street to 4th
Street;



   64.   On both sides of “G” Street from the intersection of
“G” Street and U.S. Highway 69, thence west to a point 300 feet east of
the intersection of “G” Street and Central;



   65.   On the north side of “G” Street from a point 300 feet east
of the intersection of “G” Street and Central, thence west to the
intersection of “G” Street and Clark Street;



   66.   On the south side of “G” Street from the intersection of
“G” Street and Clark Street, thence west to the intersection of “G”
Street and 6th Street;



   67.   On the north side of “G” Street from the intersection of
“G” Street and 11th Street, thence west to the intersection of “G”
Street and John K. Hanson Drive;



   68.   On the west side of School Street from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday from the Forest City High School property to a point
288 feet south of said high school property;



   69.   On the east side of School Street from the Forest City High
School property to a point 32 feet south of said high school property.



   70.   On both sides of Secor Avenue from the bridge over the
Winnebago River to “L” and 4th Streets;



   71.   On the south side of “L” Street from 6th Street to 11th
Street;



   72.   On the west side of Clark Street from “G” to “E”
Street;



   73.   Commencing at a point on the southeast corner of the parking
lot located at the intersection of “K” Street and 4th Street, thence west
56 feet to the point of beginning, thence continuing west 44 feet, thence
north 20 feet, thence east 44 feet, thence south 20 feet to the point of
beginning;



   74.   On the north side of “I” Street from 8th Street west to
9th Street from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. every day of the week;



   75.   The east side of 9th Street from “I” Street north to the
south side of the alley in Block 53 from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. every day of
the week;



   76.   The west side of 8th Street from “I” Street south to
“G” Street from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. every day of the week;



   77.   On the north side of “K” Street 70 feet west of the
intersection of “K” Street and Clark Street;



   78.   On the east side of 11th Street beginning at “O” Street
and running north to the end of the concrete street;



   79.   The East side of South 6th Street between the center of the
alley in Block 63, Original town of Forest City, Iowa, thence north to the
intersection of  6th Street and “G” Street, between the hours of 5:00
a.m. and 6:30 p.m. Monday through Friday.



(Ord. 714 – Feb. 11 Supp.)



   80.   On both sides of Bob Johnson Drive.



(Ord. 770 – Oct. 17 Supp.)



   81.   The east side of 6th Street from "I" Street south to the north
side of the alley in Block 63 from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. every day of the
week.



(Ord. 806 - Oct. 19 Supp.)



82.   On the west side on 11th Street between "J" Street to "I" Street
from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. every day of the week.



(Ord. 807 - Oct. 19 Supp.)



69.09    ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED.



No person, except physicians or other persons on emergency calls and those
with overnight permits issued by the City pursuant to this chapter, shall
park a vehicle on any of the following named streets for a period of time
longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
of any day.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   1.   The north side of the alley in Block 34, adjacent to Lots 2 and
3 in Block 34.



   2.   From the intersection of 4th Street and “G” Street, then
west to the intersection of “G” Street and 6th Street, then north to the
intersection of 6th Street and the alley in Block 31, then east through the
alley of Block 31 and continuing east through Block 32 to the intersection of
said alley, if it continued through Block 32, and 4th Street, then south to
the intersection of 4th Street and “K” Street, then east to the
intersection of “K” Street and Central Street, then south to the
intersection of Central Street and “I” Street, then west to the
intersection of “I” Street and 4th Street, then south to the intersection
of 4th Street and “G” Street to the place of beginning.



   3.   The City Parking Lot located north of City Hall, Original Town,
Forest City, Iowa.



   4.   The Municipal Parking Lot located in Block 33, Original Town,
Forest City, Iowa.



(Ord. 713 – Oct. 10 Supp.)



69.10    TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.



Trucks weighing five (5) tons or more, loaded or empty, shall not be parked
on any street within the City limits except for the purposes of loading and
unloading.



69.11    PARKING LIMITED TO FIFTEEN MINUTES.



It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than
fifteen (15) minutes on the following designated streets:



   1.   On the north side of School Street from a point 30 feet west of
Clark Street proceeding westward a distance of 134 feet;



   2.   On the north side of School Street beginning at a point 142
feet west of Clark Street thence west 22 feet;



   3.   On the north side of the alley between Clark Street and 6th
Street in Block 34 commencing at Clark westward one-half the distance to 6th
Street;



   4.   A diagonal parking place on the north side of “K” Street
beginning at a point 202 feet west of Clark Street from 8:00 a.m. until 5:30
p.m.



   5.   The west side of 4th Street beginning at a point 44 feet north
of the centerline of East “K” Street, thence continuing north for 20 feet.



(Ord. 722 – Jan. 12 Supp.)



69.12    PARKING LIMITED TO TWO HOURS.



It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than two
(2) hours upon the following designated streets:



   1.   On the north side of “I” Street from Chapel Street to 8th
Street;



   2.   The east side of Clark Street beginning at the east west
pedestrian cross walk on the south side of the intersection of “I” Street
and Clark Street thence continuing south for 170 feet.



(Ord. 742 – Jul. 14 Supp.)



69.13    SNOW REMOVAL.



No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any public
street, alley, or City-owned off-street parking area except where permitted
overnight parking is allowed, and vehicle displays a current overnight
parking permit when the snow is falling and for a period of forty-eight (48)
hours after cessation of a snowfall unless the snow has been removed or
plowed from said street, alley or parking area.



(Ord. 774 – Nov. 17 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, 321.236[1])



69.14    SNOW ROUTES.



The Council may designate certain streets in the City as snow routes.  When
conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a designated snow
route, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to impede or block traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[12])



69.15    FIRE LANES.



No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a fire lane as provided
herein.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236)



   1.   Fire Lanes Established.  The Police Chief may designate fire
lanes on any private road or driveway where deemed necessary to assure access
to property or premises by authorized emergency vehicles.



   2.   Signs and Markings.  Wherever a fire lane has been designated,
the Police Chief shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be placed
identifying such fire lanes and the parking prohibition established by this
section.



   3.   Exception.  The provisions of this section do not apply to
authorized emergency vehicles.



69.16    CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES.



Parking restrictions on controlled access facilities are as specified in
Chapter 140 of this Code of Ordinances.



69.17    OFF-STREET PARKING AREA.



The parcel of land containing Lots 30 - 36, both inclusive, Auditor’s
Survey and plat of Block 48 of the City, is designated and established as a
City off-street parking area for the use and benefit of the public.



69.18    LAW ENFORCEMENT PARKING.



The second parking stall on the west side of Clark Street, north of the alley
in Block 63 is designated as parking for peace officers only.  No other
individual other than a peace officer may park in said stall.



69.19    LAW ENFORCEMENT PARKING LOT.



There shall be no parking between 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. in the parking lots
immediately east and west of the Forest City Police Station at 524 North 4th
Street unless it is for official police business. 



69.20    PERMITTED OVERNIGHT PARKING.



Tenants of apartments in the downtown area may be allowed to park overnight
from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. in any parking lot owned by the City under the
following terms and conditions:



   1.   A permit application shall be submitted to the Chief of Police
on forms prescribed by the Chief.



   2.   A permit issued by the Chief of Police shall be prominently
displayed in the vehicle.



   3.   An annual permit must be obtained and the annual fee for said
permit shall be $240.00.  A temporary visitors parking permit may be
obtained by contacting the police department, said temporary visitors parking
permit shall be valid through the dated on the permit.  All permits, whether
temporary or the annual permit shall be displayed in the rear window of the
vehicle.



   4.   Any permit holder shall comply with the snow removal ordinance
and have their vehicle moved in compliance with said snow removal ordinance.



   5.   Any lost or stolen permits shall be immediately reported to the
Police Department.



   6.   When there is a snow event the tenant must park overnight in
the parking lot located at the intersection of West K Street and 6th Street,
however the tenant must vacate said lot by 7:00 AM.



   7.   A snow event shall be declared at the discretion of the Street
Superintendent and shall be announced on KIOW radio as well as posted on the
City’s Facebook Page prior to 6 pm prior to the event.



(Ord. 777 – May 18 Supp.)



69.21    J STREET RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT.



   1.   Establishment. The “J” Street Residential Parking Permit
Area shall be as follows; an area from 7th Street West to 11th Street, from
“J” Street North to “L” Street, and 11th Street from “J” Street
South to “G” Street.  Any street within the above described area or any
street which acts as a boundary shall include both sides of the street.
      (Ord. 762 – Feb. 17 Supp.)



   2.   Resident parking permits. The Chief of Police is authorized to
issue a resident parking permit for residents living within the “J”
Street Residential Parking Permit Area.  Resident parking permits may be
issued on an annual or monthly basis. Resident parking permits will be of a
color and design, as determined by the Chief of Police, and this color and
design will change as needed for enforcement purposes.



   3.   Resident parking permit placement. Residents issued residential
parking permits are required to display the permit on the vehicle in
compliance with placement and visibility requirements established by the City
Traffic Engineer. The resident parking permit will be of such a design that
annual permits may be applied to the inside of the windshield of the vehicle
or monthly permits may be hung from the rear view mirror. Both types of
permits must be clearly visible for enforcement purposes.



   4.   Residency requirements for issuance of a resident parking
permit.  Residents must establish to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police
they have a current residence that is within the boundaries of the “J”
Street Residential Parking Permit Area to be eligible for issuance of a
resident parking permit.  Proof of residence will normally be a copy of a
signed and executed lease document, copy of a deed which has been filed with
the Winnebago County Recorder, or a utility bill with an address within the
“J” Street Residential Parking Permit Area.



   5.   Any permit holder shall comply with the snow removal ordinance
and any existing parking ordinances.



   6.   Only persons with a permit shall be allowed to park within the
“J” Street Residential Parking Permit Area.  However, any individual who
is performing work for a resident of the “J” Street Residential Parking
Permit Area shall not be required to have a permit for the period of time the
individual is performing the work.   



(Ord. 733 - Mar. 13 Supp.)



CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES



 

70.01  Arrest or Citation
 
70.04  Parking Violations:  Vehicle Unattended


70.02  Scheduled Violations
 
70.05  Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking


70.03  Parking Violations:  Alternate
 
70.06  Impounding Vehicles



 



70.01    ARREST OR CITATION.



Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:



   1.   Immediate Arrest.  Immediately arrest such person and take
such person before a local magistrate, or



   2.   Issue Citation.  Without arresting the person, prepare in
quintuplicate a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the
Iowa Commissioner of Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint
utilizing a State-approved computerized device.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 & 321.485)



70.02    SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.



For violations of the Traffic Code which are designated by Section 805.8A of
the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of
those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 & 805.8A)



70.03    PARKING VIOLATIONS:  ALTERNATE.



Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of
Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the
office of the City Clerk.  The simple notice of a fine shall be in the
amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for snow route parking violations† 3
and ten dollars ($10.00) for all other violations except improper use of a
persons with disabilities parking permit.  If such fine is not paid within
thirty (30) days, it shall be increased by five dollars ($5.00).  The simple
notice of a fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities parking
permit is one hundred dollars ($100.00). 



(Ord. 696-Sep. 09 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1a] & 321L.4[2])



70.04    PARKING VIOLATIONS:  VEHICLE UNATTENDED.



When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code,
and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein
provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.



70.05    PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.



In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed
such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such
violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that:



   1.   Described Vehicle.  The particular vehicle described in the
information was parked in violation of the Traffic Code, and



   2.   Registered Owner.  The defendant named in the information was
the registered owner at the time in question.



70.06    IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.



A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a
vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:



   1.   Disabled Vehicle.  When a vehicle is so disabled as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of
the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent
as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   2.   Illegally Parked Vehicle.  When any vehicle is left unattended
and is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   3.   Snow Removal.  When any vehicle is left parked in violation of
a ban on parking during snow removal operations.



   4.   Parked Over Limited Time Period.  When any vehicle is left
parked for a continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. If
the owner can be located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove
the vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   5.   Costs.  In addition to the standard penalties provided, the
owner or driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of
towing and storage.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   6.   Repeat Offenders.  Any vehicle which has been issued two
tickets for violations of parking and restrictions as imposed by Section
70.03 of this Code of Ordinances and is found to be in violation for a third
time, shall, in addition to the imposition of a third parking ticket, be
impounded by the City.  Prior to the release of said vehicle, all parking
tickets and the cost of towing and impounding the vehicle shall be paid. 
Any person who removes his or her vehicle from impounding without paying the
parking tickets and the cost of towing and impounding shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and the standard penalty pursuant to Section 1.14 shall be
imposed for violation of this subsection. 



 


Notes

3 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  A snow route parking violation occurs when the driver
of a vehicle impedes or blocks traffic on a designated snow route.  (See
Section 69.14) 



CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES



 

75.01  Purpose
 
75.06  Thaw Ban


75.02  Definitions
 
75.07  Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles


75.03  General Regulations
 
75.08  Negligence


75.04  Operation of Snowmobiles
 
75.09  Accident Reports


75.05  Hours of Operation
 



 



75.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.† 4



75.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized
vehicle, with not less than three and not more than six non-highway tires,
that is limited in engine displacement to less than one thousand (1,000)
cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to less than one thousand two
hundred (1,200) pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled
by the operator and handlebars for steering control. 



(Ord. 732 –Sep. 12 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)



   2.   “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle
that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and
handlebars for steering control and that is intended by the manufacturer for
use on natural terrain.  “Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle
that was originally issued a certificate of title and registered for highway
use under Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa, but which contains design features
that enable operation over natural terrain.  An operator of an off-road
motorcycle is also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the
operation of all-terrain vehicles.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)



   3.   “Off-road utility vehicle” means a motorized vehicle, with
not less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized
tracks, that is limited in engine displacement to less than one thousand five
hundred (1,500) cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to not more than
two thousand (2,000) pounds and that has a seat that is of bucket or bench
design, not intended to be straddled by the operator, and a steering wheel or
control levers for control.  An operator of an off-road utility vehicle is
also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the operation of
all-terrain vehicles. 



(Ord. 732 –Sep. 12 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)



   4.   “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle weighing less than
one thousand (1,000) pounds which uses sled-type runners or skis, endless
belt-type tread with a width of forty-eight (48) inches or less, or any
combination of runners, skis or tread, and is designed for travel on snow or
ice.  “Snowmobile” does not include an all-terrain vehicle which has
been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks or treads.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)



75.03    GENERAL REGULATIONS.



No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle or off-road utility
vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a
snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of
the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource
Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their
registration, equipment and manner of operation.



(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G & Ch. 321I)



75.04    OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.



The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as
to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:



   1.   Streets.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated on the following
streets:



      A.   Clark Street between “G” Street and “M” Street.



      B.   4th Street between “G” Street and “M” Street.



      C.   6th Street between “G” street and “M” Street.



      D.   “I” Street between 7th Street and Central Street.



      E.   “J” Street between 7th Street and Central Street.



      F.   “K” Street between 7th Street and Central Street.



      G.   “L” Street between 7th Street and Central Street.



      H.   All streets used for sledding, skiing, etc.  These
street are designated by signs or devices in the roadway.



Snowmobiles are permitted on all other streets within the corporate limits of
the City, but only for the purpose of traveling from the owner’s residence
to an area of permitted use or from one area of permitted use to another area
of permitted use, by the most direct route.



   2.   Exceptions.  Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets
only under the following circumstances:



      A.   Emergencies.  Snowmobiles may be operated on any street
in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow
upon the roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])



      A.   Direct Crossing.  Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing
of a prohibited street provided all of the following occur:



         (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately
ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;



         (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop
before crossing the street;



         (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all
on-coming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; and



         (4)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made
only at an intersection of such street with another street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])



   3.   Railroad Right-of-way.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated on
an operating railroad right-of-way.  A snowmobile may be driven directly
across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and
notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the
improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming
traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])



   4.   Trails.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain
vehicle trails except where so designated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f])



   5.   Parks and Other City Land.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated
in any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the
express permission of the City.  A snowmobile shall not be operated on any
City land without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.



   6.   Sidewalk or Parking.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon
the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb
line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the
“parking” except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street
upon which operation is authorized by this chapter.



75.05  HOURS OF OPERATION.



No snowmobile shall be operated in the City between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 6:00 a.m. except for emergency situations or for loading and
unloading from a transport trailer.



75.06    THAW BAN.



Snowmobiles shall not be operated during a publicized thaw ban in areas
posted to prohibit such operation.



75.07    OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.



The operators of ATVs shall comply with the following restrictions as to
where ATVs may be operated within the City:



   1.   Streets.  ATVs and off-road utility vehicles may be operated
on streets only in accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa or on
such streets as may be designated by resolution of the Council for the
operation of registered ATVs or registered off-road utility vehicles.  In
designating such streets, the Council may authorize ATVs and off-road utility
vehicles to stop at service stations or convenience stores along a designated
street.



(Ord. 709 – Oct. 10 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 & 3])



   2.   Trails.  ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails
except where designated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])



   3.   Railroad Right-of-way.  ATVs shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way.  An ATV may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])



   4.   Parks and Other City Land.  ATVs shall not be operated in any
park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City. 



   5.   Sidewalk or Parking.  ATVs shall not be operated upon the
public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line
and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”



75.08    NEGLIGENCE.



The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any injury or
damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile.  The
owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage
only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at the time the
injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the owner’s consent to
operate the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 & 321I.19)



75.09    ACCIDENT REPORTS.



Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury
or death to anyone or property damage amounting to one thousand dollars
($1000.00) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator
shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident
report, in accordance with State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 & 321I.11)



 


Notes

4 
†Editor’s Note:  See also Chapter 48 with regard to operation of
snowmobiles and ATVs in Recreational Areas.



CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS



 

76.01  Scope of Regulations
 
76.08  Carrying Articles


76.02  Traffic Code Applies
 
76.09  Riding on Sidewalks


76.03  Double Riding Restricted
 
76.10  Towing


76.04  Two Abreast Limit
 
76.11  Improper Riding


76.05  Bicycle Paths
 
76.12  Parking


76.06  Speed
 
76.13  Equipment Requirements


76.07  Emerging from Alley or Driveway
 
76.14  Special Penalty



 



76.01    SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.



These regulations shall apply whenever bicycles, roller blades, skate boards
and roller skates are operated upon any street or upon any public path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, roller blades, skate boards and
roller skates, subject to those exceptions stated herein.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])



76.02    TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES.



Every person riding on a bicycle, roller blades, skate boards and roller
skates upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject
to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the
State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic
code of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to those
provisions which by their nature can have no application.  Whenever such
person dismounts from a bicycle, roller blades, skate boards or roller
skates, the person shall be subject to all regulations applicable to
pedestrians.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)



76.03    DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED.



A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent
and regular seat attached thereto.  No bicycle shall be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234 [3 and 4])



76.04    TWO ABREAST LIMIT.



Persons riding bicycles, roller blades, skate boards and roller skates upon a
roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of
roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, roller blades, skate
boards and roller skates.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])



76.05    BICYCLE PATHS.



Whenever a usable path for bicycles, roller blades, skate boards and roller
skates has been provided adjacent to a roadway, riders shall use such path
and shall not use the roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])



76.06    SPEED.



No person shall operate bicycles, roller blades, skate boards or roller
skates at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions
then existing.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])



76.07    EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.



The operator of bicycles, roller blades, skate boards and roller skates
emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a
sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk
area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on said roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])



76.08    CARRYING ARTICLES.



No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])



76.09    RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



No person shall bicycle, roller blade, skate board or roller skate on a
sidewalk except in accordance herewith:



   1.   Restricted Sidewalks.  No person shall bicycle, roller blade,
skate board or roller skate upon sidewalks adjacent to the following streets:



      A.   Clark Street between “G” Street and “M” Street;



      B.   4th Street between “G” Street and “M” Street;



      C.   6th Street between “G” Street and “M” Street;



      D.   “I” Street between 7th Street and Central Street;



      E.   “J” Street between 7th Street and Central Street;



      F.   “K” Street between 7th Street and Central Street;



      G.   “L” Street between 7th Street and Central Street.



   2.   Single File Limit.  Persons bicycling, roller blading, skate
boarding or roller skating on sidewalks must ride single file and shall not
ride two or more abreast.



   3.   Yield Right-of-way.  Whenever any person is bicycling, roller
blading, skate boarding or roller skating upon a sidewalk, such person shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before
overtaking and passing.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])



76.10    TOWING.



It is unlawful for any person bicycling, roller blading, skate boarding or
roller skating to be towed or to tow any other vehicle upon the streets of
the City.



76.11    IMPROPER RIDING.



No person shall bicycle, roller blade, skate board or roller skate in an
irregular or reckless manner such as zigzagging, stunting, speeding or
otherwise so as to disregard the safety of the operator or others.



76.12    PARKING.



No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])



76.13    EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible for providing and using
equipment as provided herein:



   1.   Lamps Required.  Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall
be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible
from a distance of at least three hundred (300) feet to the front and with a
lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of three
hundred (300) feet to the rear except that a red reflector on the rear, of a
type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to three
hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams
of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear light.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)



   2.   Brakes Required.  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake
which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level,
clean pavement.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])



76.14    SPECIAL PENALTY.



Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the
scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for violations of
the Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by the
City for not less than five (5) days for the first offense, ten (10) days for
a second offense and thirty (30) days for a third offense.



CHAPTER 77
MOPED REGULATIONS



 

77.01  Definition
 
77.03  American National Standards


77.02  Safety Helmet Required
 



 



77.01    DEFINITION.



As used in this chapter, the term “moped” includes any motor vehicle
designed to travel with not more than three wheels in contact with the ground
with an engine having a displacement no greater than 50 cubic centimeters or
not capable of operation at a speed in excess of 25 miles per hour on level
ground, unassisted by human power.



77.02    SAFETY HELMET REQUIRED.



No person aged 14 or 15 shall operate or ride a moped upon any street in the
City unless the person is properly wearing a safety helmet which complies
with the standards set out in Section 77.03.



77.03    AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS.



The requirements of the American National Standards as amended are
established as the minimum standard requirements for safety helmets for moped
operators and riders.  These standards are available for public inspection
and copies available in the office of the Clerk.



CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES



 

80.01  Definitions
 
80.06  Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles


80.02  Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles
 
80.07  Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles


80.03  Notice by Mail
 
80.08  Proceeds from Sales


80.04  Notification in Newspaper
 
80.09  Duties of Demolisher


80.05  Fees for Impoundment
 



 



80.01    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1])



   1.   “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:



      A.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public
property for more than twenty-four (24) hours and lacks current registration
plates or two (2) or more wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle
totally inoperable.



      B.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property
for more than twenty-four (24) hours.



      C.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on
private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the
property for more than twenty-four (24) hours.



      D.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a
police authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten (10) days. 
However, a police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the
ten-day period by commencing the notification process.



      E.   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police
authority to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.



      F.   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section
321J.4B of the Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not
paid the impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency
responsible for carrying out the impoundment order.



   2.   “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of
the Code of Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed
scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.



   3.   “Police authority” means the Iowa state patrol or any law
enforcement agency of a county or city.



80.02    AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.



A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request
of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic,
shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take
into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property.  The police
authority may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a
private entity, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing,
preserving, storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles.  A property owner
or other person in control of private property may employ a private entity
which is a garage keeper (any operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair,
or maintenance of motor vehicles) to dispose of an abandoned vehicle, and the
private entity may take into custody the abandoned vehicle without a police
authority’s initiative.  If a police authority employs a private entity to
dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall provide the private
entity with the names and addresses of the registered owners, all lienholders
of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or the personal
property found in the vehicle.



(Ord. 698 – Sep. 09 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])



80.03    NOTICE BY MAIL. 



The police authority or private entity that takes into custody an abandoned
vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by certified mail, the last
known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any
other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in the
vehicle, addressed to the parties’ last known addresses of record, that the
abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody.  Notice shall be deemed given
when mailed.  The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle
identification number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in
the vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is
being held, and inform the persons receiving the notice of their right to
reclaim the vehicle and personal property within ten (10) days after the
effective date of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and
storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon
payment of the costs of the notice.  The notice shall also state that the
failure of the owner, lienholders or claimants to exercise their right to
reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall be
deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants of all right, title,
claim and interest in the vehicle or personal property and that failure to
reclaim the vehicle or personal property is deemed consent to the sale of the
vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher and to
disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction.  If the abandoned
vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity without a police
authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the private entity may
claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90 of the Code of
Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the vehicle.  If the abandoned
vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority or by a private entity
hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that any person claiming
rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who disputes the
planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police authority or
private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this
section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to
contest those matters.  If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a
hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property
within the ten-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or claimants
shall no longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the
vehicle or the personal property.  A court in any case in law or equity
shall not recognize any right, title, claim, or interest of the owner,
lienholders or claimants after the expiration of the ten-day reclaiming
period.



(Ord. 698 – Sep. 09 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])



80.04    NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER.



If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and
addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders, notice by one
publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice
under Section 80.03.  The published notice may contain multiple listings of
abandoned vehicles and personal property but shall be published within the
same time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for
mailed notice in Section 80.03.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])



80.05    FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.



The owner, lienholder or claimant shall pay three dollars ($3.00) if claimed
within five (5) days of impounding, plus one dollar ($1.00) for each
additional day within the reclaiming period plus towing charges, if stored by
the City, or towing and storage fees, if stored in a public garage, whereupon
said vehicle shall be released.  The amount of towing charges, and the rate
of storage charges by privately owned garages, shall be established by such
facility.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])



80.06    DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.



If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the police
authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether or not
the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose
of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])



80.07    DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.



The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found
any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle
whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of such
motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without
notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two (2) or
more wheels or other structural part which renders the vehicle totally
inoperable.  The police authority shall give the applicant a certificate of
authority.  The applicant shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a
junking certificate and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu
of the certificate of title.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])



80.08    PROCEEDS FROM SALES.



Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the
expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing and notification
required, in accordance with State law.  Any balance shall be held for the
owner of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and
then shall be deposited in the State Road Use Tax Fund.  Where the sale of
any vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the police
authority shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])



80.09    DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.



Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor vehicle
for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or otherwise demolish such motor
vehicle.  A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or demolish a
vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for
the vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])



CHAPTER 81
RAILROAD REGULATIONS



 

81.01  Definitions
 
81.03  Obstructing Streets


81.02  Warning Signals
 
81.04  Crossing Maintenance



 



81.01    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation
or other association which owns, operates, drives or controls a railroad
train.



   2.   “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)



81.02    WARNING SIGNALS.



Operators shall sound a horn at least 1,000 feet before a street crossing is
reached and after sounding the horn, shall ring the bell continuously until
the crossing is passed.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.13)



81.03    OBSTRUCTING STREETS.



Operators shall not operate any train in such a manner as to prevent
vehicular use of any highway, street or alley for a period of time in excess
of ten (10) minutes except:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)



   1.   Comply with Signals.  When necessary to comply with signals
affecting the safety of the movement of trains.



   2.   Avoid Striking.  When necessary to avoid striking any object
or person on the track.



   3.   Disabled.  When the train is disabled.



   4.   Safety Regulations.  When necessary to comply with
governmental safety regulations including, but not limited to, speed
ordinances and speed regulations.



   5.   In Motion.  When the train is in motion except while engaged
in switching operations.



   6.   No Traffic.  When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use
the crossing. 



An employee is not guilty of a violation of this section if the employee’s
action was necessary to comply with the direct order or instructions of a
railroad corporation or its supervisors.  Guilt is then with the railroad
corporation.



81.04    CROSSING MAINTENANCE.



Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient and safe crossings
over any street traversed by their rails.



(Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943])



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)



CHAPTER 82
ALTERNATIVE STREET VEHICLES (ASV)



 



82.01  Manner of Operation
 
82.09  Streets Upon Which ASVS May Be Operated


82.02  Observance of Traffic Regulations Mandatory
 
82.10  Careless Operation Unlawful


82.03  Permit Required
 
82.11  Operating Under the Influence


82.04  Proof of Liability Insurance
 
82.12  Towing


82.05  Standard Equipment Regulations
 
82.13  Trespassing on Private Property


82.06  Operation Regulations
 
82.14  Operation Limitation – Cemeteries


82.07  Times of Operation Limited
 
82.15  Community Events - Exception


82.08  Sidewalks and Adjacent Areas
 




 



82.01    MANNER OF OPERATION.



General requirements.  No person shall operate a ASV in the City except as
hereinafter provided.  A ASV shall be defined as a golf cart or four-wheel
utility vehicle with a single bench seat, 2 bucket seats or in-line seating.



82.02    OBSERVANCE OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS MANDATORY.



ASV operators shall observe all state and local traffic control regulations
and devises.



82.03    PERMIT REQUIRED.



No ASV shall be operated in the City unless a permit from the Forest City
Clerk has been issued to the owner of said ASV.



The permit received from the City must be with the ASV whenever it is
operated within the City.  The permit is good for the calendar year within
which it is issued and shall be renewed annually.  The fee for said permit
is $5.00 per year.  Prior to any initial or renewal permit being issued, the
ASV shall be inspected by a person designated by the City to make sure said
ASV complies with the requirements of this chapter.  There shall be no
permits issued if in the previous year the applicant was cited and convicted
of any violations of this chapter.



82.04    PROOF OF LIABILITY INSURANCE.



As part of the permit process, the owner of the golf car must provide proof
of liability insurance with minimum limits of $100,000 each person, $300,000
each accident before a permit will be issued.  The proof of insurance must
be with the ASV whenever said ASV is in operation. 



82.05    STANDARD EQUIPMENT REGULATIONS.



All ASVs shall be equipped with the following:



   1.   Brakes.



   2.   Slow moving vehicle sign.



   3.   Bicycle safety flag on a staff holder to put such flag at least
five feet above the surface of the street.



   4.   Any other safety equipment which may be required for ASVs by
Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa.



82.06    OPERATION REGULATIONS.



The following regulations apply to the operation of a ASV within the City.



   1.   Any operator of a ASV must have a valid driver’s license.



   2.   All riders in the ASV must remain seated at all times.



   3.   No more than two adult people may ride in the front seat of a
ASV and no more than two adult people may ride in the backseat of a ASV, if
said seat exists.  While operating any rider must be seated on the seat and
no part of the body of any rider will extend beyond the sides of the cart. 
Children must be accompanied by an adult driver and must follow all
requirements of this subsection except the capacity limits as long as all
children are seated on the seat and no part of the body of the child extends
beyond the sides of the cart.



82.07    TIMES OF OPERATION LIMITED.



ASVs without Iowa Department of Transportation approved headlights and tail
lights may be operated during the following times:



   1.   From sunrise to sunset, during the time of year when daylight
savings time is in effect.



   2.   ASVs are prohibited on streets during inclement weather when
visibility is reduced or impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions
or at any other time there is insufficient light clearly to see a person or
vehicle on a roadway at a distance of 500 feet.



ASVs with Iowa Department of Transportation approved headlights and
taillights may be operated at any time.



82.08    SIDEWALKS AND ADJACENT AREAS.



   1.   No ASVs shall be operated upon the public sidewalk, nor shall
they be operated upon that portion of the street located between the curb
line and the sidewalk or property line, referred to as the “parking”
except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which
operation is authorized by this Chapter.



   2.   Parking.  two carts may use one parking space provided they
both park within the parking space lines.



82.09    STREETS UPON WHICH ASVS MAY BE OPERATED.



ASVs may only be operated on streets except ASVs are prohibited from being
operated on the following streets, except to cross said streets:



   1.   U.S. Highway 69.



   2.   Iowa Highway 9.



   3.   Spring Valley Road.



   4.   Hancock County Road B-14.



82.10    CARELESS OPERATION UNLAWFUL.



No person shall operate a ASV in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so
as to endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage
thereto.



82.11    OPERATING UNDER THE INFLUENCE.



No person shall operate ASV while under the influence of intoxicating liquor
or narcotics or habit-forming drugs.



82.12    TOWING.



No item shall be towed by a ASV.



82.13    TRESPASSING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



No ASV shall be operated upon private property without the express consent of
the owner thereof.



82.14    OPERATION LIMITATION – CEMETERIES.



No ASVs shall be operated on roadways or other areas in cemeteries located in
the City.



82.15    COMMUNITY EVENTS – EXCEPTION.



The Forest City Chief of Police may grant exceptions and allow any type of
ASV to be used on any City street by community and civic organizations for
community events.



CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM



 



90.01  Definitions
 
90.13  Failure to Maintain


90.02  Superintendent’s Duties
 
90.14  Curb Valve


90.03  Mandatory Connections
 
90.15  Interior Valve


90.04  Abandoned Connections
 
90.16  Inspection and Approval


90.05  Permit
 
90.17  Completion by the City


90.06  Hookup Fee
 
90.18  Shutting off Water Supply


90.07  Compliance with Plumbing Code
 
90.19  Operation of Curb Valve


90.08  Plumber Required
 
90.20  Fire Hydrants


90.09  Excavations
 
90.21  Fluoridation


90.10  Tapping Mains
 
90.22  Cross Connection Prohibited


90.11  Installation of Water Service Pipe
 
90.23  Private Water Well Prohibition


90.12  Responsibility for Water Service Pipe
 




 



90.01    DEFINITIONS.



The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code of
Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:



   1.   “Combined service account” means a customer service account
for the provision of two or more utility services.



   2.   “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water
service from the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such
parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter
imposed shall be joint and several.



   3.   “Superintendent” means the Superintendent of the City water
system or any duly authorized assistant, agent or representative.



   4.   “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public
or community use.



   5.   “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to
the building served.



   6.   “Water system” or “water works” means all public
facilities for securing, collecting, storing, pumping, treating and
distributing water.



90.02    SUPERINTENDENT’S DUTIES. 



The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of water service pipes
and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining
to water services in the City in accordance with this chapter.  This chapter
shall apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to
new ones.  The Superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with
the provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation
of the water system, subject to the approval of the Council.  In the event
of an emergency the Superintendent may make temporary rules for the
protection of the system until due consideration by the Council may be had.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



90.03    MANDATORY CONNECTIONS.



All residences and business establishments within the City limits intended or
used for human habitation, occupancy or use shall be connected to the public
water system, if it is reasonably available and if the building is not
furnished with pure and wholesome water from some other source.



90.04    ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.



When an existing water service is abandoned or a service is renewed with a
new tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains shall be turned
off at the corporation stop and made absolutely watertight.



90.05    PERMIT.



Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a written
permit must be obtained from the City.  The application for the permit shall
include a legal description of the property, the name of the property owner,
the name and address of the person who will do the work, and the general uses
of the water.  If the proposed work meets all the requirements of this
chapter and if all fees required under this chapter have been paid, the
permit shall be issued.  Work under any permit must be completed within
sixty (60) days after the permit is issued, except that when such time period
is inequitable or unfair due to conditions beyond the control of the person
making the application, an extension of time within which to complete the
work may be granted.  The permit may be revoked at any time for any
violation of these chapters.



90.06    HOOKUP FEE.



Before any permit is issued the person who makes the application shall pay a
$750.00 hookup fee to the Clerk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



90.07    COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE.



The installation of any water service pipe and any connection with the water
system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether
regulatory, procedural or enforcement provisions, of the State Plumbing Code.



90.08    PLUMBER REQUIRED.



All installations of water service pipes and connections to the water system
shall be made by a plumber approved by the City.  The Superintendent shall
have the power to suspend the approval of any plumber for violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter.  A suspension, unless revoked, shall
continue until the next regular meeting of the City Council.  The
Superintendent shall notify the plumber immediately by personal written
notice of the suspension, the reasons for the suspension and the time and
place of the Council meeting at which the plumber will be granted a
hearing.  At this Council meeting the Superintendent shall make a written
report to the Council stating the reasons for the suspension, and the
Council, after fair hearing, shall affirm or revoke the suspension or take
any further action that is necessary and proper. 



90.09    EXCAVATIONS.



All trench work, excavation and backfilling required in making a connection
shall be performed in accordance with applicable excavation provisions as
provided for installation of building sewers and/or the provisions of Chapter
135.



90.10    TAPPING MAINS.



All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the direct supervision of
the Superintendent and in accord with the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   Independent Services.  No more than one house, building or
premises shall be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is
obtained from the Superintendent and unless provision is made so that each
house, building or premises may be shut off independently of the other.



   2.   Sizes and Location of Taps.  All mains six (6) inches or less
in diameter shall receive no larger than a ¾-inch tap.  All mains of over
six inches in diameter shall receive no larger than a one-inch tap.  Where a
larger connection than a one-inch tap is desired, two or more small taps or
saddles shall be used, as the Superintendent shall order.  All taps in the
mains shall be made on the side and near the top of the pipe, at least twelve
(12) inches apart.  No main shall be tapped nearer than eighteen (18) inches
of the hub.



   3.   Corporation Stop.  A brass corporation stop, of the pattern
and weight approved by the Superintendent, shall be inserted in every tap in
the main.  The corporation stop in the main shall be of the same size as the
service pipe.



   4.   Location Record.  An accurate and dimensional sketch showing
the exact location of the tap shall be filed with the Superintendent in such
form as the Superintendent shall require.



90.11    INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE.



Water service pipes from the main to the curb valve shall be Type K copper. 
Water service pipes from the curb valve to the meter setting may be either
Type K copper or copper tube size polyethylene pipe.  Polyethylene pipe
shall be 200 psi, SDR 9, meeting ASTM D2737, AWWA C901 and material PE
3408.  Tracer wire shall be installed with all polyethylene pipe.  Tracer
wire shall be a minimum 10 gauge copper type THHW.



The use of polyethylene pipe in and around areas of petroleum tanks is not
allowed.  Pipe must be laid sufficiently waving, and to such depth, as to
prevent rupture from settlement or freezing.



90.12    RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE.



All costs relating to the initial installation of the water service pipe
shall be borne by the owner.  Once the service pipe has been inspected and
approved for use by the Superintendent, the owner shall be responsible for
all costs and expenses incident to the maintenance and repair of such water
service pipe from the curb valve or property line (whichever comes first) to
the building served.  The determination as to which comes first, the curb
valve or the property line, shall be determined from an origination point at
the water main line that the service line is connected to.  The cost of
replacement of curb valves shall be shared equally by the City and the
property owner.  The owner shall indemnify the City for any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or
maintenance of said water service pipe.  Additional related responsibilities
of the owner are as follows:



   1.   Keep the water service pipe and fixtures connected with it in
good repair, and protect or free same of frost;



   2.   Pay for all repairs to service pipe, including digging and
filling whether done by the owner or the City as permitted by this chapter;



   3.   Where paving is ordered on any street, replace all service pipe
and connections not complying with Section 90.11, with pipe that does comply;



   4.   Where a street surface is necessarily removed or excavated for
the purpose of laying or repairing service pipe, pay the expense of cutting
and replacing same in the manner provided in Chapter 135.



90.13    FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.



When any portion of the water service pipe which is the responsibility of the
property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the owner fails to
correct such nuisance the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to the
property.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])



90.14    CURB VALVE.



There shall be installed within the public right-of-way a main shut-off valve
on the water service pipe of a pattern approved by the Superintendent.  The
shut-off valve shall be constructed to be visible and even with the pavement
or ground.



90.15    INTERIOR VALVE.



There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe inside the
building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible
and so located that the water can be shut off conveniently.  Where one
service pipe supplies more than one customer within the building, there shall
be separate valves for each such customer so that service may be shut off for
one without interfering with service to the others.



90.16    INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.



All water service pipes and their connections to the water system must be
inspected and approved in writing by the Superintendent before they are
covered, and the Superintendent shall keep a record of such approvals.  If
the Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner
must proceed immediately to correct the work.  Every person who uses or
intends to use the municipal water system shall permit the Superintendent to
enter the premises to inspect or make necessary alterations or repairs at all
reasonable hours and on proof of authority.



90.17    COMPLETION BY THE CITY.



Should any excavation be left open or only partly refilled for twenty-four
(24) hours after the water service pipe is installed and connected with the
water system, or should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the
right to finish or correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs
to the property owner or the plumber.  If the plumber is assessed, the
plumber must pay the costs before receiving another permit.  If the property
owner is assessed, such assessment may be collected with and in the same
manner as general property taxes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])



90.18    SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY.



The Superintendent may shut off the supply of water to any customer because
of any violation of the regulations contained in these Water Service System
chapters that is not being contested in good faith.  The supply shall not be
turned on again until all violations have been corrected and the
Superintendent has ordered the water to be turned on.



90.19    OPERATION OF CURB VALVE.



It is unlawful for any person except the Superintendent or a plumber to turn
water on at the curb valve, and said plumber shall take no action contrary to
the orders of the Superintendent and shall leave the water off or on, as
directed by the Superintendent.



90.20    FIRE HYDRANTS.



   1.   No person, unless specifically authorized by the City, shall
open or attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose
whatsoever.



   2.   It is unlawful for any person to erect, park, place, plant, or
cause to be erected, placed or planted, anything which will interfere with
the use of a fire hydrant, fire department inlet connection, or fire
protection system control valve, including but not limited to posts, fences,
growths, trash, stored materials or objects, or other materials.



   3.   It is unlawful for any person to erect, place, plant or cause
to be erected, placed, or planted anything which will prevent a fire hydrant,
fire department inlet connection, or fire protection system control valve
from being immediately discernible from a distance of twenty-five (25) feet,
including but not limited to posts, fences, growths, trash, stored materials
or objects, or other materials.  Tall grass and flowers are permitted to the
extent they do not inhibit emergency personnel from immediately discerning
the location of fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections or fire
protection system control valves from the street.



   4.   A three-foot radius around every fire hydrant and a walking
path free of any debris or fixtures shall be maintained between the street
and the fire hydrant, fire department inlet connections or fire protection
system control valve, except as otherwise approved by the fire chief or the
fire chief’s designee.



   5.   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or
occupant of the property upon which the fire hydrant, fire department inlet,
or fire protection system exists, to ensure that the provisions of this
section are complied with.  If the fire hydrant, fire department inlet, or
fire protection system is located within public right-of-way, then it is the
duty of the abutting property owner or occupant to assure compliance with the
provisions of this section.



   6.   The City may serve notice on any property owner or occupant to
remove any obstruction(s) to fire hydrants, fire department inlets, or fire
protection systems on their property or on the adjoining right-of-way.  The
City shall grant no fewer than fourteen days’ (14) and no more than
thirty-days’ (30) notice to the property owner or occupant to remove any
obstructions as set out in this section.  If the property owner or occupant
fails to adequately remove the obstruction and come into full compliance with
this section, with the timeframe stated in the notice, the City shall have
the right to enter on the property of the owner or occupant or onto the
adjacent right-of-way for the sole purpose of removing the obstructions to
the fire hydrant, fire department inlets, or fire protection system.  The
City may enter onto the property and remove an obstruction in the event of an
emergency which requires use of an obstructed fire hydrant, fire department
inlets, or fire protection system without giving prior notice to the property
owner or occupant.  In the event the City removes an obstruction due to the
failure of the property owner or occupant to remove the obstruction after
proper notice, or in the case of an emergency, the City may charge the costs
of said removal to the owner or occupant and may levy this same against the
owner or occupant’s land.  Costs that may be assessed under this
subsection shall include the costs of notice, levy on the property, and
reasonable attorney fees.



(Ord. 749 – Oct. 15 Supp.)



90.21    FLUORIDATION. 



The Superintendent is directed to install in the water system and to operate
the necessary equipment to provide a continuous and controlled addition of
fluoride into the public water supply of the City, subject to inspection by
and direction of the State Department of Public Health.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 366.1)



90.22    CROSS CONNECTION PROHIBITED. 



The connection or cross connection of any separate water supply to premises
which receive water from the City is prohibited.



90.23    PRIVATE WATER WELL PROHIBITION.



   1.   Definitions.  For purposes of this section, the following
terms are defined:



      A.   “Drinking water well” means any underground water
used as a source for drinking water by humans and groundwater wells used
primarily for the final production of food or medicine for human consumption
with facilities routinely characterized with standard industrial codes (SIC)
Group 283 for drugs and 20 for foods.



      B.   “Non-drinking water well” means any groundwater well
(except an extraction well used as a part of a mediation system) not defined
as a drinking water well including a groundwater well which is not properly
plugged in accordance with applicable laws of the City of Forest City, Iowa
and the State of Iowa.



   2.   Private Water Wells.  No person shall construct a private well
after July 1, 2001, or own or use a private well constructed after July 1,
2001, in or upon the following described property:



The East 450 feet of the following:  That portion of the Northwest Quarter
of Section 12, Township 97 North, Range 24 West of the 5th P.M. described as
follows: Commencing at the northeast corner of said Northwest Quarter; thence
S 88°11'12" W 832.47 feet along the Northerly line of said Northwest Quarter
to the point of beginning; thence continuing S 88°11'12" W 50.06 feet along
said northerly line of the Northwest Quarter; thence S 00°31'18" E 1025.00
feet along a line parallel with the easterly line of said Northwest Quarter;
thence N 85°44'12" W 400.00 feet along a line parallel with the centerline
of the proposed 04°15'48" W 272.88 feet along a line drawn at right angles
to said proposed runway center line to a point distant 250 feet northerly,
measured at right angles, from said proposed runway centerline; thence N
85°44'12" W 911.42 feet along a line parallel with said proposed runway
center line to a point on the easterly right-of-way line of the Chicago Rock
Island and Pacific Railroad; thence S 17°33'51" E 592.48 feet along said
railroad right-of-way line to a point distant 300 feet southerly, measured at
right angles, from said proposed runway centerline; thence S 85°44'12" E
1377.27 feet along a line parallel with said proposed runway centerline;
thence S 08°06'13" W 786.82 feet to a point on the southerly line of said
Northwest Quarter; thence N 88°23'49" E 126.51 feet along said southerly
line of the Northwest Quarter to a point on the westerly line of the easterly
40 acres of said Northwest Quarter, said point being distant 657.3 feet
westerly, measured at right angles, from said easterly line of the Northwest
Quarter; thence N 00°31'18" W 1329.49 feet along said westerly line of the
easterly 40 acres to a point distant 250 feet northerly, measured at right
angles, from said proposed runway centerline; thence S 88°11'12" W 175.0
feet along a line parallel with said northerly line of the Northwest Quarter
thence N 00°31'18" W 1320.00 feet along a line parallel with said easterly
line of the Northwest Quarter to the point of beginning; containing 23.85
acres and subject to existing public road right-of-way across the northerly
63.0 feet and southerly 33.0 feet thereof.



AND



The east forty (40) acres of the Northwest Quarter (NW¼)of Section Twelve
(12), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa.



AND



The south 400 feet of the following:  Commencing at the north quarter corner
of Section 12 T-97-N, R-24-W of the 5th P.M.; thence westerly along the north
line of Section 12-97-24 657.3 feet to the west line of the existing Airport
property and the point of beginning; thence westerly along the north line of
Section 12-97-24, 175.0 feet; thence southerly parallel to the west line of
the existing Municipal Airport 1320.0 feet; thence easterly 175.0 feet to the
west line of the existing Municipal Airport thence northerly along the west
line of the existing Municipal Airport 1320.0 feet to the point of
beginning.  Said tract is located in the E½ ofthe NW¼ Section 12, T-97-N,
R-24-W of the 5th P.M. Hancock County, Iowa and contains 5.30 acres more or
less.



AND



The south 100 feet of the east 100 feet of Lot 5 of the Airport Industrial
Park Second Subdivision to Hancock County, Iowa.



CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS



 

91.01  Purpose
 
91.06  Meter Costs


91.02  Water Use Metered
 
91.07  Meter Repairs


91.03  Fire Sprinkler Systems – Exception
 
91.08  Right of Entry


91.04  Location of Meters
 
91.09  Outside Water Meters


91.05  Meter Setting
 



 



91.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and
facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers.



91.02    WATER USE METERED.



All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters furnished by
the City and installed by the City.



91.03    FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS – EXCEPTION.



Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection
without meters under the direct supervision of the Superintendent.  No open
connection can be incorporated in the system, and there shall be no valves
except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which must be
sealed open.



91.04    LOCATION OF METERS.



All meters shall be so located that they are easily accessible to meter
readers and repairmen and protected from freezing.  All new meter
installations shall be made with remote reading dials so that they may be
read both at the meter and at a dial located on the outside of the dwelling
or building.  All remote readers shall be installed outside the building at
a point mutually agreed upon by the City and the owner.



91.05    METER SETTING.



The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and fittings for proper
setting of the meter including a valve on the discharge side of the meter. 
Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Superintendent and shall be
of a design and construction approved by the Superintendent.



91.06    METER COSTS.



Each property owner served shall be charged $25.00 for each 5/8-inch or
¾-inch meter and the actual cost for the material for meters one inch or
larger.  The City shall install the meters without further charge for labor
or materials.  The Clerk or Superintendent shall determine from each
customer at the time of installation whether the customer desires to pay the
full charge at once by separate billing or at the next regular utility
billing.



91.07    METER REPAIRS.



Whenever a water meter or remote reading appurtenance is found to be out of
order the Superintendent shall have it repaired.  If it is found that damage
to the meter has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the
customer or property owner, or the meter is not owned by the City, then the
property owner shall be liable for the cost of repairs.



91.08    RIGHT OF ENTRY.



The Superintendent shall be permitted to enter the premises of any customer
at any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter.



91.09    OUTSIDE WATER METERS.



Any customer may apply to the City for a water meter for gardening or other
activities outside the building as long as the wastewater from said
activities does not flow into the sanitary sewer.  Application shall be made
with the City on permit forms available at the Clerk’s office.  The
application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00).



   1.   The Superintendent may develop specifications for any
additional plumbing which may be required for the outside water meter.



   2.   Any water usage measured through such meters shall be subject
to water rates as specified in Section 92.02 but shall not be subject to
sewer use charges.



   3.   Such meters and remote reading devices shall be purchased by
the customer at fees to be established by the City.



   4.   During any period in which the City determines that it is
necessary to conserve water, all outside metered services shall be
disconnected immediately.  Disconnection will be completed by the City. 
Reconnection shall occur only when the water conservation period is over, as
determined by the City.



   5.   If at any time it is brought to the attention of the City that
the customer is using the outside metered service to provide water for use in
the house, the outside service meter shall be removed and the customer shall
no longer be eligible for such service.



   6.   Any sign of meter tampering by the customer shall result in the
immediate termination of the outside metering service.



   7.   The City shall retain ownership of the outside water meter;
however, any customer assumes the responsibility for any damage to the
outside water meter and remote reading appurtenances.



CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES



 

92.01  Service Charges
 
92.06  Lien for Nonpayment


92.02  Rates and Service
 
92.07  Lien Exemption


92.03  Rates Outside the City
 
92.08  Lien Notice


92.04  Billing for Water Service
 
92.09  Customer Utility Deposits


92.05  Service Discontinued
 
92.10  Temporary Vacancy



 



92.01    SERVICE CHARGES.



Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the City based upon use
of water as determined by meters provided for in Chapter 91.  Each location,
building, premises or connection shall be considered a separate and distinct
customer whether owned or controlled by the same person or not.  The service
charges shall be billed as part of a combined service account which means a
customer service account for the provision of two or more utility services.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



92.02    RATES AND SERVICE.



Water service shall be furnished at the following monthly rates to each
building, dwelling or premises connected to the municipal waterworks system:



   1.   A base fee of $11.50.



   2.   A usage rate of $2.95 per 1,000.



   3.   A Capital Equipment Reserve Charge of $3.00 per month



"Building" as used in this section shall mean only those buildings which have
water connections and shall exclude out buildings.  NOTE: Where there are
multiple meters in a building, each meter may be charged individually using
the rates above.



(Ord. 797 - May 19 Supp.)



92.03    RATES OUTSIDE THE CITY.



Water service shall be provided to any customer located outside the corporate
limits of the City which the City has agreed to serve at the same rates
provided in Section 92.02.  No such customer, however, will be served unless
the customer shall have signed a service contract agreeing to be bound by the
ordinances, rules and regulations applying to water service established by
the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 & 384.84)



92.04    BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE.



Water service shall be billed as part of a combined service account, payable
in accordance with the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



   1.   Bills Issued.  The Clerk shall prepare, date and issue bills
for combined service accounts.  Bills shall be deemed issued as of the date
indicated on the bills.



   2.   Bills Payable.  Bills for combined service accounts shall be
due and payable by the twentieth (20th) of the month.



   3.   Late Payment Penalty.  Bills not paid when due shall be
considered delinquent.  A one-time late payment penalty of one and one-half
percent (1.5%) of the amount due shall be added to each delinquent bill.



92.05    SERVICE DISCONTINUED.



Water service to delinquent customers shall be discontinued in accordance
with the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



   1.   Notice.  The Clerk shall notify each delinquent customer that
service will be discontinued if payment of the combined service account,
including late payment charges, is not received by the date specified in the
notice of delinquency.  Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the
customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred and shall inform
the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford the customer the
opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance.



(Ord. 685 – Sep. 08 Supp.)



   1.   Notice to Landlords.  If the customer is a tenant, and if the
owner or landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for
notice, the notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or
landlord.  If the customer is a tenant and requests a change of name for
service under the account, such request shall be sent to the owner or
landlord of the property if the owner or landlord has made a written request
for notice of any change of name for service under the account to the rental
property.



(Ord. 729 – Sep. 12 Supp.)



   3.   Hearing.  If a hearing is requested by noon of the day
preceding the shut off, the Clerk shall conduct an informal hearing and shall
make a determination as to whether the disconnection is justified.  If it is
found that disconnection is justified, then such disconnection shall be made,
unless payment has been received.



   4.   Fees.  Rates and charges for restoration of service shall be
set by resolution of the Council.



92.06    LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.



The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises. 
Water service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien
upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County
Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



92.07   LIEN EXEMPTION. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



   1.   Water Service Exemption.  The lien for nonpayment shall not
apply to charges for water service to a residential or commercial rental
property where water service is separately metered and the rates or charges
for the water service are paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the
landlord gives written notice to the City that the property is residential or
commercial rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or
charges.  The City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of
ninety (90) days of such services to be paid to the City.  When the tenant
moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all
service charges are paid in full.  The lien exemption does not apply to
delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.



   2.   Other Service Exemption.  The lien for nonpayment shall also
not apply to the charges for any of the services of sewer systems, storm
water drainage systems,
sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal for a
residential
rental property where the charge is paid directly to the City by the tenant,
if the
landlord gives written notice to the City that the property is residential
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges for
such service.  The City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost
of ninety (90) days of such services to be paid to the City.  When the
tenant moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if
all service charges are paid in full.  The lien exemption does not apply to
delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.



   3.   Written Notice.  The landlord’s written notice shall contain
the name of the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the
residential or commercial rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and
the date that the occupancy begins.  Upon receipt, the City shall
acknowledge the notice and deposit.  A change in tenant for a residential
rental property shall require a new written notice to be given to the City
within thirty (30) business days of the change in tenant.  A change in
tenant for a commercial rental property shall require a new written notice to
be given to the City within ten (10) business days of the change in tenant. 
A change in the ownership of the residential rental property shall require
written notice of such change to be given to the City within thirty (30)
business days of the completion of the change of ownership.  A change in the
ownership of the commercial rental property shall require written notice of
such change to be given to the City within ten (10) business days of the
completion of the change of ownership. 



(Ord. 736 – Sep. 13 Supp.)



92.08    LIEN NOTICE.



A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to the
County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is
given to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. 
If the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property has
made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given to the
owner or landlord.  The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons by
ordinary mail not less than thirty (30) days prior to certification of the
lien to the County Treasurer.



(Ord. 685 – Sep. 08 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



92.09    CUSTOMER UTILITY DEPOSITS.



There shall be required from every customer served a total deposit which
shall be equal to a one-month high bill and which is intended to guarantee
the payment of bills for water, sewer, solid waste collection and electric
utility services.  The one-month high bill will be calculated by the Clerk
based on previous utility bills charged to the property served.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



92.10    TEMPORARY VACANCY.



A property owner may request water service be temporarily discontinued and
shut off at the curb valve when the property is expected to be vacant for an
extended period of time.  There shall be no fee collected for shutting the
water off at the curb valve and a thirty dollar ($30.00) fee for restoring
service.  During a period when service is temporarily discontinued as
provided herein there shall be no minimum service charge.  The City will not
drain pipes or pull meters for temporary vacancies.



(Ord. 716 - Feb. 11 Supp.)



CHAPTER 93
WATER CONSERVATION



 

93.01  Water Shortages
 
93.05  Water Appeal Board


93.02  Conditions
 
93.06  Municipal Infraction


93.03  General Procedure
 
93.07  Reduction in Flow of Water to Any Person


93.04  Penalties
 



 



93.01    WATER SHORTAGES.



From time to time during and following drought conditions or due to equipment
failure, the City’s water supply may become significantly and seriously
depleted so that there will not then be a sufficient supply of water to meet
all customary and usual demands.  Under these conditions, the Council may
find, and declare by resolution, a public Water Watch, Water Warning or Water
Emergency, during which time the following measures and provisions shall be
in effect to produce an orderly and equitable reduction of water consumption
until, by resolution, the Council finds and declares the water shortage
condition to be ended.



93.02    CONDITIONS.



   1.   “Water Watch” – A Water Watch may be declared when a
water shortage or equipment failure poses a potential threat to the ability
of the water system to meet the needs of its customers currently or in the
foreseeable future.  Indicators of the need to impose a Water Watch include:



      A.   System operating at 75% of pumping capacity;



      B.   Moderate decrease in the pumping water level of wells; or



      C.   Moderate decrease in recovery rate of water level in
wells.



   2.   “Water Warning” – A Tier I or Tier II Water Warning may
be declared when a water shortage or equipment failure poses a serious threat
to the ability of the water system to meet the needs of its customers
currently and in the foreseeable future.  Indicators of the need to impose a
Tier I Water Warning include:



      A.   System operating at 85% of pumping capacity; or



      B.   Significant decrease in the pumping water level of wells;
or



      C.   Significant decrease in recovery rate of water level in
wells.



Indicators of the need to impose a Tier II Water Warning include severe
system emergencies such as a chemical spill or major system failure in feeder
mains or treatment plant.



   3.   “Water Emergency” – A Water Emergency may be declared
when a water shortage or equipment failure poses a severe and immediate
threat to the ability of the water system to meet the needs of its
customers.  Indicators of the need to impose a Water Emergency include: 



      A.   System operation at 95% of pumping capacity; or



      B.   Serious decrease in recovery rate of water level in wells.



93.03    GENERAL PROCEDURE.



In the time during or following drought conditions or equipment failure, the
following procedures shall be followed:



   1.   Water Watch.  Under a Water Watch, all customers of the
municipal water service are encouraged to limit or curtail all nonessential
uses of water in order to conserve precious water resources during the time
of shortage.  Customers may be encouraged to comply with the following
voluntary standards:



      A.   No watering of lawns, shrubs or gardens between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.



      B.   No water should be used to fill private swimming pools,
children’s wading pools, reflecting pools or any other outdoor pool or pond.



      C.   No water should be used to wash streets, parking lots,
driveways, sidewalks or building exteriors.



      D.   No water should be used for nonessential cleaning of
commercial and industrial equipment, machinery and interior spaces.



      E.   Water should be served at restaurants only upon the
request of the customer.



   2.   Water Warning – Tier I.



Under a Tier I Water Warning, no person shall use potable processed water of
the municipal water service in any manner contrary to the following:



      A.   Outdoor watering or irrigation of lawn is prohibited.



      B.   Outdoor watering of any kind is prohibited between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. daily.



      C.   Watering or irrigation of flower and vegetable gardens,
trees and shrubs less than four years old and new seedlings or sod is
permitted once per week with an application not to exceed one (1) inch.



      D.   Car washing is prohibited except in commercial
establishments that provide that service.



      E.   No water shall be used to fill private swimming pools,
children’s wading pools, reflecting pools or any other outdoor pool or pond.



      F.   No water shall be used to wash streets, parking lots,
driveways, sidewalks or building exteriors.



      G.   No water shall be used for nonessential cleaning of
commercial and industrial equipment, machinery and interior spaces.



      H.   Water shall be served at restaurants only upon the
request of the customer.



      I.   Use of water-consuming comfort air conditioning equipment
which consumes in excess of five percent (5%) of the water circulating in
such equipment is prohibited.



      J.   Tankload water sales may be curtailed or eliminated.



Water reclaimed or recycled after some other primary use, such as water that
has been used for washing or cooling, may be used without restriction. 
Additionally, water derived from sources other than the City water utility,
such as water condensed from the atmosphere by air conditioners or collected
from rain or snow, may be used without restriction.



   3.   Water Warning – Tier II.



Under a Tier II Water Warning, no person shall use potable processed water of
the municipal water service in any manner contrary to the following:



      A.   All outside water use, except for domestic, sanitation,
and fire is prohibited.



      B.   All commercial and industrial uses of water not essential
in providing products or services are prohibited.



      C.   Irrigation of agricultural crops is prohibited.



      D.   Recreational and leisure water use, including lawn and
golf course watering and other incidental or recreational use is prohibited.



      E.   Water use not necessary for the preservation of life or
the general welfare of the community is prohibited.



   4.   Water Emergency.  Under a Water Emergency, Tier I Water
Warning use restrictions will be in effect and, in addition, each customer
will be afforded a monthly allocation of water.



      A.   Base Allocation.  The base allocation of water for
residential use shall be 3,000 gallons per household per month.  For
commercial, industrial or institutional use, the base allocation shall be
established by resolution as a percentage of the average water used during
the previous winter (November through April).



      B.   Appeal and Adjustment of the Base Allocation.  Any
person may file an appeal with the Water Appeal Board to adjust the base
allocation amount.  The Water Appeal Board may grant an adjustment to the
appellant based on the following criteria:



         (1)   For single-family residential use, the base
allocation may be increased by 1,000 gallons per person per month for all
individuals residing at the appellant’s residence for a period of more than
thirty (30) days.



         (2)   For commercial, industrial, institutional or other
residential uses, the base allocation may be increased based upon factors
appropriate to the individual customer, such as usage, production, service
and occupancy data provided by the customer.



      C.   Premium Rate for Imprudent Consumption.  In addition to
the water rates duly enacted by the Council, all persons shall pay a premium
rate of $1.00 per 100 gallons of water consumed in excess of the base
allocation.



      D.   Adjustment of Premium Rate Charges.  Any person may file
for adjustment of the premium rate charges for imprudent water consumption
with the Water Appeal Board.  The Water Appeal Board may grant an adjustment
of the premium rate charges in accordance with the following criteria:



         (1)   Adjustments may be granted for over-consumption
due to mechanical failures such as broken or leaky pipes or fixtures but not
for over-consumption due to human carelessness.



         (2)   The applicant shall furnish proof that the
mechanical failure was repaired promptly.  This should be in the form of a
licensed plumber’s invoice or statement or a materials receipt.



         (3)   The adjustment shall be granted only for the
billing period prior to the correction of the failure.



         (4)   For those accounts granted an adjustment of the
premium rate charges, the minimum adjusted rate shall be 40% of the actual
bill, which shall include the premium rate charges and sales tax.



93.04    PENALTIES.



The following penalties shall apply for violations of water warning use
restrictions imposed under this chapter.



   1.   First Violation.  For a first violation, the utility shall
issue a written notice of violation to the water user violating the water use
restrictions imposed during a Water Warning or Water Emergency.



   2.   Second Violation.  For a second violation within a
twelve-month period, a one-month surcharge shall be imposed in an amount
equal to 50% of the previous month’s water bill.



   3.   Subsequent Violations.  For any subsequent violation within a
twelve-month period, a one-month surcharge shall be imposed in an amount
equal to 50% of the previous month’s water bill and, in addition, the
utility shall interrupt water service to that customer at the premises at
which the violation occurred.  Service shall not be restored until the
customer has paid the reconnection fee and has provided reasonable assurance
that future violations of Water Warning or Water Emergency use restrictions
will not occur.



Any customer charged with a violation of the Water Warning or Water Emergency
use restriction may request a hearing before the Water Appeal Board.  The
Water Appeal Board may conclude that a violation did not occur or that the
circumstances under which the violation occurred warrant a complete or
partial mitigation of the penalty.



93.05    WATER APPEAL BOARD.



A Water Appeal Board shall be appointed during any Water Warning or Water
Emergency.  The Water Appeal Board shall consist of the Mayor, the
Superintendent and one Council member who shall be appointed by the Mayor. 
The Water Appeal Board shall hear appeals of any action taken pursuant to a
Water Warning or Water Emergency; however, if a customer is charged with a
municipal infraction relating to this chapter, that proceeding shall be
conducted pursuant to Section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa.



93.06    MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.



A second or subsequent violation of the Water Warning or Water Emergency use
restrictions by any person within a twelve-month period constitutes a
municipal infraction.  Any person who, in making application to the Water
Appeal Board for adjustment of the base allocation or premium charges,
intentionally provides false or incorrect statements or information commits a
municipal infraction.



93.07    REDUCTION IN FLOW OF WATER TO ANY PERSON.



The Superintendent is authorized, after giving notice and opportunity for
hearing before the Water Appeal Board, to reduce the flow of water to any
person determined to be using water in any manner not in accordance with this
chapter during a Water Warning or Water Emergency.



CHAPTER 94
WELLHEAD PROTECTION REGULATIONS



 

94.01  Purpose
 
94.07  Exceptions


94.02  Definitions
 
94.08  Determination of Locations within Zones


94.03  Substances Regulated
 
94.09  Enforcement and Penalties


94.04  Maps of Zones of Influence
 
94.10  Inspections


94.05  Restrictions within the Primary Protection Zone
 
94.11  Notice of Violation and Hearing


94.06  Restrictions within the Secondary Protection Zone
 
94.12  Injunctive Relief



 



94.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to institute land use regulations and
restrictions to protect the City’s water supply and well fields, restrict
the location of potential sources of contamination in close proximity to a
public water supply, and to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the residents to the City.† 5



94.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Alluvium” means sand, clay, etc., gradually deposited by
moving water.



   2.   “Aquifer” means a rock formation, group of rock formations
or part of a rock formation that contains enough saturated permeable material
to yield significant quantities of water.



   3.   “Contamination” means the presence of any harmful or
deleterious substances in the water supply.



   4.   “Groundwater” means subsurface water in the saturated zone
from which wells, springs and groundwater runoff are supplied.



   5.   “Hazardous substances” means those materials specified in
Section 94.03 of this chapter.



   6.   “Labeled quantities” means the maximum quantity of chemical
as recommended on the label, for specific applications.



   7.   “Livestock maintenance including grazing, feedlots and
concentrated animal facilities” means activities that involve the
maintenance or production of livestock.



   8.   “Permitted pumping capacity” means the amount of water
authorized to be pumped from a well during a one-year period.



   9.   “Petroleum product” means fuels (gasoline, diesel fuel,
kerosene and mixtures of those products), lubricating oils, motor oils,
hydraulic fluids and other similar products.



   10.   “Pollution” means the presence of any substance (organic,
inorganic, radiological or biological) or condition (temperature, pH,
turbidity) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a
hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.



   11.   “Potable water” means water that is satisfactory for
drinking, culinary and domestic purposes, meeting current drinking water
standards.



   12.   “Primary containment” means the first level of
product-tight containment, i.e., the inside portion of that container which
comes into immediate contact on its inner surface with the hazardous material
being contained.



   13.   “Public utility” means any utility (gas, water, sewer,
electrical, telephone, cable television, etc.) whether publicly owned or
privately owned.



   14.   “Secondary containment” means the level of product-tight
containment external to and separate from the primary containment. 
Secondary containment shall consist of leak-proof trays under containers,
floor curbing or other containment systems and shall be of adequate size and
design to handle all spills, leaks, overflows and precipitation until
appropriate action can be taken.  The specific design and selection of
materials shall be sufficient to preclude any substance loss.  Containment
systems shall be sheltered so that the intrusion of precipitation is
effectively prevented.



   15.   “Shallow well” means a well located and constructed in
such a manner that there is not a continuous five-foot layer of low
permeability soil or rock between the aquifer from which the water supply is
drawn and a point 25 feet below the normal ground surface.



   16.   “Toxic substance” means any substance that has the
capacity to produce personal injury or illness to humans through ingestion,
inhalation or absorption into the body.



   17.   “Water pollution” means the introduction in any surface or
underground water of any organic or inorganic deleterious substance in such
quantities, proportions and accumulations that are injurious to human, plant,
animal, fish and other aquatic life or property or that unreasonably
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property or the conduct
of business.



   18.   “Well” means a pit or hole sunk into the earth to reach a
resource supply such as water.



   19.   “Well field” means a tract of land that contains a number
of wells for supplying water.



   20.   “Wellhead protection zones” means zones delineated by
fixed radii around wellheads, within which toxic substances will be regulated
to protect the quality of the underground resource.



94.03    SUBSTANCES REGULATED.



The materials regulated by this chapter are the following:



   1.   Petroleum products as defined in Section 94.02;



   2.   Substances listed in 40 CFR Part 261, subparts C and D, the
Federal Hazardous Waste List;



   3.   Substances listed by the Iowa Labor Commissioner pursuant to
Chapter 89B of the Code of Iowa (Hazardous Chemicals Risks - Right to Know).



94.04    MAPS OF ZONES OF INFLUENCE.



   1.   Maps.  Zone of Influence Maps and any amendments thereto are
incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter.  These maps are
on file in the Water Department.  The Wellhead Protection Zone Maps
indicating the location of all wells in the City supplying potable water to
the City water system and the Wellhead Protection Zones around those wells
are located in City Hall.  No land within the primary protection zone that
is currently not zoned commercial or industrial will be allowed to be rezoned
to a commercial or industrial classification.  Said maps shall be provided
to the Clerk, Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Officer, Winnebago
County Health Department, and any other agency requesting said maps.



   2.   Map Maintenance.  The Wellhead Protection Zone Maps may be
updated on an annual basis.  The basis for such an update may include, but
is not limited to, the following:



      A.   Changes in the technical knowledge concerning the aquifer;



      B.   Changes in permitted pumping capacity of City well fields;



      C.   Addition or deletion of wells to existing well fields;



      D.   Designation of new well fields.



   3.   Wellhead Protection Zones.  The zones of protection indicated
on the Zone of Influence Maps are as follows:



      A.   Primary Protection Zone – an area extending 200 feet
radially from any well supplying potable water to the City Water System.



      B.   Secondary Protection Zone – an area extending between
200 and one-half mile radially from any well supplying potable water to the
City Water System.



94.05    RESTRICTIONS WITHIN THE PRIMARY PROTECTION ZONE.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted uses within
the Primary Protection Zone.  Uses not listed are to be considered
prohibited uses.



      A.   Parks, provided there is no on-site waste disposal or
fuel storage tank facilities associated with this use, and the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources Separation Distances from Wells for sources
of contamination is complied with.



   2.   Prohibited Uses.  All other uses are prohibited within the
Primary Protection Zone.  Additional restrictions are as follows:



      A.   No person shall discharge or cause or permit the
discharge of a hazardous substance to the soils, groundwater or surface water
within the Primary Protection Zone.  Any person knowing or having evidence
of a discharge shall report such information to the City’s Water
Superintendent.



      B.   New sanitary landfills are prohibited within the Primary
Protection Zone.



      C.   The use, handling, production, and storage of hazardous
substances are prohibited in the Primary Protection Zone except as provided
under Section 94.07.  All persons who presently engage in nonexempt activity
within the protection zone who store, handle, use, or produce any hazardous
substances shall cease to do so within two (2) years from the effective date
of the ordinance codified in this chapter except as provided herein.



      D.   Livestock maintenance or production activities that
involve grazing, feedlots or other livestock facilities are prohibited within
the Primary Protection Zone.



      E.   Wastewater treatment plants, percolation ponds, dredge
spoil deposits and similar facilities are prohibited within the Primary
Protection Zone.



      F.   Septic tanks are prohibited within the Primary Protection
Zone unless a variance is granted as under Section 94.07(4).



      G.   Other prohibited uses are:  septage and/or sludge and/or
animal waste land spreading, salt storage, and radioactive waste facilities.



94.06    RESTRICTIONS WITHIN THE SECONDARY PROTECTION ZONE.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the
Secondary Protection Zone.



      A.   All uses listed as permitted in the Primary Protection
Zone.



      B.   Sewered residential, commercial and/or industrial uses
except those listed as prohibited uses in subsection 2 of this section.



      C.   Above-ground storage tanks of 550 gallons or less.



      D.   Basement storage tanks.



      E.   Liquid Propane (LP) storage tanks.



   2.   Prohibited Uses.  All other uses are prohibited within the
Secondary Protection Zone.  Additional restrictions are as follows:



      A.   No person shall discharge or cause or permit the
discharge of a hazardous substance in excess of labeled quantities to the
soils, ground water, or surface water within the Secondary Protection Zone. 
Any person knowing or having evidence of a discharge shall report such
information to the City.



      B.   New sanitary landfills are prohibited within the
Secondary Protection Zone.



      C.   The use, handling, production, and storage of hazardous
substances are prohibited in the Secondary Protection Zone, except where
secondary containment is provided, or underground storage tanks in compliance
with Chapter 135 of the Iowa Administrative Code, above ground storage tanks
in compliance with requirements of the State Fire Marshal, or as provided
under Section 94.07.



      D.   Livestock maintenance or production activities that
involve grazing, feedlots or other livestock facilities are prohibited within
the Secondary Protection Zone except as exempted under Section 94.07(2).



      E.   Wastewater treatment plants, percolation ponds, dredge
spoil deposits and similar facilities are prohibited within the Secondary
Protection Zone.



94.07    EXCEPTIONS.



   1.   The following activities or uses are exempt from the provisions
of this chapter:



      A.   The transportation of any hazardous substance through the
well field protection zones, provided the transporting vehicle is in transit.



      B.   Silvaculture uses and mosquito control spraying providing
that said uses comply with the Iowa Commercial and Public Pesticide
Applicators and Dealers Licensing through the Iowa Department of
Agriculture.  The use and storage of herbicides and pesticides for
silvaculture uses are prohibited within the Primary Protection Zone but are
allowed within the Secondary Protection Zone.



      C.   The use of any hazardous substance solely as fuel in a
vehicle fuel tank or as lubricant in a vehicle.



      D.   Fire, police, emergency medical services, emergency
management center facilities or public utility transmission facilities.



      E.   Retail sales establishments that store and handle
hazardous substances for resale in their original unopened containers.



      F.   Consumer products limited to use at a facility solely for
janitorial or minor maintenance purposes.



      G.   Consumer products located in the home which are used for
personal, family or household purposes.



      H.   The storage and use of hazardous substances as a fuel or
lubricant to provide auxiliary power for emergency use to the well field,
provided an enclosed secondary containment system is provided for the
hazardous substance.



      I.   The use of water treatment chemicals connected with the
operation of the well.



   2.   The use of structures or facilities in existence on the
effective date of this Code of Ordinances may be continued even though such
use may not conform with the regulations of this chapter.  However, such
structures or facilities may not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or
substituted subsequent to said effective date, unless a variance is granted
as under subsection 4 of this section.



   3.   Any person who engages in nonresidential activities relating to
the storage, handling, use and/or production of any toxic or hazardous
substances who is exempt from this chapter by law shall not be subject to the
restrictions contained herein.



   4.   All written requests to permit variances for specific uses,
structures or activities within the City’s Wellhead Protection Zones will
be to the Water Superintendent and must include an environmental assessment
report.  Any variance granted will be made conditional and may include
environmental and safety monitoring and/or a bond posted for future
monitoring and cleanup costs.  The variance will be made void if
environmental and/or safety monitoring indicates the facility is emitting any
releases of harmful contaminates to the surrounding environment.  The
facility will be held financially responsible for all environmental cleanup
costs.  All denials of variances made by the Superintendent may be appealed
in writing to the Council.  A public hearing will be scheduled for the
purpose of reviewing the decision made by the Superintendent.



94.08    DETERMINATION OF LOCATIONS WITHIN ZONES.



In determining the location of properties within the zones depicted on the
Zones of Influence Maps, the following rules shall apply:



   1.   Properties located wholly within one zone reflected on the
applicable Zone of Influence Map shall be governed by the restrictions
applicable to that zone.



   2.   For properties having parts lying within more than one zone as
reflected on the applicable Zones of Influence Map, each part shall be
governed by the restrictions applicable to the zone in which it is located.



94.09    ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.



   1.   The Water Superintendent is designated as the Well Field
Protection Officer unless another person is specifically designated by the
Council to supervise the implementation and enforcement of this chapter.



   2.   No building permit shall be issued which is a violation of the
Iowa Department of Natural Resources Separation Distance from Wells, a
violation of this chapter or a source of contamination for a City well.



   3.   No new underground tanks will be allowed for auxiliary fuel
storage in the Primary or Secondary Zones unless a variance is granted as
under Section 94.07(4).



   4.   Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to provisions and penalties provided for a violation
of this Code of Ordinances.



94.10    INSPECTIONS.



   1.   The Well Field Protection Officer or inspector shall have the
power and authority to enter and inspect all buildings, structures and land
within well field zones of influence for the purpose of making an
inspection.  Failure of a person having common authority over a property to
permit an inspection shall be sufficient grounds and probable cause for a
court of competent jurisdiction to issue a search warrant to the Wellhead
Protection Officer to inspect such premises pursuant to Section 1.15 of this
Code of Ordinances.



   2.   In the event a building or structure appears to be vacant or
abandoned, and the owner cannot be readily contacted in order to obtain
consent for an inspection, the officer or inspector may enter into or upon
any open unsecured portion of the premises in order to conduct an inspection
thereof.



   3.   The Well Field Protection Officer or inspector shall inspect
each well field annually and shall maintain an inventory, if applicable, of
all hazardous substances which exist within each wellhead protection zone. 
An emergency plan shall be prepared and filed with the Local Emergency
Planning Committee Chairperson (LEPC) indicating the procedures which will be
followed in the event of spillage of a regulated substance so as to control
and collect all such spilled materials.



   4.   It is the duty of all law enforcement officers to assist in
making inspections when such assistance is requested by the officer or
inspector.



94.11    NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND HEARING.



Whenever an officer or an inspector determines that there is a violation of
this chapter, said officer shall give notice thereof, and such notice of
violation shall:



   1.   Be in writing;



   2.   Be dated and signed by the officer or inspector;



   3.   Specify the violation or violations;



   4.   State that said violations shall be corrected within a
specified period of time as issued in writing by the inspector.



94.12    INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



If any person who engages in nonresidential activities stores, handles, uses
and/or produces toxic substances within the well field zones of influence, as
indicated on the Zones of Influence Maps, continues to operate in violation
of the provisions of this chapter, then the City may file an action for
injunctive relief in the court of jurisdiction.



 


Notes

5 
† Permitted uses, prohibited uses and excepted activities provided for in
this chapter’s wellhead protection zones are not exempt from compliance
with the City’s zoning regulations.  See Chapter 165 for further
restrictions.



CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM



 

95.01  Purpose
 
95.06  Service Outside the City


95.02  Definitions
 
95.07  Right of Entry


95.03  Superintendent
 
95.08  Use of Easements


95.04  Prohibited Acts
 
95.09  Special Penalties


95.05  Sewer Connection Required
 



 



95.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Sanitary
Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and
disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.



95.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20º)
C, expressed in milligrams per liter or parts per million.



   2.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil,
waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys
it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.



   3.   “Building sewer” means the extension from the building
drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal including the
Wye/“T” or any other device required to connect to the public sewer.



   4.    “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface
run-off and sewage.



   5.   “Customer” means any person responsible for the production
of domestic, commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly
discharged into the public sewer system.



   6.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and
commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the
handling, storage and sale of produce.



   7.   “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary
sewage. 



   8.   “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council
to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and their
connections to the public sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be
discharged therefrom. 



   9.   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 



   10.   “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means
all equipment and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection,
storage, treatment, and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling
units or other facilities serving the equivalent of fifteen persons (1500
gpd) or less.



   11.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight
of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 



   12.   “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of
abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.



   13.   “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the
sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels),
office buildings, factories or institutions, and free from storm, surface
water, and industrial waste.



   14.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries sewage and to
which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 



   15.   “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes
from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial
establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may
be present. 



   16.   “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices
and structures used for treating sewage. 



   17.   “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities
for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 



   18.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 



   19.   “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates
or fees levied against and payable by customers, as consideration for the
servicing of said customers by said sewer system.



   20.   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial
waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow
exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than
five (5) times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal
operation. 



   21.   “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer which
carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.



   22.   “Superintendent” means the Superintendent of sewage works
and/or of water pollution control of the City or any authorized deputy,
agent, or representative. 



   23.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the
surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and
which are removable by laboratory filtering. 



   24.   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water
occurs, either continuously or intermittently.



95.03    SUPERINTENDENT.



The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and duties:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   Operation and Maintenance.  Operate and maintain the City
sewage system.



   2.   Inspection and Tests.  Conduct necessary inspections and tests
to assure compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters. 



   3.   Records.  Maintain a complete and accurate record of all
sewers, sewage connections and manholes constructed showing the location and
grades thereof.



95.04    PROHIBITED ACTS.



No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:



   1.   Damage Sewer System.  Maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewer system.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



   2.   Surface Run-off or Groundwater.  Connect a roof downspout,
sump pump, exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of
surface run-off or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in
turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 



   3.   Manholes.  Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system,
except by authority of the Superintendent. 



   4.   Objectionable Wastes.  Place or deposit in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the City, or in any area under
the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or
other objectionable waste.



   5.   Septic Tanks.  Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage except as provided in these chapters. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])



   6.   Untreated Discharge.  Discharge to any natural outlet within
the City, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of these
chapters. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])



95.05    SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.



The owners of houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located,
or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer, are hereby required
to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and
a building sewer, including the Wye/“T”, or any other device necessary to
connect to the public sewer connecting such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the
provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to be completed
within ninety (90) days after date of official notice from the City to do so
provided that said public sewer is located within one hundred (100) feet
(30.5 meters) of the property line of such owner and is of such design as to
receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to it.  Billing
for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of official notice to connect
to the public sewer.



However, compliance with this section may be postponed until the current
system fails or the property upon which the houses, buildings, or properties
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes is sold.
The sale of the property will be subject to the exceptions contained in Iowa
Code section 455B.172(11)(a).



(Ord. 773 – Nov. 17 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])



(IAC, 567-69.1[3])



95.06    SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.



The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so situated
that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for
permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions
stipulated by resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])



95.07    RIGHT OF ENTRY.



The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary
Sewer chapters.  The Superintendent or representatives shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical,
oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways
or facilities for waste treatment.



95.08    USE OF EASEMENTS.



The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement.  All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



95.09    SPECIAL PENALTIES.



The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters: 



   1.   Notice of Violation.  Any person found to be violating any
provision of these chapters except subsections 1, 3 and 4 of Section 95.04,
shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof.  The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations. 



   2.   Continuing Violations.  Any person who shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall be
in violation of this Code of Ordinances.  Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



   3.   Liability Imposed.  Any person violating any of the provisions
of these chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or
damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation. 



CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



 

96.01  Permit
 
96.08  Interceptors Required


96.02  Permit Fee
 
96.09  Sewer Tap


96.03  Limited Responsibility for Permit Revocation
 
96.10  Inspection Required


96.04  Connection Charge
 
96.11  Property Owner’s Responsibility


96.05  Plumber Required
 
96.12  Abatement of Violations


96.06  Excavations
 
96.13  Abandoned Building Sewer


96.07  Connection Requirements
 



 



96.01    PERMIT.



No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the City.  The application for the
permit shall set forth the location and description of the property to be
connected with the sewer system and the purpose for which the sewer is to be
used, and shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent.  The permit shall require the owner to
complete construction and connection of the building sewer to the public
sewer within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit, except that
when a property owner makes sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond
the owner’s control or peculiar hardship, such time period is inequitable
or unfair, an extension of time within which to comply with the provisions
herein may be granted.  Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at any
time for a violation of these chapters.



96.02    PERMIT FEE.



The person who makes the application shall pay a fee in the amount shown
below to the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the permit and supervising,
regulating, and inspecting the work.



   1.   Residential Customers   $   50.00



   2.   Commercial and Industrial Customers   $   100.00



This inspection is only for the purpose of infiltration and inflow, and does
not warranty or guarantee in any way the quality of the work.



96.03    LIMITED RESPONSIBILITY FOR PERMIT REVOCATION.



All permits to connect with sewer shall be given upon the express condition
that the Council may at any time before the work is completed revoke and
annul the same and no party interested shall have a right to claim damages in
consequence of any such permits being revoked or annulled.



96.04    CONNECTION CHARGE.



There shall be a connection charge paid to reimburse the City for costs borne
by the City in making sewer service available to the property served.  Such
charge shall be calculated by the City based on the location of the property
being connected, the size of the lot and the intended use of the property.



96.05    PLUMBER REQUIRED.



All installations of building sewers and connections to the public sewer
shall be made by a plumber approved by the City.  The Superintendent shall
have the power to suspend the approval of any plumber for violation of any of
the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters; a suspension, unless
revoked, shall continue until the next regular meeting of the Council.  The
Superintendent shall notify the plumber immediately by personal written
notice of the suspension, the reasons for the suspension, and the time and
place of the Council meeting at which the plumber will be granted a
hearing.  At this Council meeting the Superintendent shall make a written
report to the Council stating the reasons for the suspension, and the
Council, after fair hearing, shall affirm or revoke the suspension or take
any further action that is necessary and proper. 



96.06    EXCAVATIONS.



All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be
open trench work unless otherwise approved by the City.  Pipe laying and
backfill shall be performed in accordance with A.S.T.M. Specification C-12,
except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
The plumber must maintain the affected area in good repair to the
satisfaction of the City for three months after refilling.  The excavations
shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 135 where
applicable.



96.07    CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.



Any connection with a public sanitary sewer must be made under the direct
supervision of the Superintendent and in accordance with the following:



   1.   Old Building Sewers.  Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and
test conducted by the owner and observed by the Superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.



   2.   Separate Building Sewers.  A separate and independent building
sewer shall be provided for every occupied building; except where one
building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private
sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway.  In such cases the building sewer
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer.



   3.   Installation.  The connection of the building sewer into the
public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code,
applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in
A.S.T.M. Specification C-12.  All such connections shall be made gastight
and watertight.  Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.  The
Wye/“T”, saddle or any other apparatus or appliance used to connect to
the building sewer to the public sewer shall be installed, both as to
material and labor, at the expense of the property owner and any future
maintenance shall be at the expense of the property owner.



   4.   Water Lines.  When possible, building sewers should be laid at
least ten (10) feet horizontally from a water service.  The horizontal
separation may be less, provided the water service line is located at one
side and at least twelve (12) inches above the top of the building sewer. 



   5.   Size.  Building sewers shall be sized for the peak expected
sewage flow from the building with a minimum building sewer size of four (4)
inches.



   6.   Alignment and Grade.  All building sewers shall be laid to a
straight line to meet the following: 



      A.   Recommended grade at one-fourth (¼) inch per foot. 



      B.   Minimum grade of one-eighth (1/8) inch per foot. 



      C.   Minimum velocity of 2.00 feet per second with the sewer
half full.



Any deviation in alignment or grade shall be made only with the written
approval of the Superintendent and shall be made only with approved
fittings. 



   7.   Depth.  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought
to the building at an elevation below the basement floor.  The depth of
cover above the sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.



   8.   Sewage Lifts.  In all buildings in which any building drain is
too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried
by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to
the building sewer.



   9.   Pipe Specifications.  Building sewer pipe shall be free from
flaws, splits, or breaks.  Materials shall be as specified in the State
Plumbing Code except that the building sewer pipe, from the property line to
the public sewer, shall comply with the current edition of one of the
following:



      A.   Clay sewer pipe – A.S.T.M. C-700 (extra strength).



      B.   Extra heavy cast iron soil pipe – A.S.T.M. A-74. 



      C.   Ductile iron water pipe – A.W.W.A. C-151.



      D.   P.V.C. – SDR26 – A.S.T.M. D-3034.



   10.   Bearing Walls.  No building sewer shall be laid parallel to,
or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be
weakened. 



   11.   Jointing.  Fittings, type of joint, and jointing material
shall be compatible with the type of pipe used, subject to the approval of
the Superintendent.  Solvent-welded joints are not permitted.



   12.   Unstable Soil.  No sewer connection shall be laid so that it
is exposed when crossing any watercourse.  Where an old watercourse must of
necessity be crossed or where there is any danger of undermining or
settlement, cast iron soil pipe or vitrified clay sewer pipe thoroughly
encased in concrete shall be required for such crossings.  Such encasement
shall extend at least six (6) inches on all sides of the pipe.  The cast
iron pipe or encased clay pipe shall rest on firm, solid material at either
end. 



   13.   Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space.  No connection for
any residence, business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be
made unless the basement floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a
slab or crawl space, unless the ground floor is installed with the area
adjacent to the foundation of such building cleared of debris and
backfilled.  The backfill shall be well compacted and graded so that the
drainage is away from the foundation.  Prior to the time the basement floor
is poured, or the first floor is installed in buildings without basements,
the sewer shall be plugged and the plug shall be sealed by the
Superintendent.  Any accumulation of water in any excavation or basement
during construction and prior to connection to the sanitary sewer shall be
removed by means other than draining into the sanitary sewer. 



96.08    INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.



Grease, oil, sludge and sand interceptors shall be provided by gas and
service stations, convenience stores, car washes, garages, and other
facilities when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for
the proper handling of such wastes that contain grease in excessive amounts
or any flammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredients.  Such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units.  When required, such interceptors shall be installed in accordance
with the following:



   1.   Design and Location.  All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity as specified in the State Plumbing Code, to be approved by the
Superintendent, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.



   2.   Construction Standards.  The interceptors shall be constructed
of impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature.  They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and
equipped with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight. 



   3.   Maintenance.  All such interceptors shall be maintained by the
owner at the owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient
operations at all times.



96.09    SEWER TAP.



Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the
Wye/“T” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location.  If
no properly located Wye/“T” branch is available, a Wye/“T” or any
other device shall be installed at the location specified by the
Superintendent.  The type of device installed will be solely at the
discretion of the Superintendent.  The Wye/“T” saddle will comply with
City standards and the cost of said Wye/“T” saddle will be the
responsibility of the property owner.  The public sewer shall be tapped with
a tapping machine and a saddle appropriate to the type of public sewer shall
be glued or attached with stainless steel clamps to the sewer.  At no time
shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless special
written permission is received from the Superintendent and in accordance with
the Superintendent’s direction if such connection is approved.



96.10    INSPECTION REQUIRED.



All connections with the sanitary sewer system before being covered shall be
inspected and approved, in writing, by the Superintendent.  As soon as all
pipe work from the public sewer to inside the building has been completed,
and before any backfilling is done, the Superintendent shall be notified and
the Superintendent shall inspect and test the work as to workmanship and
material; no sewer pipe laid under ground shall be covered or trenches filled
until after the sewer has been so inspected and approved.  If the
Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed
immediately to correct the work.



96.11    PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.



All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the building sewer, including the Wye/“T”, saddle, or any
other device necessary to connect to the public sewer, shall be borne by the
owner.  The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.



96.12    ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.



Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines whether located upon the
private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which
construction or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of
this chapter, shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within thirty
(30) days after date of official notice from the Council of such violation. 
If not made within such time the Council shall, in addition to the other
penalties herein provided, have the right to finish and correct the work and
assess the cost thereof to the property owner.  Such assessment shall be
collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])



96.13    ABANDONED BUILDING SEWER.



Every abandoned building sewer, or part thereof, shall be plugged or capped
in a manner approved by the City.  Such plugging or capping shall be
completed at the expense of the property owner.



CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS



 

97.01  Discharging into the Sanitary Sewer System
 
97.06  Special Facilities


97.02  Surface Waters Exception
 
97.07  Control Manholes


97.03  Prohibited Discharges
 
97.08  Testing of Wastes


97.04  Restricted Discharges
 
97.09  Infiltration and Inflow Policy


97.05  Restricted Discharges – Powers
 



 



97.01    DISCHARGING INTO THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.



   1.   Definition and Method.  No water from any roof, surface,
ground, sump pump, footing tile, swimming pool or other natural precipitation
shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer collection system.  Dwellings,
including new housing construction or houses under construction, and other
buildings and structures which require, because of the infiltration of water
into basements, crawl spaces and the like, a sump pump system to discharge
water shall have a permanently installed discharge line which shall not at
any time discharge water into the sanitary sewer collection system.  A
permanent installation shall be one which provides for a year-round discharge
connection to the City subdrain/storm sewer system.  If there is no subdrain
available, the surface discharge point shall be located no closer than eight
(8) feet from the curb and three (3) feet from any impervious service or as
approved by the City Administrator via a sump pump discharge permit.  It
shall consist of a rigid discharge line, without valving or quick connections
for altering the path of discharge and, if connected to the City
subdrain/storm sewer line, include a check valve.  Industrial cooling water
or unpolluted processed waters may be discharged on approval of the
Superintendent to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.



(Ord. 787 - Dec. 18 Supp.)



   2.   Inspection.  Every person owning improved real estate or
contractors/builders who are building a house within Forest City that
discharges into the City’s sanitary sewer system or on the ground shall
allow an employee of the City or their designated representative to inspect
the buildings to confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited
discharge into the sanitary sewer system.  Any person refusing to allow
their property to be inspected within 14 days of the date City employees or
their designated representatives are denied admittance to the property shall
immediately become subject to the surcharge provided for in Section 99.02. 
Any owner of property or contractor/house builder found to violate this
subchapter shall make the necessary changes to comply with the subchapter and
furnish proof of the changes to the City within 60 days from the date of the
violation was identified.



   3.   Future Inspection.  At any future time, if the City has reason
to suspect that an illegal connection may exist in a premises, the owner, by
written notice, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.



97.02    SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION.



Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer may
be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the Superintendent where such
discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but any
permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to
the best interests of the sewer system.



97.03    PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



   1.   Flammable or Explosive Material.  Any gasoline, benzene,
naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 



   2.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials.  Any waters or wastes containing
toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a
public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2)
milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 



   3.   Corrosive Wastes.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than
5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 



   4.   Solid or Viscous Substances.  Solid or viscous substances in
quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works
such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 



   5.   Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow.  Any waters or wastes having
(a) a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million
by weight, or (b) containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids, or (c) having an average daily flow greater than two
percent of the average sewage flow of the City, shall be subject to the
review of the Superintendent.  Where necessary in the opinion of the
Superintendent, the owner shall provide, at the owner’s expense, such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (a) reduce the biochemical
oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by weight, or (b) reduce the suspended
solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or (c) control the quantities and
rates of discharge of such waters or wastes.  Plans, specifications, and any
other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment
facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Superintendent and no
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are
obtained in writing. 



97.04    RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.



No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion
of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance.  In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes,
the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities
of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.  The
substances restricted are:



   1.   High Temperature.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature
higher than one hundred fifty degrees (150º) F (65º C).



   2.   Fat, Oil, Grease.  Any water or waste containing fats, wax,
grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per
liter or 600 milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble matter. 



   3.   Viscous Substances.  Water or wastes containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32º F and 150º
F (0º to 65º C).



   4.   Garbage.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded,
that is, to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the
flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle
greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimension.



   5.   Acids.  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron
pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or
not. 



   6.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes.  Any waters or wastes
containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic
substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such
degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such
materials. 



   7.   Odor or Taste.  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or
other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding
limits which may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state,
federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.



   8.   Radioactive Wastes.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
Superintendent in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations. 



   9.   Excess Alkalinity.  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess
of 9.5. 



   10.   Unusual Wastes.  Materials which exert or cause: 



      A.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such
as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or
of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).



      B.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).



      C.   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works.



      D.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting “slugs” as defined herein. 



   11.   Noxious or Malodorous Gases.  Any noxious or malodorous gas
or other substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is
capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing
entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair. 



   12.   Damaging Substances.  Any waters, wastes, materials or
substances which react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release
noxious gases, develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids
in objectionable concentration or create any other condition deleterious to
structures and treatment processes. 



   13.   Untreatable Wastes.  Waters or wastes containing substances
which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment
processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



97.05    RESTRICTED DISCHARGES – POWERS.



If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to
the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section 97.04 and which in the judgment of the
Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard
to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:



   1.   Rejection.  Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from
the public sewage system;



   2.   Pretreatment.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition
for discharge to the public sewers; 



   3.   Controls Imposed.  Require control over the quantities and
rates of discharge; and/or 



   4.   Special Charges.  Require payment to cover the added cost of
handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges under the provisions of Chapter 99.



97.06    SPECIAL FACILITIES.



If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.  Where
preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.



97.07    CONTROL MANHOLES.



When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes.  Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent.  The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the
owner’s expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.



97.08    TESTING OF WASTES.



All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association,
and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable
samples taken at said control manhole.  In the event that no special manhole
has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected.  Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.  (The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of
all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken.  Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s
are determined from periodic grab samples).



97.09    INFILTRATION AND INFLOW POLICY.



The City shall perform a study to locate infiltration and inflow using sewer
department staff and an engineer firm.  Notification to property owners of
improper connections shall be made after July 1, 1999.  Efforts should be
made to study one area and do as much repair and disconnection as possible
before moving to another area.  Illegal connections to sanitary sewers which
were made after February 18, 1979 (adoption date of Ordinance No. 332), are
the responsibility of the property owner and shall not be eligible for the
finance options, contained herein.



   1.   Connection to Sewer.  Upon written certification by First
Class Mail of the infiltration and inflow flowing into the sanitary sewer
from an illegal connection other than leaking services and connections of
sump pumps and roof drains, the property owner shall have a period of three
years to abate the problem.  Those owners that perform the proper repairs in
one year or less shall be eligible for one of the following finance options:



      A.   20% reimbursement not to exceed $400.00 for the
disconnection costs, or



      B.   5% interest seven-year loan not to exceed $2,000.00 to be
repaid through the City utility billing system.  If financial hardship can
be demonstrated with regard to cost in excess of $2,000.00, the Council, at
its sole discretion, may approve a higher loan amount.



For those property owners who opt not to disconnect a footing tile from the
sanitary sewer after the three-year period, a $25.00 monthly fee shall be
applied to the utility bill until the disconnection has been performed, but
not to exceed five (5) years.  Every six months after the initial six-month
period in which the $25.00 per month charge has been assessed, the
non-disconnect fee will be increased by $25.00 per month.  By the end of the
five-year period, the owner shall have completed the disconnection.  For
those property owners who can show undue hardship resulting from the
disconnection, the fee may be approved by the Council, at its sole
discretion, for an additional five-year period.  Property owners that have
sump pumps illegally hooked into a sanitary sewer shall have sixty (60) days
to remove the connection.  For those property owners who opt not to
disconnect a sump pump from the sanitary sewer after the 60-day period, the
surcharge pursuant to Section 99.02 shall be imposed.  Inspection by City
staff both prior to and after repairs shall be necessary for a reimbursement
or loan.  In addition, a billing statement for services performed shall
accompany the request for reimbursement.  For those owners opting to do the
work without the assistance of a commercial contractor, the City shall
reimburse 50% of the material costs only.  The reimbursement shall not
exceed $200.00.



   2.   Leaking Service.  Upon written notification of infiltration
and inflow flowing into the sanitary sewer from a leaking service, the
property owner shall have a period of six (6) months to repair the problem. 
Those owners that perform the proper repairs in three (3) months or less
shall be eligible for one of the following finance options:



      A.   20% reimbursement not to exceed $400.00 for the
disconnection costs, or



      B.   5% interest seven-year loan not to exceed $2,000.00 to be
repaid through the City utility billing system.  If financial hardship can
be demonstrated with regard to cost in excess of $2,000.00, the Council, at
its sole discretion, may approve a higher loan amount.



Inspection by City staff both prior to and after repairs shall be necessary
for a reimbursement or loan.  In addition, a billing statement for services
performed shall accompany the request for reimbursement.  For those owners
opting to do the work without the assistance of a commercial contractor, the
City shall reimburse 50% of the material costs only.  The reimbursement
shall not exceed $200.00.  Property owners that have leaking services into a
sanitary sewer shall have six (6) months to repair the service.  For those
property owners who opt not to repair the leaking service to the sanitary
sewer after the six-month period, a $25.00 per month fee shall be applied to
the utility bill until the repair has been performed but not to exceed five
(5) years.  Every six months after the initial six-month period in which the
$25.00 per month charge has been assessed, the non-disconnect fee will be
increased by $25.00 per month.  By the end of the five-year period, the
owner shall have abated the leaking service.  For those property owners who
can show undue hardship resulting from the repairs process, the fee may be
approved by the Council, at its sole discretion, for an additional five-year
period.



   3.   Sump Pump/Roof Drains.  Upon written certification of
infiltration and inflow flowing into the sanitary sewer from a sump pump or
roof drain, the property owner shall have a period of 30 days to repair the
problem.  Those owners that perform the proper repairs within the 30 days or
less (or within the 6 months if the Council determines hardship pursuant to
this section) shall be eligible for one of the following finance options:



      A.   20% reimbursement not to exceed $400.00 for the
disconnection costs, or



      B.   A 5% interest seven-year loan not to exceed $2,000.00 to
be repaid through the City utility billing system.  If financial hardship
can be demonstrated with regard to cost in excess of $2,000.00, the Council,
at its sole discretion, may approve a higher loan amount.



Inspection by City staff both prior to and after repairs shall be necessary
for a reimbursement or loan.  In addition, a billing statement for services
performed shall accompany the request for reimbursement.  For those owners
opting to do the work without the assistance of a commercial contractor, the
City shall reimburse 50% of material costs only.  The reimbursement shall
not exceed $200.00.  Property owners that have sump pumps or roof drains
discharging into a sanitary sewer shall have 30 days to repair the service. 
For those property owners who do not abate the discharge from the sump pump
or roof drains within the 30 days (or within the 6 months if the Council
determines hardship pursuant to this section) shall be assessed a surcharge
pursuant to Section 99.02 of this Code of Ordinances.  For those property
owners who can show undue hardship resulting from the repair process, within
30 days the City Council, at its sole discretion, may grant an extension for
an additional six-month period.



   4.   Inspection.  Every person owning improved real estate or
contractors/builders who are building a house within Forest City that
discharges into the City’s sanitary sewer system or on the ground shall
allow an employee of the City or other designated representative to inspect
the buildings to confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited
discharge into the sanitary sewer system.  Any person refusing to allow his
or her property to be inspected within 14 days of the date City employees or
their designated representatives are denied admittance to the property shall
immediately become subject to the surcharge provided for in Section 99.02. 
Any owner of property or contractor/house builder found to violate this
section shall make the necessary changes to comply with the section and
furnish proof of the changes to the City within 60 days from the date of the
violation was identified.



   5.   Future Inspection.  At any future time, if the City has reason
to suspect that an illegal connection may exist in a premises, the owner, by
written notice, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.



CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS



 

98.01  When Prohibited
 
98.05  Discharge Restrictions


98.02  When Required
 
98.06  Maintenance of System


98.03  Compliance with Regulations
 
98.07  Systems Abandoned


98.04  Permit Required
 
98.08  Disposal of Septage



 



98.01    WHEN PROHIBITED.



Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])



98.02    WHEN REQUIRED.



When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section
95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are employed
shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system complying with the provisions of this chapter.



(IAC, 567-69.1[3])



98.03    COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.



The type, capacity, location and layout of a private on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and
requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and
with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the
County Board of Health.



(IAC, 567-69.1[3 & 4])



98.04    PERMIT REQUIRED.



No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of Health.



98.05    DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.



It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch,
stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the
surface of the ground.



(IAC, 567-69.1[3]) 



98.06    MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.



The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall
operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no
expense to the City.



98.07    SYSTEMS ABANDONED.



At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an
on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section
95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with these Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])



98.08    DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.



No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at any
location except an approved disposal site.



CHAPTER 99
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES



 

99.01  Sewer Service Charges Required
 
99.05  Payment of Bills


99.02  Rental Rates
 
99.06  Lien for Nonpayment


99.03  Special Rates
 
99.07  Deposit


99.04  Private Water Systems
 
99.08  Special Agreements Permitted



 



99.01    SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED.



Every customer shall pay to the City sewer service fees as hereinafter
provided.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



99.02    RENTAL RATES. 



Each customer shall pay sewer service charges for the use of and for the
service supplied by the municipal sanitary sewer system based upon the amount
of water consumed as follows:



   1.   Base fee .................. $ 3.84



   2.   Plus......................... $ 7.03 per 1,000 gallons of water
used.



   3.   A Capital Equipment Reserve Charge of $6.72 per month



"Building," as used in this section, means only those buildings which have
water connections and excludes outbuildings.  Where there are multiple
meters in a building, each meter may be charged individually using the above
rates.  In buildings where there is one meter serving several separate
individual residential units, each unit comprising a separate and distinct
apartment or dwelling unit the above mention base fee will be assessed
against each separate and distinct apartment or dwelling unit

(Ord. 798 - May 19 Supp.)



In buildings where there is one meter serving several separate individual
residential units, each unit comprising a separate and distinct apartment or
dwelling unit the above mention base fee will be assessed against each
separate and distinct apartment or dwelling unit.



A surcharge of $25.00 per day is imposed by invoice and/or added to every
sewer billing mailed on and after July 5, 2005, to property owners or to the
contractor/builder of a new house, which are not in compliance with Section
97.09(3) of this Code of Ordinances. The surcharge will be levied daily
against those properties found not to be in compliance with section 97.09(3)
until the property has been certified by the Superintendent that the property
is in compliance. The surcharge will be levied against the property owner,
whether existing property or new construction, and/or contractor/builder of a
new house on the thirty-first day after notice of the violation has been
provided to the owner/contractor/builder. In the event that a person who has
been notified for noncompliance with Section 97.09(3) corrects that
noncompliance, but it is found that such person’s sump pump system is out
of compliance with Section 97.09(3) a second time, such person will be fined
$100.00 a day commencing upon the day such person is found to be in
noncompliance. There shall be no grace period for bringing the system into
compliance.



(Ord. 766 – Jun. 17 Supp.)



99.03    SPECIAL RATES.



Where, in the judgment of the Superintendent and the Council, special
conditions exist to the extent that the application of the sewer charges
provided in Section 99.02 would be inequitable or unfair to either the City
or the customer, a special rate shall be proposed by the Superintendent and
submitted to the Council for approval by resolution.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



99.04    PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS.



Customers whose premises are served by a private water system shall pay sewer
charges based upon the water used as determined by the City either by an
estimate agreed to by the customer or by metering the water system at the
customer’s expense.  Any negotiated, or agreed upon sales or charges shall
be subject to approval of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



99.05    PAYMENT OF BILLS.



All sewer service charges are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section 92.04 of this Code of Ordinances.  Sewer service may be discontinued
in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 92.05 if the combined
service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section
92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.



99.06    LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.



Except as provided for in Section 92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner
of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and
severally liable for sewer service charges to the premises.  Sewer service
charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the
premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer
for collection in the same manner as property taxes.



(Ord. 729 – Sep. 12 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



99.07    DEPOSIT.



There is required from every customer a total deposit which shall be equal to
a one-month high bill and which is intended to guarantee the payment of bills
for water, sewer, solid waste collection and electric utility services.  The
one-month high bill will be calculated by the Clerk based on previous utility
bills charged to the property be served.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



99.08    SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED.



No statement in these chapters shall be construed as preventing a special
agreement, arrangement or contract between the Council, and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted subject to special conditions, rate and cost as established by the
Council.



CHAPTER 100
NORTHWEST FOREST CITY MUNICIPAL SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT



 

100.01  Establishment of the Sanitary Sewer District
 
100.05  Sewer Connection Fee


100.02  Cost of the Project
 
100.06  Payment Schedule


100.03  Connection of Existing Structures
 
100.07  Certification of Ordinance


100.04  Connection of Future Structures
 
100.08  Collection of Fees



 



100.01    ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT.



It is hereby established within the City of Forest City the Northwest Forest
City Municipal Sanitary Sewer District, said district to include the
following described property to-wit:



 

LAND OWNER
 
DESCRIPTION




NORTH CENTRAL HUMAN SERVICES
 
A tract of land described as commencing at a point twenty rods north of the
southwest corner of Block 5 on the west line of said Block, thence easterly
parallel with the south line of said Block 132 feet, thence northerly,
parallel with the west line of said Block 74.8 feet, thence westerly parallel
with the south line of said Block 132 Feet, to the west line of said Block
thence southerly on the west line of said Block 74.8 feet to point of
beginning


NORTH CENTRAL HUMAN SERVICES
 
A tract described .as beginning at a point on the west line 404.8 feet
northerly of the southwest corner of Block 5, thence easterly parallel to the
south line of said Block 132 feet, thence northerly parallel to the west line
of said Block 84.7 feet, thence west parallel to the north line of Block
132.4 feet to a point on the west line of said Block, thence southerly along
the west line of said Block 74.8 feet to point of beginning


DALE A. & ELAINE A. NERDIG
 
The west 66 feet of a tract of land described as beginning at a point on the
east line 330 feet northerly of the southeast corner of Block Five (5) Forest
City, Iowa, thence westerly parallel with the south line of said Block 132.0
feet, thence northerly, parallel with the west line of Block, 159.5 feet, to
a point 33.0 feet south of the north line of said Block, thence easterly,
parallel to the north line of said Block 129.0 feet, to a point 3.4 feet west
of the east line of said Block Five (5), thence southeasterly to the east
line of said Block at a point 46 feet south of the north line of said Block,
thence southerly on the east line of said Block to the place of beginning


CHARLES L. & SUZANNE J. JONES
 
The east 66 feet of a tract of land described as beginning at a point on the
east line 330 feet northerly of the southeast corner of Block Five (5) Forest
City, Iowa, thence westerly parallel with the south line of said Block 132.0
feet, thence northerly, parallel with the west line of Block, 159.5 feet, to
a point 33.0 feet south of the north line of said Block, thence easterly,
parallel to the north line of said Block 129.0 feet, to a point 3.4 feet west
of the east line of said Block Five (5), thence southeasterly to the east
line of said Block at a point 46 feet south of the north line of said Block,
thence southerly on the east line of said Block to the place of beginning and
also the north 4 rods of the south 20 rods of Block 5 except the west 8 rods,
all in Forest City, Iowa


MYRTLE AC BARTLESON, l.e. rem. ALICE LEWISON,
et al
 
A tract of land located in the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of the Southeast
Quarter (SE¼) of Section Twenty-six (26), Township Ninety-eight (98) North,
Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth P.M., in Forest City, Winnebago
County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:  commencing 33 feet
north of the southwest corner of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of the
Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of said Section Twenty-six (26), thence north 132
feet, thence west 72.5 feet, thence south 132 feet, thence east 72.5 feet to
place of beginning


RAYMOND L. & BONNIE STEIFF
l.e. rem. ROBERT A. & JULIE ANN STEIFF
 
The East Half (E½) of the East Half (E½) of the Southwest Quarter (SE¼) of
the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of Section Twenty-six (26), Township
Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth P.M.,
Winnebago County, Iowa, except the south 33 feet thereof; and except a tract
of land described as commencing 33 feet north and 145 feet west of the
southwest corner of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of the Southeast Quarter
(SE¼), Section Twenty-six (26), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range
Twenty-four (24), Winnebago County, Iowa; thence north 132 feet; thence west
185 feet; thence south 132 feet; thence east 185 feet to place of beginning;
and also except a tract of land described as commencing 33 feet north of the
southwest corner of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of the Southeast Quarter
(SE¼), Section Twenty-six (26), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range
Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth P.M., Winnebago County, Iowa; thence north
132 feet; thence west 72.5 feet; thence south 132 feet; thence east 72.5 feet
to place of beginning


THEODORE & ALICE R. LEWISON
 
A tract of land commencing 161.5 feet west and 33 feet north of the southwest
corner of the Southeast ¼ of the Southeast ¼ of Section 26, Township 98,
Range 24, thence North 132 feet, thence west 92.5 feet, thence south 132
feet, thence east 92.5 feet to the point of beginning


GEORGE & JOANN BARTLESON
 
A tract of land located in the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of the Southeast
Quarter (SE¼) of Section Twenty-six (26), Township Ninety-eight (98) North,
Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth P.M., in Forest City, Winnebago
County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:  commencing 254 feet
west and 33 feet north of the southwest corner of the Southeast ¼ of the
Southeast ¼ of Section 26, Township 98, Range 24, thence north 132 feet,
thence west 76 feet, thence south 132 feet, thence east 76 feet to the point
of beginning


LARRY L. & GLORIA KEARNEY
 
The south 60 feet of a tract of land described as commencing at a point on
the east line of said Block 6, 272 feet north from the southeast corner of
said Block 6, thence north 194 feet, thence west 132 feet, thence south 194
feet, thence east 132 feet to point of beginning


GINA & TERRY KEEPER
 
A tract of land described as commencing at a point on the east line of Block
6, 272 feet north from the southeast corner of said Block 6, thence north 194
feet, thence west 132 feet, thence south 194 feet, thence east 132 feet to
point of beginning except the south 60 feet thereof, all in Forest City, Iowa


LARRY L. & GLORIA M. KEARNEY
 
A tract of land described as beginning at a point on the east line of Block
Six (6), Forest City, Iowa, 202 feet northerly from the southeast corner of
said Block Six (6), thence westerly and parallel with the south line of said
Block, 132 feet, thence northerly and parallel with the east line of said
Block 70 feet, thence easterly and parallel with the south line of said
Block, 132 feet, thence southerly on the east line of said Block, 70 feet to
the place of beginning


RONALD G. SUBY CONT: JEFF & CONNIE GREMMER
 
A tract of land described as beginning at a point on the east line of Block
Six (6), Forest City, Winnebago County, Iowa, eight (8) rods northerly from
the southeast corner of Block 6; thence westerly and parallel with the south
line of said Block, 132 feet; thence northerly and parallel with the east
line of said Block, 70 feet; thence easterly and parallel with the south line
of said Block, 132 feet; thence southerly on the east line of said Block, 70
feet to the place of beginning


VERLA MISSAL
 
The south 100 feet of the east 130.97 feet of the west 458.4 feet of the
Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of Section
Twenty-six (26), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24),
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Winnebago County, Iowa; a tract
commencing 27.09 feet west of the northwest corner of Block Seven (7) of the
original town of Forest City, Iowa, the point of beginning; thence east along
the north line of said Block Seven (7), 126.4 feet; thence south 4 degrees 42
seconds west, parallel with the east line of Eleventh (11th) Street, 207.2
feet; thence north 85 degrees 18 seconds west 126.0 feet to said east line of
Eleventh (11th) Street; thence north 4 degrees 42 seconds east along said
east line, 196.8 feet to point of beginning


KEN & CAROL JOHNSON
 
The North Half of the East Half of Block 8 Forest City, Iowa, except the
south 72 feet thereof, and except commencing at the northeast corner of the
East Half of the North Half of Block 8, thence south 39.25 feet on the west
line of 11th Street, to point of beginning; thence continuing south 39.25
feet on the west line; thence south 86º31¢56² west 153.4 feet, thence
north 02º10¢15² west 37.50 feet, thence north 85º54¢29² east 154.9 feet
to beginning, and except the South Half (S½) of a tract described as the
North Half (N½) of the East Half (E½) of Block Eight (8) Forest City, Iowa,
except the south 72 feet, and a tract of land described as commencing at the
northeast corner of the East Half (E½) of the North Half (N½) of Block
Eight (8) of the Original Plat of Forest City, Iowa; thence south 00º 00¢
00² east (assumed bearing) 39.25 feet on the west line of 11th Street to the
point of beginning; thence continuing south 00º00¢ 00² Seconds 39.25 feet
on said west line; thence south 86º31¢56² west 153.4 feet; thence north
02º10¢15² west 37.50 feet; thence north 85º54¢29² east 154.9 feet to
the point of beginning


DENNIS L. & LINDA M. STUCKI
 
The South Half (S½) of a tract described as the North Half (N½) of the East
Half (E½) of Block Eight (8) Forest City, Iowa, except the south 72 feet,
and a tract of land described as commencing at the northeast corner of the
East Half (E½) of the North Half (N½) of Block Eight (8) of the Original
Plat of Forest City, Iowa; thence south 00º00¢ 00² east (assuming bearing)
39.25 feet on the west line of 11th Street to the point of beginning; thence
continuing south 00º00¢00² 39.25 feet on said west line; thence south
86º31¢56²  west 153.4 feet; thence north 02º10¢15² west 37.50 feet;
thence north 85º54¢29²  east 154.9 feet to the point of beginning


JOSEPH L. JR. & ETHYLE SCOTT SOCZEK
 
The South 72 feet of the North ½ of East ½ of Block 8, Forest City, Iowa


MARY ANN WARD
 
The south 132 feet of Lot 4 in M.C. Halverson’s Subdivision of the
Southeast ¼ of the Southwest ¼, Section 26, Township 98 North, Range 24
west of 5th P.M. Forest City, Iowa


MERLE C. & THARON STEINMETZ
 

The south 66 feet of the north 132 feet of Lot 4 M.C. Halverson’s
Subdivision of the Southeast ¼ of the Southwest ¼, Section 26, Township 98
North, Range 24 Forest City, Iowa



LLOYD R. & KATHY R. CONRAD
 

The north 66 feet of Lot 4 and the south 33 feet of Lot 5 in M.C.
Halverson’s Subdivision of the Southeast ¼ of the Southwest ¼, Section
26, Township 98 North, Range 24, Forest City, Iowa



DOUGLAS A. & JULIE A. PRICE
 

The south ½ of Lot 5 except the south 33 feet thereof M.C. Halverson’s
Subdivision of the Southeast ¼ of the Southwest ¼, Section 26, Township 98
North, Range 24 Forest City, Iowa



DENNIS D. & JUDY M. HARRINGA
 

The north ½ of Lot 5 M.C. Halverson’s Subdivision of the Southeast ¼ of
the Southwest ¼, Section 26, Township 98 north, Range 24 Forest City, Iowa



RICHARD & TRUDY JOHNSON
 

The west 132 feet of the south 90 feet of Lot 7 M.C. Halverson’s
Subdivision of the Southeast ¼ of the Southwest ¼, Section 26, Township 98
North, Range 24 Forest City, Iowa



GERALD HEIMENDINGER
 

Lots 12, 13, 14, 15 & 16 and the west ½ of Lot 17 all in M.C. Halverson’s
Subdivision, Section 26, Township 98 North, Range 24 and east 10 rods of west
32 rods of the Southeast ¼ of the Southwest ¼, all in Section 26, Township
98 North, Range 24, Forest City, Iowa



DARREL E. & ROSE ALICE BEAVERS, cont. to: DALE GJERSTAD
 

The east ½ of Lot 17 M.C. Halverson’s Subdivision of Southeast ¼ of the
Southwest ¼, Section 26, Township 98 North, Range 24 Forest City, Iowa



LOIS I. & ROBERT A. HANNA
 

Lot 18 M.C. Halverson’s Subdivision of the Southeast ¼ of the Southwest
¼, Section 26, Township 98 North, Range 24 Forest City, Iowa



DOUGLAS & JULIE A. PRICE
 

The East Half (E½) of Lot Nineteen (19) in M.C. Halverson’s Subdivision in
the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of Section
Twenty-six (26) in Township Ninety-eight (98) North Range Twenty-four (24)
West of the Fifth P.M., Iowa, except a tract described as commencing two (2)
rods north of the southeast corner of the East Half (E½) of Lot Nineteen
(19) in M.C. Halverson’s Subdivision in the Southeast Quarter (SE¼) of the
Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of Section Twenty-six (26) in Township Ninety-eight
(98) North, Range Twenty-four (24), running thence north eight (8) rods along
west line of alley, thence west four (4) rods, thence south eight (8) rods,
thence east four (4) rods to place of beginning, from Government to date
hereof



RAYMOND G. & LILA M. KLOSTER
 

Commencing 2 rods north of the southeast corner of East ½ of Lot 19 M.C.
Halverson’s Subdivision of the Southeast ¼ of the Southwest ¼, Section
26, Township 98 North, Range 24 running thence north 8 rods along the west
line of the alley, thence west 4 rods, thence south 8 rods, thence east 4
rods to the point of beginning



EUGENE & CAROLYN HANNA
 

The south 215 feet of the east 69 feet of the west ½ of Lot 19 M.C.
Halverson’s Subdivision of the Southeast ¼ of the Southwest ¼, Section
26, Township 98 North, Range 24, Forest City, Iowa



LOIS IONE & ROBERT A. HANNA
 

The West ½ Lot 19 in M.C. Halverson’s of the Southeast ¼ of the Southwest
¼, Section 26, Township 98 North, Range 24 except the south 215 feet of the
east 69 feet thereof, Forest City, Iowa





 



100.02    COST OF THE PROJECT.



The total cost of the project attributable to the sanitary sewer is
$112,601.25, the portion of the engineering attributable to the project is
$13,512.15, and the portion of legal attributable to the project is
$1,872.00, for a total project cost for the sanitary sewer portion of the
project of $127,985.40.  Said total project cost will be divided equally
amongst the property, above described, which will be served by connecting to
the City Sanitary System.



100.03    CONNECTION OF EXISTING STRUCTURES.



If there is an existing structure or house on the property which has sewage,
as defined in 95.02(15) of this Code of Ordinances, said property must
connect to the sanitary sewer system pursuant to Section 95.05 of this Code
of Ordinances.



100.04    CONNECTION OF FUTURE STRUCTURES.



Any property which does not have any structures on it at the time of the
effective date of this chapter shall be required to pay the hookup fee at the
time the structure with sewage, as defined in Section 95.02(15) of this Code
of Ordinances, is built upon the property.  In addition, the property owner
will be required to pay the permit fee required in Section 96.02 of this Code
of Ordinances.



100.05    SEWER CONNECTION FEE.



The sewer connection fee on each of the above described properties is hereby
established at $3,555.00.  In the case of new construction, the connection
fee of $3,555.00 is due and payable when a utility connection application is
filed with the City and the permit fee required in Section 96.02 of this Code
of Ordinances is paid.  At the option of the property owner a payment
schedule pursuant to Section 100.06 may be used.  The first payment shall be
due and payable on July 1 after the permit is approved.



100.06    PAYMENT SCHEDULE.



For those existing houses located in the Northwest Forest City Municipal
Sanitary Sewer District hooked up to the sanitary sewer system by July, 1995,
the permit fee required in Section 96.02 of this Code of Ordinances will be
waived.  For those existing houses located in the Northwest Forest City
Municipal Sanitary Sewer District, the property owners, at their option,
shall have the right to pay the connection fee in ten (10) equal
installments.  The first installment shall be due and payable on July 1,
1995, and be delinquent on August 1, 1995, and the remaining nine payments
shall be due and payable on July 1 of the year following, and each succeeding
year until paid in full.  All payments shall be delinquent on October 1 of
the fiscal year.  Any unpaid balances shall bear interest at the rate of
5.1%, said interest to commence on July 1, 1995.



100.07    CERTIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



The Clerk is hereby directed to certify the ordinance codified in this
chapter and record the same in the office of the County Recorder of Winnebago
County, Iowa.  After such recordation, any unpaid balance shall be a lien on
the property.



100.08    COLLECTION OF FEES.



All fees collected herein shall be paid to the City Treasurer and shall only
be used for the purpose of operating the sanitary sewer utility or to pay the
debt service on obligations issued to finance the sanitary improvement and/or
extensions portion of the project.



CHAPTER 101
SOUTHEAST FOREST CITY MUNICIPAL SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT



 

101.01  Establishment of the Sanitary Sewer District
 
101.05  Sewer Connection Fee


101.02  Cost of the Project
 
101.06  Payment Schedule


101.03  Connection of Existing Structures
 
101.07  Certification of Ordinance


101.04  Connection of Future Structures
 
101.08  Collection of Fees



 



101.01    ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT.



There is hereby established within the City of Forest City the Southeast
Forest City Municipal Sanitary Sewer District, said district to include the
following described property to-wit:



 


LAND OWNER

 

DESCRIPTION





NO. 1 - DEVELOPMENTAL RESOURCES, INC.
Parcel A
 
That part of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼)of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼)of
Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24),
and all that part of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼)of the Southeast Quarter (SE
1/4)of Section Two (2), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four
(24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, lying east of the right-of-way of
Iowa Highway No. 69, subject to easement for public highway along the south
side thereof, described as follows:

Beginning at a point on the east line of Section 2-97-24, said point being
1340 feet south of the East ¼ corner of said Section 2; thence N 88º46' E
55 feet; thence S 2º21' E 250.8 feet; thence S 86º04' W 65.0 feet to the
east line of Section 2; thence S 86º04' W 92.3 feet to the original east ROW
line of U.S. Highway No. 69; thence N 3º17' W 258.1 feet along said east ROW
line; thence N 88º46' E 106.3 feet to the point of beginning, EXCEPT the
west 27 feet thereof, AND

A tract of land in the Southwest Quarter (SW¼)of the Southwest Quarter
(SW¼)of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four
(24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, described
as follows: Commencing at the West Quarter corner of said Sec. 1, thence S
89º05' E 0.7 feet; thence S 02º21' E 1340.0 feet to the point of beginning;
thence N 88º46' E 50.0 feet, thence S 02º21' E 248.6 feet; thence S 86º04'
W 50.0 feet, thence N 02º21' W 250.8 feet to the point of beginning, AND


A tract of land in the Southwest Quarter (SW¼)of the Southwest Quarter
(SW¼)of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four
(24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, and the
Southeast Quarter (SE¼)of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼)of Section Two (2),
Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth
Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, described as follows: Commencing at
a point 1593.9 feet south of the East Quarter corner of said Sec. 2; thence N
86º04' E 115.0 feet; thence S 02º21' E 245.0 feet; thence S 86º04' W 176.8
feet to the east right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 69; thence N 03º21' W
37.5 feet; thence N 03º17' W 207.5 feet; thence N 86º04' E 65.3 feet to the
point of beginning



NO.1 - DEVELOPMENTAL RESOURCES, INC.
Parcel B
 
The north 145 feet of that part of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼) of the
Southwest Quarter (SW¼)of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North,
Range Twenty-four (24) and all that part of the Southeast Quarter (SE¼)of
the Southeast Quarter (SE¼)of Section Two (2), Township Ninety-seven (97)
North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, lying
east of the right-of-way of Iowa Highway No. 69, subject to easement for
public highway along the south side thereof, described as follows:

Beginning at a point on the East line of Section 2-97-24, said point being
1340 feet south of the East 1/4 corner of said Section 2; thence N 88º46' E
55 feet; thence S 2º21' E 250.8 feet; thence S 86º04' W 65.0 feet to the
east line of Section 2; thence S 86º04' W 92.3 feet to the original east ROW
line of U.S. Highway No. 69; thence N 3º17' W 258.1 feet along said east ROW
line; thence N 88º46' E 106.3 feet to the point of beginning, EXCEPT the
west 27 feet thereof, AND

A tract of land in the Southwest Quarter (SW¼)of the Southwest Quarter
(SW¼)of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four
(24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, described
as follows: Commencing at the West Quarter corner of said Sec. 1, thence S
89º05' E 0.7 feet; thence S 02º21' E 1340.0 feet to the point of beginning;
thence N 88º46' E 50.0 feet, thence S 02º21' E 248.6 feet; thence S 86º04'
W 50.0 feet, thence N 02º21' W 250.8 feet to the point of beginning


NO. 2 - FOREST CITY RADIATOR
 
That part of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼)of the Southwest Quarter (SW¼)of
Section One (1) and the Southeast Quarter (SE¼)of the Southeast Quarter
(SE¼)of Section Two (2), both in Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range
Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth P.M., Hancock County, Iowa, described as
follows:

Commencing at the northwest corner of the SW¼ofsaid Sec. 1; thence S
00º38'04" E, 1839.38 feet (recorded as 1859.38 feet) along the westerly line
of said SW¼ tothe point of beginning; thence N 85º25'57" E 124.80 feet
(recorded as N 86º04' E); thence S 02º55'20" E, 232.00 feet; thence S
85º38'27" W, 134.05 feet to a point on said westerly line of the SW¼ thence
continuing S 85º38'27" W, 37.43 feet to the easterly right-of-way line of
U.S. Highway No. 69 and the beginning of a 26384.22 foot radius, non-tangent
curve, concave easterly; thence northerly 231.29 feet along said right-of-way
line and said curve with a chord bearing of N 04º06'29" W, 231.29 feet to a
point on a line bearing S 85º25'27" W from said point of beginning; thence N
85º25'57" E, 51.49 feet (recorded as N 86º04' E) to the point of beginning


NO. 3- ALL-FOUR, INC.
 
That part of Parcel E, located in the Southwest Quarter (SW¼)of Section One
(1), and in the Southeast Quarter (SE¼)of Section Two (2), both in Township
Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, said Parcel E also shown and described in
Plat and Survey filedApril 21, 1999, in Book 6, Page 38 in the Office of the
Hancock County Recorder, described as follows:  Commencing at the southwest
corner of said SW¼ofSec. 1; thence N 88º11'l2" E, 131.82 feet along the
southerly line of said SW¼ toa point on the easterly right-of-way line of
U.S. Highway No. 69, said point also being the point of beginning; thence N
27º26'43" W, 292.19 feet along said easterly right-of-way line and along the
southwesterly line of said Parcel E to a point on the easterly line of said
SE¼; thence continuing N 27º26'43" W, 49.04 feet along said right-of-way
line and along said southwesterly line to the beginning of a 26384.22 foot
radius, non-tangent curve, concave easterly; thence northerly 220.37 feet
along the westerly line of said Parcel E and along said curve with a chord
bearing N 04º35'52" W, 220.37 feet to the southwest corner of Parcel A as
described and recorded in a Warranty Deed filedFebruary 17, 1993, in Book 92,
Page 936, Office of the Hancock County Recorder; thence N 85º38'27" E,
590.45 feet along the southerly line of said Parcel A and along the easterly
extension of said southerly line of Parcel A to a point on the northerly
extension of a line 233.00 feet westerly, measured along the northerly and
southerly lines of Lot 1, Airport Industrial Park, Hancock County, Iowa, from
the easterly line of said Lot 1, thence S 00º31'18" E, 544.11 feet along a
line parallel with said easterly line of Lot 1 to a point on the southerly
line of said SW¼,said point also being on the southerly line of said Parcel
E; thence S 88º11'12" W, 419.06 feet along said southerly line to the point
of beginning


NO. 4 - SUPER 8 MOTEL M.W. HART, INC.
 
A tract of land in the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section
1, Township 97 North, Range 24 and the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast
Quarter of Section 2, Township 97 North, Range 24, West of the Fifth
Principal Meridian, Hancock County, exclusive of present established highway
and described as follows:  Commencing at the East Quarter corner of said
Section 2, thence south 89º05' east 0.7 feet, thence south 2º21' east 944.6
feet to the point of beginning; thence south 2º21' east 395.4 feet; thence
south 88º46' west 144.2 feet to the east right-of-way line of U.S. Highway
#69, thence north 3º25' west along said right-of-way line 401.2 feet; thence
south 89º05' east 150.2 feet to the point of beginning


NO. 5 - RANDY GROVES
 
A tract of land in the Northwest Quarter (NW¼)of the Southwest Quarter
(SW¼)of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four
(24) West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, and the Northeast Quarter (NE¼)of
the Southeast Quarter (SE¼)of Section Two (2), Township Ninety-seven (97)
North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock
County, Iowa, containing 0.71 acres, more or less, and described as
follows:  Commencing at the East Quarter corner of Section 2, thence S
89º05' E 0.7 feet; thence S 2º21' E 544.6 feet to the point of beginning;
thence S 2º21' E 200.0 feet; thence N 89º05', W 163.3 feet to the east
right-of-way line of U.S. Highway #69, thence N 3º25' W along said east
right-of-way line 200.0 feet, thence S 89º05' E 156.4 feet to the point of
beginning, and commencing at the East Quarter corner of Section 2, Township
97 North, Range 24 West of the 5th P.M., thence S 89º05' E 0.7 feet; thence
S 2º21' E 744.6 feet to the point of beginning; thence S 2º21' E 200.0
feet; thence N 89º05' W 150.2 feet to the east right-of-way line of U.S.
Highway #69; thence N 3º25' W along said right-of-way line 200.0 feet;
thence S 89º05' E 153.3 feet to the point of beginning


NO. 6 - ALL TIRE-LEONORA M. HENDERSON & WAYNE M. HENDERSON (deceased)
 
A tract of land in the Northwest Quarter (NW¼)of the Southwest Quarter
(SW¼)of Section One (1), in Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range
Twenty-four (24), and in the Northeast Quarter (NE¼)of the Southeast Quarter
(SE¼)of Section Two (2), in Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range
Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa,
containing 2.00 acres, more or less, described as follows:  beginning at the
East ¼ corner of Sec. 2, Twp. 97, Range 24, thence S 89º05' E 0.7 feet;
thence S 2º21' E 544.6 feet; thence North 89º05' W 156.4 feet to the east
right-of-way line of U.S. Highway #69; thence N 3º25' W along said east
right-of-way line 544.6 feet; thence S 89º05' E 163.4 feet along the quarter
section line to the point of beginning.


NO. 7 - WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC.
 
PARCEL B-That part of the Southwest Quarter of Section 1, Township 97 North,
Range 24 West of the 5th P.M., Hancock County, Iowa, described as follows:
Commencing at the Northwest Corner of said Southwest Quarter; thence N
87º54'26" E, 0.70 feet along the Northerly line of said Southwest Quarter to
the point of beginning; thence continuing N 87º54'26" E, 2123.59 feet along
said Northerly line to a point 450.00 feet Westerly, measured along said
Northerly line, from the Northeast Corner of said Southwest Quarter; thence S
00ºl7'45" W, 525.00 feet along a line parallel with said Easterly line;
thence S 87º54'26" W, 2094.12 feet along a line parallel with said Northerly
line to a point on the Easterly line of that parcel of land described and
recorded in a Warranty Deed filed July 9, 1991, in Book 91, Page 754, Office
of the Hancock County Recorder; thence N 02º55'20" W (recorded as S 2º21'
E) 524.60 feet along said Easterly line to the point of beginning; containing
25.39 acres, subject to any easements either recorded or unrecorded.


NO. 7 – WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC.

(continued)
 
PARCEL D-That part of the Southwest Quarter of Section 1, Township 97 North,
Range 24 West of the 5thP.M., Hancock County, Iowa, described as follows:
Commencing at the Northwest Corner of said Southwest Quarter (SW ¼);thence N
87º54¢26² E, 0.70 feet along the Northerly line of said Southwest Quarter;
thence S 02º55¢20² E, 524.60 feet along the Easterly line of that parcel
of land described and recorded in a Warranty Deed filedJuly 9, 1991, in Book
91, Page 754, Office of the Hancock County Recorder, to the point of
beginning; thence N 87º54¢26² E, 2094.12 feet along a line parallel with
said northerly line to a point 450.00 feet Westerly, measured along a line
parallel with said Northerly line, from the Easterly line of said Southwest
Quarter; thence S 00ºl7¢45² W, 371.00 feet along a line parallel with said
easterly line; thence S 87º54¢26² W, 2073.29 feet along a line parallel
with said northerly line to a point on the easterly line of that parcel of
land described and recorded in a Quit Claim Deed filed March 15, 1993, in
Book 92, Page 1022, Office of the Hancock County Recorder; thence N
02º55¢20² W, 370.72 feet along the easterly line of that parcel recorded
in said Quit Claim Deed and along the easterly line of that parcel recorded
in said Warranty Deed to the point of beginning; containing 17.73 acres,
subject to any easements either recorded or unrecorded.

PARCEL E-That part of the Southwest Quarter of Section 1 and the Southeast
Quarter of Section 2, both in Township 97 North, Range 24 West of the 5th
P.M., Hancock County, Iowa, described as follows: Commencing at the Northwest
Corner of said Southwest Quarter; thence N 87º54¢26² E, 0.70 feet along
the northerly line of said Southwest Quarter; thence S 02º55¢20² E, 895.32
feet along the easterly line of that parcel of land described and recorded in
a Warranty Deed filedJuly 9, 1991, in Book 91, Page 754, Office of the
Hancock County Recorder and along the easterly line of that parcel of land
described and recorded in a Quit Claim Deed filedMarch 15, 1993, in Book 92,
Page 1022, Office of the Hancock County Recorder to the point of beginning;
thence N 87º54¢26² E, 2523.29 feet along a line parallel with the
northerly line of said Southwest Quarter to a point on the easterly line of
said Southwest Quarter; thence S 00º17¢45² W, 1718.64 feet along said
easterly line to the southeast corner of said Southwest Quarter; thence S
88º11¢12² W, 2399.72 feet along the southerly line of said Southwest
Quarter to a point on the easterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 69;
thence N 27º26¢43² W, 292.19 feet along said easterly right-of-way line to
a point on the easterly line of said Southeast Quarter; thence continuing N
27º26¢43² W, 49.04 feet along said right-of-way line to the beginning of a
26384.22 foot radius, non-tangent curve, concave easterly; thence northerly
220.37 feet along said curve with a chord bearing N 04º35¢52² W, 220.37
feet to the southwest corner of Parcel A as described and recorded in a
Warranty Deed filedFebruary 17, 1993, in Book 92, Page 936, Office of the
Hancock County Recorder; thence N 85º38¢27²” E, 171.48 feet along the
southerly line of said Parcel A to the southeast corner of said Parcel A;
thence N 02º55¢20² W, 232.00 feet along the easterly line of said Parcel A
to the northeast corner of said Parcel A; thence continuing N 02º55¢20² W
493.60 feet (recorded as S 02º21¢ E, 493.6 feet) along the easterly line of
that parcel of land described in a Warranty Deed filedSeptember 7,


NO. 7 – WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC.

(continued)
 
1984, in Book 86, Page 249, Office of the Hancock County Recorder to the
northeast corner of said parcel; thence S 88º07’56” W, 50.00 feet
(recorded as N 88º46’ E, 50.0 feet) along the northerly line of said
parcel to the southeast corner of that parcel of land described and recorded
in a Warranty Deed filed June 17, 1959, in Book 61, Pages 451 and 452; thence
N 02º55’20” W, 444.68 feet along the easterly line of said parcel and
the easterly line of that parcel of land described and recorded in said Quit
Claim Deed filedMarch 15, 1993 in Book 92, Page 1022, Office of the Hancock
County Recorder to the point of beginning; containing 97.31 acres subject to
existing public road right of way and subject to any easements either
recorded or unrecorded.




 



 

LANDOWNERS OUTSIDE THE CORPORATE BOUNDARIES, CITY OF FOREST CITY



LAND OWNER

 

DESCRIPTION





NO. 8 – DENNIS AND JANET HAUGEN
 
Lot One (1), except the east 200 feet thereof, Airport Industrial Park,
Hancock County, Iowa


NO. 9 – KEITH AND MARY FARLAND
 
The east 200 feet of Lot One (1), Airport Industrial Park, Hancock County,
Iowa


NO. 10 – COUNTY OF HANCOCK
 
Lot Two (2), Airport Industrial Park, Hancock County, Iowa


NO. 11 – JOHNE. MONSON
 
Lot Three (3), Airport Industrial Park, Hancock County, Iowa


NO. 12 – CLARENCE J.AND MARY ANN WELLIK
 
Lot Four (4), Airport Industrial Park, Hancock County, Iowa


NO. 13 – DALE R. AND CAROL J. HEITLAND
 
The north 200 feet of Lot Five (5), Airport Industrial Park, Hancock County,
Iowa


NO. 14 – VAUGHN R. AND JOANN M. DREWES
 
The west 165 feet EXCEPT the north 200 feet thereof, Lot Five (5), Airport
Industrial Park, Hancock County, Iowa


NO. 15 – RICHARD AND BEVERLY THOMPSON
 
The west 25.00 feet of the east 130.00 feet except the north 200 feet of Lot
Five (5), Airport Industrial Park, Hancock County, Iowa, as depicted on
attached survey plat, comprising approximately 5,848 square feet


NO. 16 – VAUGHN R. AND JOANN M. DREWES
 
A part of Lot Six (6), Airport Industrial Park, located in the Northwest
Quarter (NW¼) of Section Twelve (12), Township Ninety-seven North (T97N),
Range Twenty-four West (R24W) of the Fifth Prime Meridian, described as
follows:  Beginning at the northwest corner of said Lot 6, thence N
88º12’02” E along the north line of said Lot 6, 329.92 feet to the
northeast corner of said Lot 6; thence S 0º31’18” E along the east line
of said Lot 6, 199.94 feet; thence N 85º44’12” W, 324.67 feet to the
west line of said Lot 6; thence N 2º43’39” W along said west line,
165.54 feet to the point of beginning


NO. 17 - JAYAND LISA KNUTSON
 
A part of Lot Six (6), Airport Industrial Park Subdivision, Hancock County,
Iowa described as follows:  Beginning at the southeast corner of said Lot 6;
thence N 85º43'00" W along the south line of said Lot 6 and the northerly
right of way line of Industrial Road, 239.35 feet; thence northwesterly 82.62
feet along an arc of an 80.00 foot radius curve to the left having a chord
length of 75.00 feet and bearing N 49º45'26" W; thence N 0º39'51 " E,
168.20 feet; thence S 85º44'12" E 295.89 feet to a point on the east line of
said Lot 6; thence S 0º31'18" E along said east line, 215.11 feet to the
point of beginning


NO. 18 - YOHN READY MIX CO.
 
Lot Seven (7) and Lot Eight (8), Airport Industrial Park, Hancock County, Iowa


NO. 19 - JOSEPH REDIG
 
Lot Nine (9), except the east 150 feet thereof, Airport Industrial Park,
Hancock County, Iowa, containing 49384 square feet; also, that part of
Industrial Road, Airport Industrial Park, Hancock County, Iowa, described as
follows:  Beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 9 in said Industrial
Park; thence N 04º15'48" E, 47.00 feet along the westerly line of said Lot 9
extended northerly to a point of intersection with the northerly line of said
Lot 9 extended westerly; thence S 85º44'12" E, 72.88 feet along said
northerly line of Lot 9 extended westerly to a point on said northerly line
of Lot 9 and the beginning of a 80.00 foot radius, non-tangent curve, concave
northwesterly; thence southwesterly 91.65 feet along the northwesterly line
of said Lot 9 and said curve with a chord bearing S 61º26'44" W, 86.72 feet
to the point of beginning, containing 2464 square feet.  Section Twelve
(12), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the
Fifth P.M., Hancock County, Iowa


NO. 20 - CHRIS AND MARY BAXTER
 
The east 150 feet of Lot Nine (9), Airport Industrial Park, Hancock County,
Iowa


NO. 21 - VAUGHN R. AND JOANN DREWES
 
The west 150 feet of Lot Ten (10), Airport Industrial Park, Hancock County,
Iowa


NO. 22 - MARION OLSON
 
Lot Ten (10), Airport Industrial Park, Hancock County, Iowa, except the west
150 feet thereof


NO. 23 - DALE AND CAROL HEITLAND
 
A tract of land located in the Northwest Quarter (NW¼)of Section Twelve
(12), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the
Fifth Prime Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, more particularly described as
follows: Lots One (1), Two (2), Three (3) and Four (4), Airport Industrial
Park Second Addition Subdivision, Hancock County, Iowa


NO. 24 - WINNEBAGO INDUSTRIES, INC.
 
Lot Five (5), Airport Industrial Park, Hancock County, Iowa


NO. 25 - CITY OF FOREST CITY, IOWA
 
Commencing at the North Quarter corner of Section Twelve (12), Township
Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the 5th P.M.; thence
westerly along the north line of Section 12-97-24 657.3 feet to the west line
of the existing Airport property and the point of beginning; thence westerly
along the north line of Section 12-97-24, 175.0 feet; thence southerly
parallel to the west line of the existing Municipal Airport 1320.0 feet;
thence easterly 175.0 feet to the west line of the existing Municipal
Airport; thence northerly along the west line of the existing Municipal
Airport 1320.0 feet to the point of beginning.  Said tract is located in the
East Half (E 1/2)of the Northwest Quarter (NW¼),Section Twelve (12),
Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the 5th
P.M., Hancock County, Iowa, and contains 5.30 acres more or less




 



101.02    COST OF THE PROJECT.



The portion of construction cost attributable to the project is $287,472, the
portion of the engineering attributable to the project is $99,408, and the
portion of legal attributable to the project is $5,000 for a total project
cost for the sanitary sewer portion of the project of $391,880, said total
project cost will be divided equally on a per acre basis amongst the
property, above described, which will be served by connecting to the City
Sanitary System.



101.03    CONNECTION OF EXISTING STRUCTURES.



If there is an existing structure or house on the property within the City
which has sewage, as defined in Section 95.02(15) of this Code of Ordinances,
said property must connect to the sanitary sewer system pursuant to Section
95.05 of this Code of Ordinances.



101.04    CONNECTION OF FUTURE STRUCTURES. 



Any property which does not have any structures on it at the time of the
passage of the ordinance codified by this chapter shall be required to pay
the hook-up fee, pursuant to this chapter, at the time the structure with
sewage, as defined in Section 95.02(15) of this Code of Ordinances, is built
upon the property.  In addition, the property owner will be required to pay
the permit fee required in Section 96.02 of this Code of Ordinances.



101.05    SEWER CONNECTION FEE.



   1.   There is hereby established a sewer connection fee schedule
based upon the following schedule to-wit:



 

Item No.
 
Owner
 
Property Description No.
 
Acreage
 
Anticipated Cost Share




1
 
All Tire
 
#6
 
2.00
 
$6,436.73


2
 
Groves Contracting
 
#5
 
1.40
 
$4,505.71


3
 
M.W. Hart, Inc.
 
#4
 
1.34
 
$4,312.61


4
 
Developmental Resources, Inc.
 
#1 – Parcel A
 
0.70
 
$2,252.86


5
 
Developmental Resources, Inc.
 
#1 – Parcel B
 
1.51
 
$4,859.73


6
 
Forest City Radiator Service, Inc.
 
#2
 
0.93
 
$2,993.08


7
 
All Four, Inc.
 
#3
 
5.72
 
$18,409.05


8
 
Winnebago Ind. Rally Grounds
 
#7 – Parcel B
 
13.77
 
$44,316.89


9
 
Winnebago Ind.
 
#7 – Parcel D
 
9.98
 
$32,119.29


10
 
Winnebago Ind.
 
#7 – Parcel E
 
9.56
 
$30,767.57


11
 
Winnebago Ind. Heritage Park
 
#7 – Parcel E
 
19.34
 
$62,243.19




 



The minimum sewer connection fee on each of the above described properties is
hereby established at $4,000.00 based upon domestic residential use. 
However, any use due to increased volume or in higher concentration will be
assessed pursuant to Subsection 3 of this section.  Any costs associated
with the extension to the applicable property from the existing sewer pipe
will be the responsibility of the property owner.



   2.   Upon petition as provided in Section 384.41(1), the City may
assess to private property affected by public improvements within three miles
of the City’s boundaries the cost of construction and repair of public
improvements within that area.  The Council expressly finds the Airport
Industrial Park and the Airport Industrial Park Second Addition are within
three (3) miles of the City’s boundaries and will benefit from the public
improvements.  There is hereby established a sewer connection fee schedule
based upon the following schedule for said Airport Industrial Park and the
Airport Industrial Park Second Addition to-wit:



 

Item No.
 
Owner
 
Property Description No.
 
Acreage
 
Anticipated Cost Share




1
 
Dennis/Janet Haugen
 
#8
 
4.55
 
$14,643.56


2
 
Keith/Mary Farland
 
#9
 
1.84
 
$5,921.79


3
 
County of Hancock
 
#10
 
1.85
 
$5,953.98


4
 
John E. Monson  N. IA. Plumbing/Heating
 
#11
 
0.92
 
$2,960.90


5
 
Mary Ann/Clarence Wellik
 
#12
 
0.92
 
$2,960.90


6
 
Dale R. Heitland Dale’s Body Shop
 
#13
 
1.35
 
$4,344.79


7
 
Vaughn/Joann Drewes North Iowa Storage
 
#14
 
0.83
 
$2,671.24


8
 
Richard/Beverly Thompson
 
#15
 
0.74
 
$2,381.59


9
 
Vaughn/Joann Drewes Norbert Pint
 
#16
 
1.24
 
$3,990.77


10
 
Jay/Lisa Knutson
 
#17
 
1.35
 
$4,344.79


11
 
Yohn Ready Mix Co.
 
#18
 
5.48
 
$17,636.64


12
 
Joseph Redig
 
#19
 
1.19
 
$3,829.85


13
 
Chris/Mary Baxter
 
#20
 
0.94
 
$3,025.26


14
 
Vaughn/Joann Drewes Mini Storage
 
#21
 
0.94
 
$3,025.26


15
 
Marion Olson
 
#22
 
1.19
 
$3,829.85


16
 
Dale Heitland
 
#23
 
1.10
 
$3,540.20


17
 
Dale Heitland
 
#23
 
1.10
 
$3,540.20


18
 
Dale Heitland
 
#23
 
0.80
 
$2,574.69


19
 
Dale Heitland
 
#23
 
0.80
 
$2,574.69


20
 
Winnebago Ind.
 
#24
 
4.80
 
$15,448.15


21
 
City of Forest City
 
#25
 
20.91
 
$67,296.02




 



The minimum sewer connection fee on each of the above-described properties is
hereby established at $6,000.00, based on domestic residential use. 
However, any use due to increased volume or in higher concentration will be
assessed pursuant to Subsection 3 of this section.  Any costs associated
with the extension to the applicable property from the existing sewer pipe
will be the responsibility of the property owner.



   3.   The above minimum sewer connection fee of $4,000, in the case
of those properties within the City limits, and $6,000 for those properties
located outside the City limits, is based upon a residential use of 300
gallons per day.  Any additional usage either in terms of volume or
concentration may be assessed a larger hook-up fee.  Said hook-up fee shall
be calculated as follows.  For each additional 300 gallons per day or part
thereof, an additional $4,000 shall be added to the hook-up fee.  For every
additional 240 milligrams per liter BOD5 in concentration above 240
milligrams per liter BOD5 or portion thereof, there shall be assessed an
additional $4,000 hook-up fee.



   4.   In the event the preliminary cost share for an individual
property is more than $4,000 or $6,000, respectively, and the volume and
concentration are the same as or less than residential uses as defined above,
the difference between the minimum hook-up fee, whether it is $4,000 or
$6,000, and the preliminary cost share as defined above shall be considered a
deficiency.  Said deficiency will not be assessed unless, within a 20-year
period, the use of the property is changed and the volume and concentration
is increased or a portion of the property is sold.  The use of the portion
of the property which is sold will be examined and in the event the use is
less than the residential use as defined above the minimum hook-up fee will
be charged.  In the event the use is more than the residential use as
defined above, the same formula as defined above in Subsection 3 will be used
to determine the assessment.  In the event there is no change in the use
within 20 years after the passage of Ordinance No. 587, no further
assessments will be collected by the City.



101.06    PAYMENT SCHEDULE.



   1.   New Construction.  In the case of new construction, the above
referred to connection fees of either $4,000 or $6,000 may be due and payable
when a utility connection application is filed with the City, and the permit
fee required in Section 96.02 of this Code of Ordinances is paid.  At the
option of the property owner of new construction located in the Southeast
Forest City Municipal Sanitary Sewer, said property owner shall have the
right to pay the above referred to connection fee in 10 equal set
installments.  The first installment shall be due and payable on July 1 of
the year in which construction is substantially complete and shall be
delinquent on October 1 of said year, and the remaining nine payments shall
be due and payable on July 1 of the year following, and each succeeding year
thereafter until paid in full.  All payments shall be delinquent on October
1 of the fiscal year.  Any unpaid balances shall bear interest at the rate
of 6.75%, said interest to commence on July 1 of the year in which
construction is substantially complete.



   2.   Existing Structures.  For those existing structures located in
the Southeast Forest City Municipal Sanitary Sewer District hooked up to the
sanitary sewer system by October 1, 2000, the permit fee required in Section
96.02 of this Code of Ordinances will be waived.  For those existing
structures located in the Southeast Forest City Municipal Sanitary Sewer
District in which no utility application will be filed, the property owners,
at their option, shall have the right to pay the above referred to connection
fee in 10 equal set installments.  The firstinstallment shall be due and
payable on July 1, 2001, and shall be delinquent on October 1, 2001, and the
remaining nine payments shall be due and payable on July 1 of the year
following, and each succeeding year until paid in full.  All payments shall
be delinquent on October 1 of the fiscal year.  Any unpaid balances shall
bear interest at the rate of 6.75%, said interest to commence on July 1, 2001.



101.07    CERTIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



The City Clerk is hereby directed to certify the ordinance codified by this
chapter and record the same in the office of the County Recorder of Hancock
County, Iowa.  After such recordation, any unpaid balances shall be a lien
on the property.



101.08    COLLECTION OF FEES. 



All fees collected herein shall be paid to the City Treasurer, and shall only
be used for the purpose of operating the sanitary sewer utility, or to pay
the debt service on obligations issued to finance the sanitary improvement
and/or extensions portion of the project.



CHAPTER 102
EAST FOREST CITY MUNICIPAL SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT



 

102.01  Establishment of Sewer District
 
102.06  Payment Schedule


102.02  Cost of the Project
 
102.07  Certification of Ordinance


102.03  Connection of Existing Structures
 
102.08  Collection of Fees


102.04  Connection of Future Structures
 
102.09  Check Valves


102.05  Sewer Connection Fee
 



 



102.01    ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT.



There is hereby established within the City of Forest City, the East Forest
City Municipal Sanitary Sewer District, said district to include the
following described property to-wit:



 


LAND OWNER

 

DESCRIPTION





EDGAR J. AND ROSEMARY SCHOOLCRAFT
 

That part of Lot Nineteen (19) lying Southwesterly of a line described as
extending from a point on the East line of Lot Nineteen (19), Thirty-two (32)
feet North of the Southeast (SE) corner of Lot Nineteen (19), thence
Northwesterly to a point that intersects with the Easterly line of the street
cul-de-sac of Oakmont South, Twenty-six (26) feet Northerly of the Southwest
corner of Lot Nineteen (19), and that part of Lot Eighteen (18) lying
parallel with and Northeasterly of the high water mark of the Lagoon situated
at the Westerly edge of said Lot together with the unobstructed right of
access in the Buyers and their successors to the lagoon for pleasure
purposes; reserving the restriction however, that the Buyers and their
successors shall not build or cause to be located any building or other
structure on the premises within 50 feet of the high-water mark of said
Lagoon, all in the Plat and Subdivision of a tract of land named Country Club
Heights and described as the North Eighty-seven and one-half (87 ½) Rods of
the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97)
North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth P.M., Hancock County, Iowa,
lying East of the Center Line of Lime Creek, a meandering stream, and subject
to easements and restrictions of record.




KEVIN AND JODY HARMON AND KEVIN AND JILL SHEIMO


 
 

Lot Nineteen (19), Country Club Heights, Sub-division of the North
Eighty-seven and one-half (871/2) rods of the North West Quarter (NW1/4) of
Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24),
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, lying east of the
Center Line of Lime Creek, except that part of said Lot Nineteen (19), lying
Southwesterly of a line described as extending from a point on the East line
of Lot Nineteen (19), Thirty-two (32) feet North of the Southeast (SE) corner
of Lot Nineteen (19), thence Northwesterly to a point that intersects with
the Easterly line of the street cul-de-sac of Oakmont South, Twenty-six (26)
feet Northerly of the Southwest corner of Lot Nineteen (19).




SHARON NERDIG




 

Lot Twenty (20), Country Club Heights Subdivision, of the North 87 1/2 Rods
of the Northwest Quarter of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97)
North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock
County, Iowa, lying East of Centerline of Lime Creek.




DAVID J. AND DEANNA L. ENNEN




 

Lot Twenty-one (21), Country Club Heights, Subdivision of the North
Eighty-seven and one-half (87 ½) rods of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of
Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24),
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the
Center Line of Lime Creek.




ROBERT AND NATALIE ALSOP




 

Lot Fourteen (14), Country Club Heights Subdivision of the North Eighty-seven
and one-half (87 ½) rods of the North West Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One
(1), Township Ninety-seen (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the center line
of Lime Creek; excepting therefrom the following described tract: Beginning
at the Southwest corner of said Lot 14; thence North 05º31’50” West
183.00 feet to the Northwest corner of said Lot 14; thence South
11º34’40” East 143.00 feet; thence South 89º29’00” East 105.00
feet; thence North 84º34’10” East 115.00 feet to the Southeast corner of
said Lot 14; thence South 78º35’10” West 235.00 feet to the point of
beginning.




CHARLIE AND MARY BAXTER

 

Lot Seven (7), Country Club Heights, a sub-division of the North 87 ½ rods
of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven
(97) North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian,
Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the center line of Lime Creek.




DONALD & MARVEL SMIDT REVOCABLE TRUST

 

Lots Twelve (12) and Thirteen (13), Country Club Heights, a sub-division of
the North Eighty-seven and one-half (87 1/2) rods of the Northwest Quarter
(NW ¼) of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range
Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa,
lying East of the center line of Lime Creek.




JEANNE O. PETERSON/NANCY MACKIN

 

Lot Eight (8), County Club Heights, a sub-division of the North Eighty-seven
and one-half (87 1/2) rods of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One
(1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the center line
of Lime Creek.




GARY L. AND DEBRA J. VANDENBOSCH

 

Lot Eleven (11), County Club Heights, a sub-division of the North
Eighty-seven and one-half (87 1/2) Rods of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of
Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24)
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the
center line of Lime Creek.




RONALD L. & JOAN E. LANGERUD

 

Lot Ten (10), Country Club Heights, a sub-division of the North Eighty-seven
and one-half (87 1/2) rods of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One
(1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the center line
of Lime Creek.




ROGER E. AND SONIA L. JOHNSON

 

Lot Twenty-two (22), Country Club Heights, a sub-division of the North 87 ½
rods of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One (1), Township
Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the center of Lime Creek.




WALTER T. ROSE II  AND REBECCA J. ROSE

 

Lot Twenty-four (24),County Club Heights, a sub-division of the North
Eighty-seven and one-half (87 1/2) rods of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of
Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24)
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the
center line of Lime Creek, except a tract described as commencing at the
Northeast corner pin of said Lot 24; thence South 20 feet along the easterly
lot line of said Lot 24; thence West 88 feet, said line running parallel to
existing Northern boundary line of said Lot 24; thence North 20 feet running
parallel to Easterly lot line of said Lot 24; thence East 88 feet to the
point of beginning.




LOWELL L. & MARJORY F. SOLBERG

 

That part of Lot Twenty-four (24), County Club Heights, a sub-division of the
North Eighty-seven and one-half (87 1/2) rods of the Northwest Quarter (NW
¼) of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four
(24) West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, lying East
of the center line of Lime Creek, described as follows: Commencing at the
Northeast corner pin of said Lot 24; thence South 20 feet along the Easterly
lot line of said Lot 24; thence West 88 feet, said line running parallel to
existing Northern boundary line of said Lot 24; thence North 20 feet running
parallel to Easterly lot line of said Lot 24; thence East 88 feet to the
point of beginning.



AND AS TO



That part of Lot Twenty-three (23), in County Club Heights, a sub-division of
the North Eighty-seven and one-half (87 1/2) rods of the Northwest Quarter
(NW ¼) of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range
Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa,
lying East of the centerline of Lime Creek, described as follows: Commencing
at the Southeast corner of Lot 23; thence West Eighty-eight (88) feet to the
Southwest Corner of said Lot 23; thence North One Hundred and five tenths
feet (100.5’) along the West line of said Lot 23; thence East One Hundred
Thirty-five (135) feet to the East line of said Lot 23; thence South One
Hundred Thirty-two and six tenths feet (132.6’) to the point of beginning.




SHIRLEY K. HANSON

 

Lot Twenty-three (23), County Club Heights, a sub-division of the North
Eighty-seven and one-half (87 1/2) rods of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of
Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24)
West of the Fifth P.M., Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the center line
of Lime Creek, EXCEPT Commencing at the Southeast Corner of Lot 23; thence
West 88 feet to the Southwest corner of said Lot 23; thence North 100.5’
along the West line of said Lot 23; thence East 135 feet to the East line of
said Lot 23; thence South 132.6 feet to the point of beginning.




RICHARD A. & ROBERT L. HONSEY

 

Lot Nine (9), County Club Heights, a sub-division of the North Eighty-seven
and one-half (87 1/2) rods of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One
(1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the
Fifth P.M., Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the centerline of Lime Creek.




ROGER W. & PEGGY S. MARTIN

 

Lot Six (6), Country Club Heights, a sub-division of the North Eighty-seven
and one-half (87 1/2) rods of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One
(1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the center line
of Lime Creek.




JEROME V. & EUNICE A. CLOUSE

 

Lot Five (5), Country Club Heights, a sub-division of the North 87 ½ rods of
the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97)
North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock
County, Iowa, lying East of the center line of Lime Creek.




JEROME V. & EUNICE A. CLOUSE

 

Lot Four (4), Country Club Heights, a sub-division of the North 87 ½ rods of
the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97)
North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock
County, Iowa, lying East of the center line of Lime Creek.




JEROME V. & EUNICE A. CLOUSE

 

Lot Two (2), Country Club Heights, a sub-division of the North 87 ½ rods of
the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97)
North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock
County, Iowa, lying East of the center line of Lime Creek.




JOHN C. & MARY ANN FARUS

 

Lots Three (3), County Club Heights, a sub-division of the North 87 ½ rods
of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven
(97) North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian,
Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the center line of Lime Creek.




MARK J. AND BETH A. CLOUSE

 

That part of Lots Two (2), Three (3) , Four (4) and Five (5)in the
Subdivision of the West Half (W ½) of the Northeast Quarter (NE ¼) of
Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24),
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, described as
Parcel A in Plat of Survey 5 I.S. 91 filed for record August 23, 1994 in the
office of the Recorder, Hancock County, Iowa.




LAND OWNER

 

DESCRIPTION




THE ANNE M. BAKKE REVOCABLE TRUST DATED FEBRUARY 14, 2012

 

Lot Thirteen (13), Estates of Bear Creek First Subdivision, Forest City,
Hancock County, Iowa.




THE ANNE M. BAKKE REVOCABLE TRUST DATED FEBRUARY 14, 2012

 

Lot Fourteen (14), Estates of Bear Creek First Subdivision, Forest City,
Hancock County, Iowa.




RICHARD AND VERA HYNES REV. TRUST

 

Lot Twenty-five (25), Country Club Heights, Subdivision of the North
Eighty-seven and one-half (87 ½) rods of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of
Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24),
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the
Center Line of Lime Creek.




COLLEEN SCHMIDT

 

Lot Twenty-six (26), Country Club Heights, a sub-division of the North 87 ½
rods of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One (1), Township
Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the center line of Lime Creek.




LANCE S. BARHITE AND KELSEY G. BARHITE

 

Lot Twenty-seven (27), County Club Heights, a sub-division of the North
Eighty-seven and one-half (87 1/2) rods of the Northwest Fractional Quarter
(NW Frl. ¼) of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range
Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa,
lying East of the center line of Lime Creek.




MILDRED E. OSTRANDER

 

Lot Twenty-eight (28), Country Club Heights, a sub-division of the North 87
½ rods of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One (1), Township
Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the center line of Lime Creek.




KEVIN AND JILL SHEIMO

 

Lot Twenty-nine (29), Country Club Heights, a sub-division of the North 87 ½
rods of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One (1), Township
Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Hancock County, Iowa, lying East of the center line of Lime Creek.




JOHN C. & MARY ANN FARUS

 

Lots One (1), County Club Heights, a sub-division of the North 87 ½ rods of
the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section One (1), Township Ninety-seven (97)
North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Hancock
County, Iowa, lying East of the center line of Lime Creek.




CYNTHIA M. FJETLAND

 

That part of Lots Fourteen (14), Fifteen (15), Sixteen (16) and Outlot
“C”, Country Club Heights, an Addition to Hancock County, Iowa, now in
the city of Forest City, Iowa, described as follows: Beginning at the
Southeast corner of Lot 14 in said Country Club Heights; thence S
16º31’20” E, 44.70 feet along the Northeasterly line of Lot 15 in said
Country Club Heights to the beginning of a 407.56 foot radius, nontangent
curve, concave Northeasterly; thence Southeasterly 105.17 feet along said
Northeasterly line and said curve with a chord bearing S 23º29’53” E,
104.88 feet to the Northeast Corner of Lot 16 in said Country Club Heights;
thence continuing Southeasterly 33.09 feet along the Northeasterly line of
said Lot 16 and said curve with a chord bearing S 33º13’00” E, 33.08
feet; thence S 45º17’33” W. 90.33 feet; thence S 28º30’41” W,
115.00 feet; thence S 56º30’41” W, 45.00 feet; thence S 86º30’41”
W, 60.00 feet; thence N 38º29’19” W, 65.00 feet; thence N 33º29’19”
W, 155.00 feet; thence N 16º06’09” E, 182.25 feet to a point located S
11º34’40” E, 143.00 feet from the Northwest Corner of said Lot 14;
thence S 86º29’00” E, (Recorded as S 89º29’00” E), 105.00 feet;
thence N 84º31’02” E (Recorded as N 84º34’10” E), 115.00 feet to
the point of beginning; containing 83723 square feet subject to any existing
easements of record.




RICHARD A. HONSEY AND ROBERTA L. HONSEY

 

The West 145 feet of the East 211 feet of the South 178 feet of Lot Seventeen
(17) in the Subdivision of the East Half (E ½) of Section Thirty-six (36),
Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth
Principal Meridian, Winnebago County, Iowa.




HARLAN AND MARY RODBERG

 

A tract of land described as beginning at a point on the West line of the
Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of Section Thirty-six (36) in Township Ninety-eight
(98) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth P.M., Iowa, 549.78 feet
North of the Southwest corner of the Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of said
Section Thirty-six (36), which is also the Southwest corner of Lot Fifteen
(15) in the Subdivision of the East Half (E ½) of Section 36, Township 98
North, Range 24 West; thence North 544 feet, thence East 0º19’ South 907.3
feet, thence South 0º15’ West 539 feet, thence West 0º05’ South 905
feet to the point of beginning except a tract described as follows: Beginning
at the Southwest corner of Lot Fifteen (15) in the Subdivision of the East
Half of Section 36, Township 98 North, Range 24 West, which is on the North
and South line and 549.78 feet North of the South Quarter corner of said
Section 36, thence North 132 feet, thence East 200 feet, thence South 132
feet to the South line of Lot 15, thence West 200 feet to the point of
beginning, and except the West 341.0 feet of the North 170.0 feet.




BARRY L. BENDICKSON AND MICHELLE C. BENDICKSON

 

A tract of land described as the West 341.0 feet of the North 170.0 feet of
the following described tract of land; beginning at a point on the West line
of the Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of Section Thirty-six (36) in Township
Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Winnebago County, Iowa, 549.78 feet North of the Southwest corner
of the Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of said Section Thirty-six (36) which is
also the Southwest corner of Lot Fifteen (15) in the Subdivision of the East
Half (E ½) of Section Thirty-six (36), Township Ninety-eight (98) North,
Range Twenty-four (24) thence North 544 feet; thence East 0º19’ South
907.3 feet; thence South 0º15’ West 539 feet; thence West 0º05’ South
905 feet to the point of beginning.




ERIC AND LAURA CANTERBURY

 

A parcel of land designated as Parcel “A” located in part of Lot Fifteen
(15) in the Subdivision of the East One-half (E ½) of Section Thirty-six
(36), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, Forest City, Winnebago County, Iowa, described as
follows: Commencing at the Southwest corner of the W ½ of the SE ¼ of said
Sec. 36; thence N 0º00’00” W along the west line of said W ½ SE ¼,
1089.00 feet to the Point of Beginning of Parcel “A”, thence continuing N
0º00’00” W along said west line, 115.50 feet; thence S 89º26’40” E,
514.80 feet to the easterly line of said Lot 15 and the westerly line of Lot
13 in said Subdivision of the E ½ of Section 36; thence S 00º00’00” E
along said easterly line of Lot 15, 115.50 feet; thence N 89º26’40” W,
514.80 feet to the Point of Beginning.




FOREST THOMPSON AND BARBARA THOMPSON AND THOMAS MCCLOSKEY, JR. AND ROBIN
MCCLOSKEY

 

A tract of land described as commencing ten rods South of the Northwest
corner of Lot Fifteen (15) in the Sub-division of the East Half (E 1/2) of
Section Thirty-Six (36), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four
(24) West of the Fifth P.M., Winnebago County, Iowa, thence East Thirty-one
(31) rods and Three and one-half (3 ½) feet; thence South Five (5) Rods;
thence West Thirty-one (31) Rods and Three and one-half (3 ½) feet; thence
North Five (5) rods to place of beginning.




LAWRENCE K. AND SHIRLEY DALTON

 

The South 84.52 feet of the West 253.26 feet of the North 2 chains and 47
links of Lot Fifteen (15) in the Sub-division of the East Half (E ½) of
Section Thirty-six (36) in Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range
Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Winnebago County, Iowa.




ASHLEY AND ALYSSA LANGE

 

The West 245 feet of the South 82.5 feet of Lot Fourteen (14) in the
Subdivision of the East Half (E ½) of Section Thirty-six (36), Township
Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth P.M.,
Winnebago County, Iowa.




MARLEN L. AND KAREN L. HANSON

 

A tract of land located in part of Lot Fourteen (14) in the Subdivision of
the East Half (E ½) of Section Thirty-six (36), Township Ninety-eight (98)
North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the 5th P.M., Winnebago County, Iowa,
described as follows: The West 245 feet of the North 115.5 feet of said Lot
14.




LAND OWNER

 

DESCRIPTION




LINDA JORDAHL

 

The North One Hundred Fifty-five (155) feet of the West Two Hundred
Sixty-four (264) feet of Lot Twelve (12) in the Subdivision of the East Half
(E ½) of Section Thirty-six (36) in Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range
Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Winnebago County,
Iowa.




ROBERT AND SHARON EAMES

 

Lot Nine (9) in the Subdivision of the East Half (E ½) of Section Thirty-six
(36), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the
5th P.M., Winnebago County, Iowa, except a tract of land One Hundred
Eighty-three (183) feet North and South by One Hundred Eighty (180) feet East
and West in the Northwest corner of said Lot 9.




CHARLES G. & PATRICIA S. BOLINGER

 

The North One Hundred Eighty-three (183) feet of the West One Hundred Eighty
(180) feet of Lot Nine (9) in the Subdivision of the East Half (E ½) of
Section Thirty-six (36) in Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range
Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Winnebago County,
Iowa.




SETH AND JOSI THOMPSON

 

The South Two Hundred Nineteen point seventy-eight (219.78) feet of the West
Two Hundred Twenty-three point eight (223.8) feet of Lot Sixteen (16) in the
Subdivision of the East Half (E ½) of Section Thirty-six (36), Township
Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Winnebago County, Iowa EXCEPT the South One Hundred Thirteen (113)
feet of the West One Hundred Forty-eight point eight (148.8) feet of said Lot
16.




STEVEN T. AND CARI A. LILLQUIST

 

The South 113.0 feet of the West 148.8 feet of Lot Sixteen (16) in the
Subdivision of the East Half (E ½) of Section Thirty-six (36), Township
Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Winnebago County, Iowa.




ROGER A. TORKELSON

 

The West 73 feet of the East 211 feet of the South 13-1/3 rods of Lot Sixteen
(16) in the Subdivision of the East one-half (E ½) of Section Thirty-six
(36), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the
5th P.M. AND the West four (4) rods of the South Half (S ½) of Block Nine
(9), Forest City, Winnebago County, Iowa.




SANDRA HUGELEN

 

Lot Seventeen (17) in the Subdivision of the East Half (E ½) of Section
Thirty-six (36), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24)
West of the Fifth P.M., Forest City, Winnebago County, Iowa, except the South
178 feet of the West 323.07 feet thereof.




BARBARA E. HOWIESON

 

Tract “B” in Lot Seventeen (17) in the Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of
Section Thirty-six (36), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four
(24) West of the 5th P.M., Winnebago County, Iowa, more particularly
described as: The South One Hundred Seventy-eight (178) feet of the West One
Hundred Seventy-eight and Seven Hundredths (178.07) feet of Lot Seventeen
(17) of said Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of Section 36, and containing 0.73
acres, more or less.




STEVEN CRAIG HAUGEN, JR., AND JEFFREY WILLIAM HAUGEN

 

The North Ten (10) Rods of Lot Sixteen (16), in Subdivision of the East Half
(E ½) of Section Thirty-six (36), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range
Twenty-four (24), West of the 5th P.M., Winnebago County, Iowa.




JAKE T. AND LYDIA L. THOMPSON

 

A tract of land described as beginning at the Southwest Corner of Lot Fifteen
(15) in the Subdivision of the East Half (E ½) of Section Thirty-six (36),
Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the fifth
Principal Meridian, Winnebago County, Iowa, which is on the North and South
line and 549.78 feet North of the South Quarter Corner of said Section 36,
thence North 66 feet, thence East 200 feet, thence South 66 feet to the South
line of Lot 15, thence West 200 feet to the place of beginning.




BENJAMIN A. AND NICOLE FOLLMAN

 

A tract of land described as beginning at a point 66 feet North of the
Southwest corner of Lot Fifteen (15), in Subdivision of the East Half (E ½)
of Section Thirty-six (36) in Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range
Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Winnebago County,
Iowa, which is on the North and South line and 615.78 feet North of the South
Quarter corner of said Section 36, thence North 66 feet, thence East 200
feet, thence South 66 feet, thence West 200 feet to the place of beginning.




CITY OF FOREST CITY, IOWA

 

The South Half (S ½) of the Southwest Quarter (SW ¼) East of the centerline
of the Winnebago River formerly known as Lime Creek all in Section Thirty-six
(36), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, Winnebago County, Iowa EXCEPT the East 995.7 feet
of the South 33 feet of the Southwest Quarter (SW ¼) all lying East of
Center of Winnebago River.




DENNIS M. SCHOENWETTER AND DONNA G. SCHOENWETTER

 

The South One Hundred Fifty-eight and one-half (158.5) feet of the West Two
Hundred Sixty-four (264) feet of Lot Twelve (12) in the Subdivision of the
East Half (E ½) of Section Thirty-six (36), in Township Ninety-eight (98)
North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the 5th P.M., Winnebago County, Iowa,
subject to road.




LEE VANG AND DARLA B. VANG

 

Lot Fourteen (14) of the Subdivision of the East Half (E ½) of Section
Thirty-six (36), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24),
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Winnebago County, Iowa; EXCEPT the
South 181.5 feet of the West 245 feet; AND EXCEPT the North 16.5 feet of the
West 245 feet.




ERIC D. AND SHELLY L. KINGLAND

 

Part of Lot Twelve (12) in the Subdivision of the East Half (E ½) of Section
Thirty-six (36), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24)
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Winnebago County, Iowa, described as
follows: The East 165.0 feet of the West 429.0 feet of said Lot 12.




ESTATE OF DORIS HOVDA; MARYANN J. LUND AND THEODORE JAMES HOVDA, EXECUTORS

 

Lot Twelve (12) in the Subdivision of the East Half (E ½) of Section
Thirty-six (36) in Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Twenty-four (24)
West of the 5th P.M., Winnebago County, Iowa, save and except a parcel of
land carved out of the above and more fully described as follows: Commencing
at a point in the Center of Highway at the Northwest corner of said Lot 12;
thence East 264 feet, along said North line of said Lot to an Iron Stake;
thence directly South 330 feet to another Iron Stake; thence West 264 feet to
center of said highway; thence North 330 feet to place of beginning.




MICHAEL L. AND SARA E. KORTHALS

 

The North 2 Chains and 47 Links of Lot Fifteen (15) in the Subdivision of the
East Half ( E ½) of Section Thirty-six (36), in Township Ninety-eight (98)
North, Range Twenty-four (24), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian,
Winnebago County, Iowa, EXCEPT the South 84.52 feet of the West 253.25 feet
thereof.




STEVEN AND PATRICIA LOVIK

 

A tract of land described as commencing Thirteen and One-third (13 1/3) rods
North of the Southwest Corner of Lot Sixteen (16), in the Subdivision of the
East Half (E ½) of Section Thirty-six (36), Township Ninety-eight (98)
North, Range Twenty-four (24) West of the 5th P.M., City of Forest City,
Winnebago County, Iowa, running thence North Ten (10) rods; thence East
Thirty-one (31) rods and Three and one-half (3 ½) feet; thence South Ten
(10) rods; thence East Thirty-one (31) rods and Three and one-half (3 ½)
feet to the place of beginning.




DONALD D. AND KATHRYN M. OLSON

 

A tract of land described as commencing Two Hundred Eleven (211) feet West of
the Southeast corner of Lot Sixteen (16) in the Subdivision of the East Half
(E ½) of Section Thirty-six (36) in Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range
Twenty-four (24) West of the Fifth P.M., Winnebago County, Iowa, running
thence North Thirteen and one-third (13 1/3) rods; thence West Eighty (80)
feet; thence South Thirteen and one-third (13 1/3) Rods; thence East Eighty
(80) feet to the place of beginning.





 



102.02    COST OF THE PROJECT.



The portion of the construction cost attributable to the project is
$1,052,790, the portion of the engineering attributable to the project is
$149,700, and the portion of legal attributable to the project is $7,500 for
a total cost of the project of $1,052,790, for a total possible assessable
portion of the project of $1,052,790. The City hereby determines the total
assessment per benefited property which will be served by connecting to the
City Sanitary System shall be $3,500.



102.03    CONNECTION OF EXISTING STRUCTURES. 



If there is an existing structure or house on the property within the City
limits of Forest City, Iowa, which has sewage, as defined in 95.02(17) of the
2007 Code of Ordinances, City of Forest City, said property hereto effected
must connect to the sanitary sewer system pursuant to Section 95.05 of the
2007 Code of Ordinances, City of Forest City, and the terms of this chapter.
In addition, the property owner will be required to pay the permit fee
required in Section 96.01(4)(A) of the 2007 Code of Ordinances, City of
Forest City.



102.04    CONNECTION OF FUTURE STRUCTURES. 



Any property which does not have any structures on it at the time of the
passage of this chapter shall be required to pay the hook-up fee at the time
the structure with sewage, as defined in 95.02(17) of the 2007 Code of
Ordinances, City of Forest City, is built upon the property.  In addition,
the property owner will be required to pay the permit fee required in Section
96.01(4)(A) of the 2007 Code of Ordinances, City of Forest City.



102.05    SEWER CONNECTION FEE.



There is hereby established a sewer connection fee schedule of $3,500. Any
costs associated with the extension to the applicable property from the
existing sewer pipe will be the responsibility of the property owner.



102.06    PAYMENT SCHEDULE.



   1.   New Construction.  In the case of new construction, the above
referred to connection fees of $3,500 will be due and payable when a utility
connection application is filed with the City, and the permit fee required in
Section 96.01(4)(A) of the 2007 Code of Ordinances, City of Forest City is
paid.



   2.   Existing Structures without proper certification.  Any
existing structures which do not have a current septic system certified by
the Winnebago/Hancock County Department of Health located in the East Forest
City Municipal Sanitary Sewer District must be hooked up to the sanitary
sewer system by August 1, 2013. The permit fee required in Section
96.01(4)(A) of the 2007 Code of Ordinances, City of Forest City, shall also
be paid with the utility connection application.  For those existing
structures located in the East Forest City Municipal Sanitary Sewer District
which do not have a current septic system certified by the Winnebago/Hancock
County Department of Health, the property owners, at their option, shall have
the right to pay the above referred to connection fee in 5 equal
installments.  The first installment shall be due and payable on the first
day of July, 2014, and be delinquent on the 1st day of October; the remaining
four payments shall be due and payable on the first day of July of the year
following, and each succeeding year until paid in full.  All payments shall
be delinquent on the first day of October of the fiscal year.  Any unpaid
balances shall bear interest at the rate of  3.25%, said interest to
commence on the 1st day of July, 2013.



   3.   Existing Structures with proper certification.  Any existing
structures located in the East Forest City Municipal Sanitary Sewer District
which have a current septic system certified by the Winnebago/Hancock County
Department of Health, may postpone hooking up to the sanitary sewer system
for a period up to and including June 1, 2016. The following conditions shall
apply to existing structures located in the East Forest City Municipal
Sanitary Sewer District which have a current septic system certified by the
Winnebago/Hancock County Department of Health:



      A.   Property owners, at their option, shall have the right to
pay the above referred to connection fee in 5 equal installments subsequent
to the connection to the sewer system.



      B.   The first installment shall be due and payable on the
first day of July, subsequent to the connection to the sewer system and be
delinquent on the 1st day of October, subsequent to the connection to the
sewer system and the remaining four payments shall be due and payable on the
first day of July of the year following, and each succeeding year until paid
in full.  All payments shall be delinquent on the first day of October of
the fiscal year.  Any unpaid balances shall bear interest at the rate of
3.25%, said interest to commence on the 1st day of July subsequent to the
connection to the sewer system.



102.07    CERTIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



The City Clerk is hereby directed to certify Ordinance No. 734 and record the
same in the office of the County Recorder of Hancock County, Iowa.  After
such recordation, any unpaid balances shall be a lien on the property.



102.08    COLLECTION OF FEES.



All fees collected herein shall be paid to the City Treasurer, and shall only
be used for the purpose of operating the sanitary sewer utility, or to pay
the debt service on obligations issued to finance the sanitary improvement
and/or extensions portion of the project.



102.09    CHECK VALVES.



Any property which connects to the sanitary sewer system shall install check
valves on the sanitary sewer service connection line.




(Ch. 102 – Ord. 734 – Mar. 13 Supp.)




CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL



 

105.01  Purpose
 
105.07  Open Dumping Prohibited


105.02  Definitions
 
105.08  Toxic and Hazardous Waste


105.03  Sanitary Disposal Required
 
105.09  Waste Storage Containers


105.04  Health and Fire Hazard
 
105.10  Prohibited Practices


105.05  Air Pollution
 
105.11  Sanitary Disposal Project Designated


105.06  Littering Prohibited
 



 



105.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Solid
Waste Control is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection and disposal
of solid waste, and thereby, to protect the citizens of the City from such
hazards to their health, safety and welfare as may result from the
uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.



105.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Air contaminant” means any smoke, soot, fly ash, dust,
cinder, dirt, noxious or obnoxious acids, fumes, oxides, gases, vapors,
odorous substances, toxic substances, radioactive substances, waste matter,
particulate matter or any other material which by its presence in the
atmosphere may constitute air pollution, excluding uncombined water.



   2.   “Air pollution” means the presence in the outdoor
atmosphere of one or more air contaminants or combinations thereof in such
quantities and of such duration that they are or may tend to be injurious to
human, plant or animal life, or unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of
life, property or the conduct of business.



   3.   “Approved incinerator” means equipment or facilities for
the enclosed burning of refuse having a stack adequate to maintain a draft
sufficient for efficient combustion and equipped with a screen sufficiently
fine to prevent ejection of particles of burning materials as acceptable to
the Environmental Protection Commission.



   4.   “Chimney” or “stack” means any flue, conduit or duct
permitting the discharge or passage of air contaminants into the open air, or
constructed or arranged for this purpose.



   5.   “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid
waste from public and private places.   



   6.   “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw,
deposit or drop. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361)



   7.   “Dust” means solid particles released into the air by
natural forces or by mechanical processes.



   8.   “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located
within a structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which
are used, or are intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and
eating.   



   9.   “Emission” means a discharge or release into the atmosphere
of any air contaminant or any substance which by chemical reaction may become
an air contaminant.



   10.   “Fly ash” means suspended particles, charred paper, dust,
soot or other partially incinerated or burned matter carried in the products
of combustible refuse.



   11.   “Fumes” means solid particles generated by the
condensation of vapors or gases that are of such character as to create an
unclean, unhealthy or an offensive condition when airborne.



   12.   “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible
animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking,
storing, serving and consuming of food or of material intended for use as
food, and all offal, excluding useful industrial by-products, and shall
include all such substances from all public and private establishments and
from all residences. 



(IAC, 567-100.2)



   13.   “Landscape Waste” means any vegetable or plant wastes
except garbage.  The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps,
brush, weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery and yard trimmings. 



(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])



   14.   “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste
materials or debris. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])



   15.   “Odor” means that property of an air contaminant
detectable by the sense of smell.



   16.   “Open burning” means any burning of combustible materials
where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air without
passing through a chimney or stack. 



(IAC, 567-100.2)



   17.   “Open dumping” means the depositing of solid wastes on the
surface of the ground or into a body or stream of water. 



(IAC, 567-100.2)



   18.   “Owner” means, in addition to the record title-holder, any
person residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting
business in any premises, and as between such parties the duties,
responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be
joint and several. 



   19.   “Particulate matter” means material which is or has been
suspended in air or other gases and is a liquid or solid at standard
conditions of temperature (68ºF.) and pressure (14.7 pounds per square inch
absolute).



   20.   “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible wastes,
including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues,
street cleanings, market and industrial solid wastes and sewage treatment
wastes in dry or semi-solid form.     



(IAC, 567-100.2)



   21.   “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and
any multiple-family dwelling.




   22.   “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the
premises as a result of residential activities.  The term includes landscape
wastes grown on the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but
excludes garbage, tires and trade wastes. 




(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])



   23.   “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of
combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery or litter of any kind.



(IAC, 567-100.2)



   24.   “Salvage operations” means any business, industry or trade
engaged wholly or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any project or material,
including (but not limited to) chemicals, drums, metals, motor vehicles or
shipping containers.



   25.   “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste
so that it does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create
a nuisance.



(IAC, 567-100.2)



   26.   “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and
appurtenances including all real and personal property connected with such
facilities, which are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed,
equipped, improved, extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final
disposition of solid waste without creating a significant hazard to the
public health or safety, and which are approved by the Director of the State
Department of Natural Resources.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)



   27.   “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other
similar discarded solid or semi-solid materials, including but not limited to
such materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and
domestic activities.  Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by
subsection one of Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa.   



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301[4])



   28.   “Toxic and hazardous wastes” means waste materials,
including but not limited to poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids,
caustics, pathological wastes, flammable or explosive materials and similar
harmful wastes which require special handling and which must be disposed of
in such a manner as to conserve the environment and protect the public health
and safety. 



(IAC, 567-100.2)



   29.   “Trade waste” means all solid or liquid material or
rubbish resulting from building operations, construction or the conduct of
any business, industry or trade, including (but not limited to) chemicals,
cinders, grease, paint, plastic products and other forms of liquid or solid
waste materials.



   30.   “Yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings,
leaves, garden waste, brush and trees.  Yard waste does not include tree
stumps.



105.03    SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED.



It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all
refuse accumulating on said owner’s premises before it becomes a
nuisance.  Any such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of
more than thirty (30) days shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may
proceed to abate such nuisances in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
50 of this Code of Ordinances or by initiating proper action in district
court.



(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)



105.04    HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.



It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises,
improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste
that constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.



105.05    AIR POLLUTION.



   1.   Open Burning Restricted.  No person shall allow, cause or
permit open burning of combustible materials, including trade wastes, nor
shall any person conduct a salvage operation by open burning, except that the
following shall be permitted:



(IAC, 567-23.2[455B])



      A.   Disaster Rubbish.  The open burning of rubbish,
including landscape waste, for the duration of the community disaster period
in cases where an officially declared emergency condition exists, provided
that the burning of any structures or demolished structures is conducted in
accordance with 40 CFR Section 61.145.



(IAC, 567-23.2[3a])



      B.   Trees and Tree Trimmings.  The open burning of trees and
tree trimmings at a City-operated burning site, provided such burning is
conducted in compliance with the rules established by the State Department of
Natural Resources. 



(IAC, 567-23.2[3b])



      C.   Flare Stacks.  The open burning or flaring of waste
gases, provided such open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with
applicable rules of the State Department of Natural Resources.



(IAC, 567-23.2[3c])



      D.   Landscape Waste.  The disposal by open burning of
landscape waste originating on the premises between April 1 and June 1 of any
year and between October 1 and December 1 of any year, between the hours of
12:00 noon and 7:00 p.m.  However, the burning of landscape waste produced
in clearing, grubbing and construction operations shall be limited to areas
located at least one-fourth (¼) mile from any building inhabited by other
than the landowner or tenant conducting the open burning.  Rubber tires
shall not be used to ignite landscape waste. 



(IAC, 567-23.2[3d])



      E.   Recreational Fires.  Open fires for cooking, heating,
recreation and ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission
of visible air contaminants established by the State Department of Natural
Resources.  Rubber tires shall not be burned in a recreational fire.



(IAC, 567-23.2[3e])



      F.   Training Fires.  Fires set for the purpose of conducting
bona fide training of public or industrial employees in fire fighting
methods, provided that the training fires are conducted in compliance with
rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources.



(IAC, 567-23.2[3g])



      G.   Controlled Burning of a Demolished Building.  The
controlled burning of a demolished building by the City, subject to approval
of the Council, provided that the controlled burning is conducted in
accordance with rules and limitations established by the State Department of
Natural Resources.



(IAC, 567-23.2[3j])



   2.   Variance.  Any person wishing to conduct open burning of
materials not permitted herein may make application for a variance to the
Director of the State Department of Natural Resources. 



(IAC, 567-23.2[2])



   3.   Incinerators.  Equipment or facilities for the enclosed
burning of refuse shall have a stack adequate to maintain a draft sufficient
for efficient combustion and the stack shall have a screen sufficiently fine
to prevent emission of particles of burning material.  Such equipment or
facilities shall not be installed until approved by the Council and shall be
maintained and operated so that no air pollution shall result, in accordance
with State law and rules on air contaminants.



   4.   Enforcement.  When the City has reason to believe that a
violation of this section has occurred, it may enter into informal
negotiations to resolve the problem.  If, after a reasonable period of time,
such negotiations have failed to resolve the problem, the City may cause
written notice to be served upon the alleged violator in the manner provided
for the abatement of nuisances in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
50 of this Code of Ordinance.  Such notice shall become a final order unless
the person named therein requests in writing a hearing before the Council. 
In lieu of such order, the Council may require that the alleged violator
appear before the Council for a public hearing at the time and place
specified in the notice, not less than ten (10) days after service of such
notice, to answer the charges complained of, or the Council may institute
action to abate the nuisance as provided in Chapter 50.



105.06    LITTERING PROHIBITED.



No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that
nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized
collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles
provided for such purpose.  When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle,
the driver of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case
where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually
discarded the litter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)



105.07    OPEN DUMPING PROHIBITED.



No person shall dump or deposit or permit the dumping or depositing of any
solid waste on the surface of the ground or into a body or stream of water at
any place other than a sanitary disposal project approved by the Director of
the State Department of Natural Resources, unless a special permit to dump or
deposit solid waste on land owned or leased by such person has been obtained
from the Director of the State Department of Natural Resources.  However,
this section does not prohibit the use of dirt, stone, brick or similar
inorganic material for fill, landscaping, excavation, or grading at places
other than a sanitary disposal project. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.307 and IAC, 567-100.2)



105.08    TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.



No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for
collection any toxic or hazardous waste.  Such materials shall be
transported and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State
Department of Natural Resources. 



(IAC, 567-100.2) 



(IAC, 567-102.13[2] and 400-27.14[2])



105.09    WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS.



Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any premises,
dwelling unit or any place where refuse accumulates shall provide and at all
times maintain in good order and repair portable containers for refuse in
accordance with the following:



   1.   Container Specification.  Waste storage containers shall
comply with the following specifications:



      A.   Residential.  Residential waste containers shall be of
not less than fifteen (15) gallons or more than thirty-three (33) gallons in
nominal capacity; shall be leak proof, water proof and fitted with a fly
tight lid which shall be kept in place except when depositing or removing the
contents thereof.  They shall have handles, bails or other suitable lifting
devices or features and be of a type originally manufactured for the storage
of residential waste with tapered sides for easy emptying.  They shall be of
light weight and sturdy construction with the total weight of any individual
containers and contents not exceeding forty (40) pounds.  Galvanized metal
containers, rubber or fiberglass containers and plastic containers which do
not become brittle in cold weather may be used.  Disposable containers or
other containers as approved by the City may also be used.



      B.   Commercial.  Every person owning, managing, operating,
leasing or renting any commercial premises where an excessive amount of
refuse accumulates and where its storage in portable containers as required
above is impractical, shall maintain metal bulk storage containers approved
by the City.



   2.   Location of Containers.  Residential solid waste containers
shall be stored upon the residential premises.  Commercial solid waste
containers shall be stored upon private property, unless the owner shall have
been granted written permission from the City to use public property for such
purposes.  The storage site shall be well drained; fully accessible to
collection equipment, public health personnel and fire inspection personnel.



   3.   Nonconforming Containers.  Solid waste containers which are
not adequate will be collected together with their contents and disposed of
after due notice to the owner. 



105.10    PROHIBITED PRACTICES.



It is unlawful for any person to:



   1.   Unlawful Use of Containers.  Deposit refuse in any solid waste
containers not owned by such person.



   2.   Interfere with Collectors.  Interfere in any manner with solid
waste collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful
performance of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be
those of the City, or those of any other authorized waste collection
service. 



   3.   Scavenging.  Take or collect any solid waste which has been
placed out for collection on any premises, unless such person is an
authorized solid waste collector.



   4.   Radioactive Material.  Dispose of radioactive material in a
sanitary disposal project.  Luminous timepieces are exempt.



   5.   Incinerators.  Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators
designed for high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid or
gaseous combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which
the solid residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable
to the Environmental Protection Commission.



   6.   Hours for Placing and Pickup of Garbage.



      A.   No person shall place garbage out for pickup prior to
5:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled pickup.



      B.   Except in emergency situations, the City shall not begin
residential garbage pickup any earlier than 8:00 a.m.



(Ord. 719 – Nov. 11 Supp.)



7.   Burning at City-Operated Burning Site.



A.   Disposal at the City-operated burning site is open to brush collected
within the City limits of the City of Forest City only.  Brush collected
outside of the City limits are strictly prohibited. 



B.   Every Resident of Forest City Iowa shall register to use the burning
site.  The Superintendent of Streets shall issue rules and procedures for
registering.



C.   Violations of Section 1.05.10(7)A and B are declared to be City
infractions punishable by civil penalty.  A five hundred dollar ($500) civil
penalty shall be imposed for each violation.



(Ord. 805 - Oct. 19 Supp.)



105.11    SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED.



The sanitary landfill facilities operated by Landfill of North Iowa are
hereby designated as the official “Public Sanitary Disposal Project” for
the disposal of solid waste produced or originating within the City.  By 28E
Agreement, entered into on November 1, 1990, Forest City is a part of LFNIA
Comprehensive Plan and all solid waste generated within City limits shall go
to LFNIA.



CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE



 

106.01  Collection Service
 
106.06  Separation of Yard Waste Required


106.02  Collection Vehicles
 
106.07  Bulky Rubbish


106.03  Loading
 
106.08  Right of Entry


106.04  Frequency of Collection
 
106.09  Collection Fees


106.05  Location of Containers
 
106.10  Lien for Nonpayment



 



106.01    COLLECTION SERVICE.



The City shall provide for the collection of all solid waste except bulky
rubbish as provided in Section 106.07 within the City, with the exception of
Winnebago Industries and 3-M Company.



106.02    COLLECTION VEHICLES.



Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage
and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall
be leakproof, durable and of easily cleanable construction.  They shall be
cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution or insect breeding and shall be
maintained in good repair.



(IAC, 567-104.9[455B])



106.03    LOADING.



Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any
solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will
not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing
or loss of material.  Where spillage does occur, the material shall be
picked up immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the
vehicle or container and the area properly cleaned.



106.04    FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.



All solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least once
each week and from commercial, industrial and institutional premises as
frequently as may be necessary, but not less than once each week.



106.05    LOCATION OF CONTAINERS.



Containers for the storage of solid waste awaiting collection shall be places
outdoors at some easily accessible place by the owner or occupant of the
property served.



106.06    SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED.



All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other
solid waste accumulated on the premises and shall be composted or burned on
the premises in accordance with the provisions of Section 105.05 of this Code
of Ordinances or placed in acceptable containers and set out for collection.



106.07    BULKY RUBBISH.



Bulky rubbish which is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal
manner of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request in
accordance with procedures therefor established by the Council.



106.08    RIGHT OF ENTRY.



Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property
for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this
chapter; however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or
other residential buildings.



106.09    COLLECTION FEES.



The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by this chapter are
declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served and
there shall be levied and collected fees therefor in accordance with the
following:



(Goreham vs. Des Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449)



1.   Schedule of Fees.  The monthly fees for solid waste collection and
disposal service, used or available, are:



      A.   Residential Sanitation Fee         $5.25



      B.   Recycling                $4.00       
   



      C.   C.   All households will dispose of solid waste, using
solid waste containers of blue plastic bags.  All bags will have the name of
the City of Forest City on them.  The City shall sell a variance of 15-19
and 33-gallon solid waste container plastic bags, for the collection and
disposal of residential refuse and garbage.  The City shall sell a variance
of 15-19 gallon bags at a cost of $1.50 per bag, and 33-gallon bags at the
cost of $2.00 per bag.  In any event, the weight of the solid waste
container plastic bags, when full, shall not exceed 40 pounds.  The City of
Forest City will also sell by the case, waste container plastic bags, a
variance of 15-19 gallon bags at a cost of $375.00 per case, and 33-gallon
bags at the cost of $400.00 per case



(Subsection A-C - Ord. 801 - Aug. 19 Supp.)



      D.   White Goods: stoves, washers, dryers, freezers,
refrigerators, hot water heaters, furnaces, microwaves, dishwashers, etc. for
each appliance is $25.00.



      E..   Special Pickups: carpet, chairs, mattresses, box
springs, etc. is $10.00.



      F.   Dumpster Rental:




         Each dumpster, except shingles   $   30.00





         Each dumpster, with shingles      $   45.00




      G.   Tires: 




         Car   $   10.00





         Truck   $   15.00





         Tractor   $   25.00




      H.   Rates for commercial establishments, based on cubic yards
picked up each month, are as follows:



         Landfill Fee   $   5.25



         Minimum up to 2 cubic yards   $   16.00




         2 to 5 cubic yards   $   35.00





         6 to 10 cubic yards   $   76.00





         First 10 cubic yards   $   90.00





         Over 10 cubic yards, per cubic yard   $   6.00




All commercial establishments are allowed a five percent (5%) discount from
the above rate if they are recyclable cardboard pursuant to City standards.



(Subsection 1  – Ord. 796 – May 19 Supp.)



   2.   Payment of Bills.  All fees are due and payable under the same
terms and conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as
contained in Section 92.04 of this Code of Ordinances.  Solid waste
collection service may be discontinued in accordance with the provisions
contained in Section 92.05 if the combined service account becomes
delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section 92.08 relating to lien
notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent account.



106.10    LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.



Except as provided for in Section 92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner
of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof are jointly and
severally liable for fees for solid waste collection and disposal.  Fees
remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises
served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for
collection in the same manner as property taxes. 



(Ord. 729 – Sep. 12 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



CHAPTER 107
RECYCLING



 

107.01  Definitions
 
107.06  Disposal


107.02  Residential Recycling
 
107.07  Prohibited Materials


107.03  Collections
 
107.08  Recycling Computer and Electronic Waste Required


107.04  Containers
 
107.09  Recycling Costs for Computers and Electronic Waste


107.05  Scavenging Prohibited
 



 



107.01    DEFINITIONS. 



For use in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases are defined:



   1.   “Computer and electronic waste” means computer monitors,
TVs, computers, keyboards, input devices, printers, scanners, video and
surveillance cameras, fax machines, stereos, DVD players, VCRs, cordless
phones and speakers.



   2.   “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms within a structure
which are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one family.



   3.   “Family” means any number of persons living together in a
room or rooms comprising a single household unit.



   4.   “Non-recyclable materials” means and includes solid waste,
refuse, construction debris and other materials for which there are no
appropriate existing recycling markets.



   5.   “Recyclable materials” means and includes aluminum cans and
containers, tin cans, glass bottles and jars (made of clear, green or brown
glass), plastic bottles and jugs, newspapers, junk mail, corrugated
cardboard, and such materials as the City may by resolution designate or
delete from time to time.



   6.   “Recycling” means the process of collecting and preparing
recyclable materials and reusing the materials in their original form or
using them in manufacturing processes that do not cause the destruction of
the materials in a manner that precludes further use.



   7.   “Source separation” means the division or separation out
from the main body, making distinguishable from, isolating or secluding.



107.02    RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING. 



Every person living in a dwelling unit within the City shall:



   1.   Separate recyclable materials from non-recyclable materials. 
All recyclable materials shall beplaced in one container.



   2.   Empty, rinse clean and remove caps from all recyclable
materials, and remove labels and lids from all tin cans.



   3.   Store such materials in a clean and sanitary manner.



   4.   Place all recyclable materials at the curb side by 7:00 a.m. on
the designated day of pickup.



107.03    COLLECTIONS. 



Recyclable materials shall be made available for collection bimonthly and
shall be collected by the collector designated by the City.



107.04    CONTAINERS. 



Recyclable materials shall be placed for collection in containers designated
and labeled as recycling containers or by use of the appropriate recycling
logo as designated by the City.  The containers shall have a capacity of no
less than 20 gallons or more than 30 gallons and shall be rubber or plastic,
cylindrical in shape, and must have exterior handles and a lid.  The maximum
empty container weight shall not exceed 10 pounds.  Said containers shall be
yellow in color and shall be purchased from the City.  Only containers
purchased from the City shall be used.



   1.   All persons shall maintain the recycling containers in a
sanitary condition and shall replace lost or damaged containers at their own
expense within ten (10) days of receiving written notice to do so from the
collector of recyclable materials.



   2.   Noperson shall place yard waste or any other non-recyclable
materials in a recycling container.



   3.   The containers shall become a fixture and a part of the real
estate upon which the dwelling unit is located, and shall be sold and/or
transferred with said real estate upon which the dwelling unit is located,
and shall not be removed from the site of the dwelling unit except for repair
and replacement.



107.05    SCAVENGING PROHIBITED. 



Ownership of recyclable materials placed for collection shall be vested in
the collector designated by the City.  No person other than the collector
shall take or collect any recyclable materials placed for collection. 
Nothing in this section shall preclude a person from disposing of recyclable
materials with commercial recyclers or salvage yards.  This section does not
preclude all persons other than the collector designated by the City from
conducting drives for the collection of recyclable materials.



107.06    DISPOSAL. 



Recyclable materials collected within the City shall not be burned or
deposited in any landfill except with the express, written consent of the
City, nor shall they be otherwise disposed of in any way or manner which is
contrary to applicable law, statute, ordinance, rule or regulation.



107.07    PROHIBITED MATERIALS. 



No person within the City shall dispose of appliances, used oil, batteries,
yard waste (as defined in Section 105.02), tires, hypodermic needles and
syringes, liquid paint and household hazardous materials except in the manner
described herein:



   1.   Yard waste must be disposed of as required in Chapter 105.



   2.   All other materials described in this section shall be disposed
of pursuant to the rules established by the City.



107.08    RECYCLING COMPUTERS AND ELECTRONIC WASTE REQUIRED.



Every person living in a dwelling unit or using a commercial business within
the City shall recycle computer and electronic waste and anyone who fails to
recycle computer or electronic waste shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor.



107.09    RECYCLING COSTS FOR COMPUTERS AND ELECTRONIC WASTE.



The fee for recycling computer monitors, televisions or copying machines is
$17.25 each.  The price for recycling a printer will be $6.90 each.  All
other listed electronics shall be recycled at no cost.  In the event that
the entire contents of a pickup truck, trailer or dump truck is made up of
computers and electronic waste, the same shall be priced at a premium price
of $0.25 per pound.



CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE



 

110.01  Franchise Granted
 
110.06  Extension of Company Facilities


110.02  Term
 
110.07  Relocation of Company Facilities


110.03  Rules and Regulations
 
110.08  Confidential Information


110.04  Construction
 
110.09  Force Majeure


110.05  Maintenance
 
110.10  Hold Harmless



 



110.01    FRANCHISE GRANTED. 



The City hereby grants a nonexclusive franchise to Aquila (hereinafter called
“Grantee”), its lessees, successors and assigns.  Grantee is hereby
granted the right, privilege, franchise, permission and authority to
construct, maintain, operate and extend in the present and future streets,
alleys, avenues, bridges, public rights-of-way and public places as are now
within the present or future limits of the City, a natural gas distribution
system for the purpose of supplying natural gas or processed gas for all
purposes to the inhabitants of the City and consumers in the vicinity
thereof, and for the distribution of natural gas from or through the City to
points beyond the limits thereof.  The City further grants Grantee the
right, permission and authority to lay, install, maintain and operate over,
across and along all of the streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, public
rights-of-way and public places of the City all mains, services, pipes,
conduits and appliances necessary or convenient for transmitting,
transporting, distributing and supplying natural gas for all purposes for
which it may be used, and to do all other things necessary and proper in
providing natural gas service to the inhabitants of the City and in carrying
on such business.



110.02    TERM. 



The rights and privileges granted by this franchise shall remain in effect
for a period of twenty-five (25) years from and after the effective date of
the ordinance codified by this chapter. † 6



110.03    RULES AND REGULATIONS. 



This franchise is granted subject to all conditions, limitations and
immunities now provided for, or as hereafter amended, and applicable to the
operations of a public utility, by the laws of the State.  The rates to be
charged by Grantee for service within the present or future corporate limits
of the City and the rules and regulations regarding the character, quality
and standards of service to be furnished by Grantee shall be under the
jurisdiction and control of such regulatory body or bodies as may, from time
to time, be vested by law with authority and jurisdiction over the rates,
regulations and quality and standards of service to be supplied by Grantee. 
Provided, however, should any judicial, regulatory or legislative body,
having proper jurisdiction, take any action that precludes Grantee from
recovering from its customers any cost associated with services provided
hereunder, then Grantee and the City shall renegotiate the terms of this
franchise in accordance with the action taken so as to allow Grantee to be
made whole economically.  In determining the rights and duties of the
Grantee, the terms of this chapter shall take precedence over any conflicting
terms or requirements contained in any other ordinance enacted by the City.



110.04    CONSTRUCTION. 



Any pavements, sidewalks or curbing taken up and any and all excavations made
shall be done in such a manner as to cause only such inconvenience to the
inhabitants of the City and to the general public as is reasonably necessary;
and repairs and replacements shall be made promptly by Grantee, leaving such
properties in as good a condition as existed immediately prior to
excavation. 



110.05    MAINTENANCE. 



Grantee agrees that for the term of this grant, it will use its best efforts
to maintain facilities and equipment sufficient to meet the current and
future energy requirements of the City, its inhabitants and industries. 
While maintaining its facilities and equipment, Grantee shall obtain permits
as required by ordinance, except that in emergency situations, Grantee shall
take immediate unilateral actions as it determines are necessary to protect
the public health, safety and welfare; in which case, Grantee shall notify
the City as soon as reasonably possible.



110.06    EXTENSION OF COMPANY FACILITIES. 



Upon receipt and acceptance of a valid application for service, Grantee
shall, subject to its own economic feasibility criteria, make reasonable
extensions of its distribution facilities to serve customers located within
the current or future corporate limits of the City.  No obligation shall
extend to, or be binding upon, Grantee to extend its facilities if Grantee
is, for any reason, unable to obtain and deliver an adequate energy supply.



110.07    RELOCATION OF COMPANY FACILITIES. 



If the City elects to change the grade of or otherwise alter any street,
alley, avenue, bridge, public right-of-way or public place for a public
purpose, Grantee, upon reasonable notice from the City, shall remove and
relocate its facilities or equipment situated in the public rights-of-way, if
such removal is necessary to prevent interference and not merely for the
convenience of the City, at the cost and expense of Grantee.  If the City
orders or requests Grantee to relocate its facilities or equipment primarily
for non-public purposes or the primary benefit of a commercial or private
project, or as a result of the initial request of a commercial or private
developer or other non-public entity, and such removal is necessary to
prevent interference and not merely for the convenience of the City or other
right-of-way user, Grantee shall receive reimbursement for the cost of such
relocation as a precondition to relocating its facilities or equipment.  The
City shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its public works
projects so as not arbitrarily to cause Grantee unreasonable additional
expense in exercising its authority under this section.  The City shall also
provide a reasonable alternative location for Grantee’s facilities.



110.08    CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. 



The City acknowledges that certain information it might request pursuant to
this franchise may be of a proprietary and confidential nature.  If Grantee
requests that any information provided by Grantee to the City be kept
confidential due to such proprietary or commercial value, the City and its
employees, agents and representatives shall maintain the confidentiality of
that information.  If the City is requested or required by legal or
administrative process to disclose any such confidential information, the
City shall promptly notify Grantee of such request or requirement so that
Grantee may seek an appropriate protective order or other relief.  The City
shall use all reasonable efforts to ensure that the confidentiality of
Grantee’s confidential information is maintained.



110.09    FORCE MAJEURE.



It shall not be a breach or default under this franchise if either party
fails to perform its obligations hereunder due to Force Majeure.  Force
Majeure shall include, but not be limited to, the following:  (1) physical
events such as acts of God, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires,
freezing, storms, floods, washouts, explosions, breakage or accident or
necessity of repairs to machinery, equipment or distribution or transmission
lines; (2) acts of others such as strikes, work-force stoppages, riots,
sabotage, insurrections or wars; (3) governmental actions such as necessity
for compliance with any court order, law, statute, ordinance, executive order
or regulation promulgated by a governmental authority having jurisdiction;
and any other causes, whether of the kind herein enumerated or otherwise not
reasonably within the control of the affected party to prevent or overcome. 
Each party shall make reasonable efforts to avoid Force Majeure and to
resolve such event as promptly as reasonably possible once it occurs in order
to resume performance; provided, however, that this provision shall not
obligate a party to settle any labor strike.



110.10    HOLD HARMLESS.



Grantee, during the term of this franchise, agrees to save harmless the City
from and against all claims, demands, losses and expenses arising out of the
negligence of Grantee, its employees or agents, in the constructing,
operating and maintaining of distribution and transmission facilities or
appliances of Grantee; provided, however, that Grantee need not save harmless
the City from claims, demands, losses and expenses arising out of the
negligence of the City, its employees or agents. 



 


Notes

6 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  Ordinance No.588, granting a natural gas franchise for
the City, was passed and adopted on June 5, 2000.



CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC UTILITY



 

111.01  ISCC Electric Tariff No. 1
 
111.07  Normal Installation Furnished by Electric Utility


111.02  Rate Schedule
 
111.08  Readings of Two or More Meters


111.03  Sales Tax
 
111.09  Meter Deposit


111.04  Fuel and Purchased Power Cost Adjustment
 
111.10  Different Rates and Terms Prohibited


111.05  Late Payment Fee
 
111.11  Readings to Be Placed on Bill


111.06  Utility Deposit
 
111.12  Net Metering Policy and Rates



 



111.01    ISCC ELECTRIC TARIFF NO. 1. 



The Forest City Municipal Utility ISCC Electric Tariff No. 1, placed by
Resolution No. 75-76-14, on October 20, 1975, in the office of the Clerk, and
a duplicate copy of the tariff sent to the State Utilities Board for review
and inspection and approval, which was granted, is adopted as the official
ISCC Electric Tariff No. 1 of the Forest City Municipal Utility.  The tariff
is adopted by reference and shall constitute the rules and regulations
governing the utility.



111.02    RATE SCHEDULE.



Effective June 15, 2019.  The rates for electric service are as follow :



   1.   Residential.



      Applicable to:  Residential customers for all domestic uses in
single-family dwellings and individually metered apartments within the
service territory of the City of Forest City Municipal Electric Utility,
including use of motors of not more than 5 horsepower individual capacity. 
This schedule also applies to all rural residential customers.



      Monthly Rate:



         Customer Charge (no kWh)      $6.89 per meter




         Plus





         Energy Charge—All kWh @      10.3 cents per kWh




   2.   Small Commercial Services.



      Applicable to:  Any commercial, industrial, city or farm load
within the service territory of the Forest City Municipal Electrical Utility,
for all purposes, where the monthly consumption is less than 5,000 kWh



      Service Available:  Single-phase, 60 hertz, 120/240-volt, 400
amp max., 3-wire, single meter; or three-phase, 60 hertz, 240/120 V, 208Y/120
V, or 480Y/277 V, 4-wire, single meter.



      Monthly Rate:



         Customer Charge (no kWh)      $9.60 per meter




         Plus





         Energy Charge—All kWh @      11.1 cents per kWh





   3.   Large Commercial Service.




      Applicable to:  Any commercial, industrial, city, or farm load
within the Forest City Municipal Electric Utility service territory, for all
purposes, where the monthly consumption is more than 5000 kWh and the demand
is less than 1000 kWh.



      Service Available:  60 hertz, three-phase, 240/120 V, 208Y/120
V, or 480Y/277 V, 4-wire, or standard primary voltage available at point of
delivery.  Special voltages may be provided at the discretion of the
utility.  Utility furnishes only one transformer bank and/or one meter



      Monthly Rate:



         Customer Charge          $15.20 per meter




         Plus





         Energy Charge—All kWh @      5.5 cents per kWh





         Plus





         Demand Charge—All KW @      $9.35 per KW




      Metered Demand:  The metered demand for any month shall be the
maximum kilowatt demand established by the customer for any thirty-minute
interval during the month as indicated or recorded by a demand meter.



      Power Factor Adjustment:  If the customer’s average monthly
power factor falls below 90%, leading or lagging, the utility may adjust the
metered demand by the ratio of 90% to the measured average monthly factor in
percent.  Example:



         Metered Demand = 739 KW




         Average Monthly Power Factor = 73.0%





         Ratio = 90/73 = 1.2329





         Adjusted Demand = (739)(1.2329) = 911 KW




      Adjusted Demand:  The adjusted demand consists of the metered
demand adjusted for power factor, if applicable.




      Billing Demand:  The billing demand shall be the maximum
measured thirty-minute integrated demand in the billing month, but not less
than ninety percent (90%) of the maximum thirty-minute demand established in
the three preceding summer months, or not less than seventy-five percent
(75%) of the maximum thirty-minute demand established in the seven preceding
non-summer months.  The summer months are defined as the period of use May
15 through September 15 (July through October billing months).





      Primary Metering:  The utility will furnish and install primary
metering when service is taken by the customer and metered at primary
voltage.  The customer owns and installs all necessary primary and
transformers beyond point of service.  A 2% discount will apply to demand
and energy charges to allow for losses and investment return.




      If service is taken at primary voltage (that is, customer owns
primary and transformers) and metered at secondary voltage, a 1% discount
will apply to demand and energy charges to allow for investment return.




      Measurement of Demand and Energy:  When there are two or more
demand and energy metering installations on the customer’s premises, the
metered quantities shall be determined by adding together the separate meter
readings before application of the rate, unless special provisions are agreed
to by the utility.  At the customer’s request, and at the customer’s
expense, and at the Utility’s discretion, the Utility may install special
metering that will allow coincident demand billing.




   4.   Industrial Service.



      Applicable to:  Any commercial, industrial, city, or farm load
within the Forest City Municipal Electric Utility service territory, for all
purposes, where the monthly demand is more than 1000 kW.



      Service Available:  60 hertz, three-phase, 240/120 V, 208Y/120
V, or 480Y/277 V, 4-wire, or standard primary voltage available at point of
delivery.  Special voltages may be provided at the discretion of the
utility.  Utility furnishes only one transformer bank and/or one meter.



      Monthly Rate:



         Customer Charge         $300.00 per customer




         Plus





         Energy Charge—All kWh @      5.5 cents per kWh





         Plus





         Demand Charge—All KW @      $12.65 per KW




   Metered Demand:  The metered demand for any month shall be the maximum
kilowatt demand established by the customer for any thirty-minute interval
during the month as indicated or recorded by a demand meter.



   Power Factor Adjustment:  If the customer’s average monthly power
factor falls below 90%, leading or lagging, the utility may adjust the
metered demand by the ratio of 90% to the measured average monthly power
factor in percent.  Example:



      Metered Demand = 739 KW




      Average Monthly Power Factor = 73.0%





      Ratio = 90/73 = 1.2329





      Adjusted Demand = (739)(1.2329) = 911 KW




   Adjusted Demand:  The adjusted demand consists of the metered demand
adjusted for power factor, if applicable.



   Billing Demand:  The billing demand shall be the maximum measured
thirty-minute integrated demand in the billing month, but not less than
ninety percent (90%) of the maximum thirty-minute demand established in the
three preceding summer months, or not less than seventy-five percent (75%) of
the maximum thirty-minute demand established in the seven preceding
non-summer months.  The summer months are defined as the period of use from
May 15 through September 15 (July through October billing months).



   Primary Metering:  The utility will furnish and install primary
metering when service is taken by the customer and metered at primary
voltage.  The customer owns and installs all necessary primary and
transformers beyond point of service.  A 2% discount shall apply to demand
and energy charges to allow for losses and investment return.



   If service is taken at primary voltage (that is, customer owns primary
and transformers) and metered at secondary voltage, a 1% discount will apply
to demand and energy charges to allow for investment return.



   Measurement of Demand and Energy:  When there are two or more demand
and energy metering installations on the customer’s premises, the metered
quantities shall be determined by adding together the separate meter readings
before application of the rate, unless special provisions are agreed to by
the utility.  At the customer’s request, and at the customer’s expense,
and at the Utility’s discretion, the Utility may install special metering
that will allow coincident demand billing.



   5.   Street Lighting.




      Applicable to:  All street lighting for which single-phase 120
or 240 volt service is provided by Forest City Municipal Electric Utility.





      Service Available:  Single-phase, 60 hertz, 120/240 volt.





      Monthly Rate:





         Energy Charge—All kWh @      9.2 cents per kWh




   6.   Public Authorities.



      Applicable to:  Any load owned by the City of Forest City, with
service at any voltage, where service is provided by Forest City Municipal
Electric Utility.



      Service Available:  Any available voltage.



      Monthly Rate:



         Customer Charge (no kWh)      $2.30 per meter




            Plus




         Energy Charge—All kWh @      9.2 cents per kWh




(Sec. 111.02 – Ord. 793 – May 19 Supp.)




111.03    SALES TAX.



Sales tax will be added to all bills for electrical service in compliance
with the provisions of the laws of Iowa.



111.04    FUEL AND PURCHASED POWER COST ADJUSTMENT. 



Forest City Municipal Electric Utility may, at its discretion, implement a
fuel and purchased power cost adjustment to compensate the City for
variations in the cost of fuel for the generating plant or for purchased
power.  At the time the adjustment is implemented, the calculation used to
arrive at the adjustment will be developed, and the adjustment will be
applied to all kWh billed by the Forest City Municipal Electric Utility.



(Ord. 717 – Apr. 11 Supp.)



111.05    LATE PAYMENT FEE. 



Customers’ monthly bills on all rates will be computed at the net rate and
there will be added to the total bill a sum equal to one and one-half percent
(1½%) of the total utility bill (for water, sewer, solid waste collection
and electricity), which will be collected from customers who fail to pay the
net bill on or before the 20th day of the month.



111.06    UTILITY DEPOSIT. 



There is required from every customer served a total deposit equal to a
one-month high bill and which is intended to guarantee the payment of bills
for water, sewer, solid waste collection and electric utility services.



111.07    NORMAL INSTALLATION FURNISHED BY ELECTRIC UTILITY. 



The municipal electric utility shall furnish, as a normal installation,
adequate facilities to supply and meter the energy and anticipated maximum
thirty-minute demand of the customer.  Each normal installation shall
include facilities for one-three phase transformation.  When the customer
requires facilities in excess of normal installation, the electric department
will provide such facilities at the customer’s expense with charges on a
rental or lease basis.  The City, at its option, may allow the customer to
continue existing meters on other rates unless the customer elects at his or
her own expense to alter wiring in order to receive all energy at demand
meters, provided the City may permit meter readings to be combined for
billing with respect to installations existing on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter where deemed equitable by the Council.



111.08    READINGS OF TWO OR MORE METERS.



Each transformer and metering installation shall be billed as a single
customer; provided, however, where two or more meters are existing or
required from one transformer bank, the metered quantities shall be combined
for billing purposes.  If the customer desires billing in such cases on the
basis of the maximum thirty-minute coincident demand, the customer shall pay
the extra cost of demand metering facilities required to meter coincident
demands.  Meter readings at two or more premises or from more than one
transformer bank will not be combined for billing purposes.



111.09    METER DEPOSIT.



A minimum deposit of twenty dollars ($20.00) may be charged and collected
from each customer for each meter installed, which sum shall be held in trust
as security for the payment of such electricity as may be used through said
meter.



111.10    DIFFERENT RATES AND TERMS PROHIBITED.



It is unlawful to sell any electric energy upon different or more favorable
terms than those fixed in this chapter.  All contracts between persons and
customers for furnishing electric energy and especially contracts specifying
terms or rates other than those enumerated in this chapter are hereby
prohibited.



111.11    READINGS TO BE PLACED ON BILL.



Present and previous meter readings, if ascertainable, must be placed on each
bill rendered to customers.



111.12    NET METERING POLICY AND RATES.



The City of Forest City shall allow individuals and businesses, who own real
property located within City limits, to receive credit for privately
generated electric loads supplied to the grid controlled by the Municipal
Electric Utility.  Any loads up to a maximum of 60 kWh, supplied from the
owner’s property to the grid, shall be credited to the homeowner’s bill
at the same rate as the owner is charged for power by the City.  Prior to
receiving Net Metering treatment, a property owner must comply with the
applicable established Net Metering regulations and receive written
permission from the City of Forest City.  Any solar panels, wind mills, and
other power generating structures must comply with all other applicable
ordinances.



(Ord. 750 – Oct. 15 Supp.)



CHAPTER 112
TELEPHONE FRANCHISE



 

112.01  Franchise Granted
 
112.05  Indemnification


112.02  Location of Equipment
 
112.06  Nonexclusive


112.03  Restoration of Property
 
112.07  Protection of Company


112.04  Franchise Subject to City Ordinances
 



 



112.01    FRANCHISE GRANTED.



Winnebago Coop Telephone Association, a corporation organized under the laws
of the State of Iowa (the “Company”), its successors and assigns are
hereby granted the right, privilege and authority for a term of twenty-five
(25) years from and after the adoption, approval and final acceptance of the
ordinance codified in this chapter† 7 to construct, maintain and operate a
telephone system within the present and future corporate limits of the City;
and said Company, its successors and assigns are granted the right, privilege
and authority to construct and install all necessary poles, towers, conduits,
manholes, wires, cables, fixtures and apparatus over, across and under the
right-of-way of the streets and alleys of the City and over and across any
private lands therein, upon proper proceedings in eminent domain for the said
period of time, and for said purposes upon the following terms and conditions.



112.02    LOCATION OF EQUIPMENT.



All poles and fixtures erected, operated and maintained by the Company under
and by virtue of this chapter shall be located, erected and maintained under
the supervision and direction of the Council of the City and shall be so
located so as not to permanently interfere with or obstruct the free public
use of or travel over any street or alley, or permanently interfere with the
repairs of same.



112.03    RESTORATION OF PROPERTY.



After the placing of any cable, conduit or manhole, or the erection of any
pole or fixture, or the removal of any such, the Company, at its own expense,
shall restore the surface of the street, alley or sidewalk which was
disturbed by it to the condition in which it was found.  The work of
restoring the street, alley or sidewalk as aforesaid, shall be done under the
supervision of the Streets and Alleys Committee of the Council.



112.04    FRANCHISE SUBJECT TO CITY ORDINANCES.



The franchise is granted subject to all ordinances now in force in the City
and such other reasonable regulations by ordinances as may be enacted by the
City.



112.05    INDEMNIFICATION.



The Company shall hold the City free and harmless from any and all damages of
every kind and character whatsoever caused by the construction, operation or
maintenance of said telephone lines, fixtures and equipment.



112.06    NONEXCLUSIVE.



Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as granting unto said Company an
exclusive right or franchise for the use of said streets or alleys for said
purposes or to prevent the grant of similar privileges to other individuals
or corporations for like purposes.



112.07    PROTECTION OF COMPANY.



The City shall pass such ordinances as the Council may deem necessary or
advisable for the due, legal and complete protection of the Company in the
enjoyment of all its rights and privileges granted to it by this chapter, and
shall attach penalty of fine for interference with or damage to the property
of the Company.



(Ord. 800 - July 19 Supp.)



 


Notes

7 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  Ordinance No. 549, adopting a telephone franchise for
the City, was passed and adopted on March 17, 1997.



CHAPTER 113
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE



 

113.01  Grant of Franchise
 
113.04  Notice


113.02  Terms of the Franchise
 
113.05  Equal Protection


113.03  Assignment or Transfer
 



 



113.01    GRANT OF FRANCHISE.



A nonexclusive right is hereby granted to Cablevision IV, Ltd. (hereinafter
referred to as the “Grantee”), its successors and assigns, beginning
September 18, 1995, to establish, construct, operate, maintain, repair,
replace, renew, reconstruct and remove a cable system across public property
in the City limits for a term of five (5) years† 8 , in accordance with the
laws and regulations of the United States of America and the State of Iowa
and the ordinances and regulations of the City, including the nonexclusive
right, privilege and authority:



   1.   To sell and supply audio and video communication service to
persons within the City;



   2.   To use public property within the City;



   3.   To engage in such further activities within the City as may now
or hereafter be consistent with the generally accepted principles applicable
to the operation of a cable television system.




It is expressly agreed to by the City and Grantee that the franchise shall
renew automatically for an additional 10 years in the event that all the
terms and conditions of Section 113.02 are completed.




113.02    TERMS OF THE FRANCHISE.



The grant of the franchise shall be on the following terms and conditions:



   1.   The Grantee shall comply with all terms and conditions of
Chapter 115 of this Code of Ordinances.



   2.   The Grantee shall continue to provide one channel dedicated for
public, educational and governmental access.  The City shall be responsible
for establishing rules and regulations pertaining to the administration of
this access channel.  Except where Federal and State law and the Grantee’s
contractual obligations apply, Grantee will not move any PEG channel without
a minimum of thirty days’ notice to the City’s Cable Commission.



   3.   The Grantee shall allow any customer within the City to block
out one channel at no charge to the customer.  Any additional channels
blocked out may be assessed a one-time charge for the service.



   4.   All areas within the City not served by the Grantee shall be
served within five years of the effective date of the franchise, service to
said areas to be constructed at the rate of 20% per year.  Any exception to
this subsection shall be governed by Chapter 115 and any other pertinent
sections thereof.



   5.   The City shall receive 1% of the gross service fees.



   6.   Grantee shall provide, at no cost to either the City or
customers of the Grantee, a channel for Waldorf College, Forest City, Iowa,
when the current system is upgraded to 35 channels.



   7.   Grantee shall provide a copy of all reports required under 47
CFR Ch. 1, Section 76.403 and Section 76.611 filed with the Federal
Communications Commission to the City.



   8.   It is expressly understood the Grantee herein shall upgrade the
system located within the corporate area of the City to provide for a two-way
communication capability system-wide with a minimum of 77 channel capacity. 
It is also expressly agreed by the Grantee that over and above any upgrade
heretofore mentioned or any upgrade contemplated herein will include
compression when available and as needed.  This upgrade will be completed by
December of 1999.



   9.   All educational channels, both current and future, will be
upgraded with sufficient equipment to be able to transmit onto the system,
said equipment will be provided only in the event of a system upgrade under
subsection 8.  This equipment includes a modulator or its equivalent, which
is sufficient to transmit audio and video onto the system.



   10.   Grantee will provide cable service to each public building and
school at no charge.  In addition to the cable service, Grantee will provide
a line to the building, one converter and one outlet.



   11.   If and when menu-based channel offerings are available in
Mason City, Iowa, the same option for menu-based channel offerings will be
completed within the City of Forest City.



   12.   The existing system will be upgraded from 30 channels to 35
channels within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, or January 1, 1997, whichever date comes first.



113.03    ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER.



The Grantee shall not assign or transfer any right granted under the
franchise to any other person, company or corporation without prior consent
of the Council, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, provided
that the Grantee shall have the right to assign the franchise to a
corporation wholly owned by the Grantee or to a limited partnership of which
the Grantee is a general partner without prior consent of the City.  No such
approval shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by
any other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest
of the Grantee in the franchise or cable system in order to secure
indebtedness.



113.04    NOTICE.



Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or
response to be served upon the City or Grantee shall be in writing and shall
be deemed to have been duly given to the required party five (5) business
days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed
envelope by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, at a post office
or branch thereof regularly maintained by the U.S. Postal Service. 



113.05    EQUAL PROTECTION.



In the event the City enters into a franchise, permit, license, authorization
or other agreement of any kind with any other person or entity, other than
the Grantee, to enter into the City’s streets and public ways for the
purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable
service to any part of the service area, the material provisions thereof
shall be reasonably comparable to those contained herein, in order that one
operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another and to
provide all parties equal protection under the law.



 


Notes

8 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  Ordinance No. 543, adopting a cable television
franchise for the City, was passed and adopted on October 21, 1996.



CHAPTER 114
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE



 

114.01  Franchise Granted
 
114.05  Indemnification


114.02  Location of Equipment
 
114.06  Nonexclusive


114.03  Restoration of Property
 
114.07  Protection of Company


114.04  Franchise Subject to City Ordinances
 
114.08  Additional Regulations



 



114.01    FRANCHISE GRANTED. 



Winnebago Coop Telephone Association, a corporation organized under the laws
of the State of Iowa (hereinafter referred to as the “Company”), its
successors or assigns, are hereby granted the right, privilege and authority
for a term of twenty-five (25) years from and after the adoption, approval
and final acceptance hereof,† 9 to construct, maintain and operate a cable
television system within the present and future corporate limits of the City;
and said Company, its successors and assigns are granted the right, privilege
and authority to construct and install all necessary poles, towers, conduits,
manholes, wires, cables, fixtures and apparatus over, across and under the
right-of-way of the streets and alleys of the City and over and across any
private lands therein, upon proper proceedings in eminent domain for the said
period of time, and for said purposes upon the following terms and conditions.



114.02    LOCATION OF EQUIPMENT. 



All poles and fixtures erected, operated and maintained by said Company under
and by virtue of this chapter shall be located, erected and maintained under
the supervision and direction of the Council and shall be so located so as
not to permanently interfere with or obstruct the free public use of or
travel over any street or alley, or permanently interfere with the repairs of
same.



114.03    RESTORATION OF PROPERTY. 



After the placing of any cable, conduit or manhole, or the erection of any
pole or fixture, or the removal of any such, said Company, at its own
expense, shall restore the surface of the street, alley or sidewalk which was
disturbed by it to the condition in which it was found.  The work of
restoring the street, alley or sidewalk as aforesaid, shall be done under the
supervision of the Streets and Alleys Committee of the City Council.



114.04    FRANCHISE SUBJECT TO CITY ORDINANCES. 



This franchise is granted subject to all ordinances not in force in said City
and such other reasonable regulations by ordinances as may be enacted by said
City.



114.05    INDEMNIFICATION. 



Said Company shall hold the City free and harmless from any and all damages
of every kind and character whatsoever caused by the construction, operation
or maintenance of said cable television lines, fixtures and equipment.



114.06    NONEXCLUSIVE. 



Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as granting unto said Company an
exclusive right or franchise for the use of said streets or alleys for said
purposes or to prevent the grant of similar privileges to other individuals
or corporations for like purposes.



114.07    PROTECTION OF COMPANY. 



The City shall pass such ordinances as the Council may deem necessary or
advisable for the due, legal and complete protection of said Company in the
enjoyment of all its rights and privileges granted to it by this grant or
franchise, and shall attach penalty of fine for interference with or damage
to the property of said Company.



(Ord. 800 - July 19 Supp.)



114.08    ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.



   1.   The Grantee shall comply with all terms and conditions of
Chapter 115 of this Code of Ordinances.



   2.   The Grantee shall continue to provide one channel dedicated for
public, educational and governmental access.  The City shall be responsible
for establishing rules and regulations pertaining to the administration of
this access channel.  Except where Federal and State law as well as
Grantee’s contractual obligations apply, Grantee will not move any PEG
channel without a minimum of thirty (30) days’ notice to the Forest City
Cable Commission.



   3.   The Grantee shall allow any customer within the City to block
out one channel at no charge to the customer.  Any additional channels
blocked out may be assessed a one-time charge for the service.



   4.   All areas within the City not served by the Grantee shall be
served within five years of effective date of the franchise, service to said
areas to be constructed at the rate of 20% per year.  Any exception to this
subsection shall be governed by Section 115.08 of this Code of Ordinances and
any other pertinent sections thereof.



   5.   The City shall receive 1% of the gross service fees.



   6.   Grantee shall provide, at no cost to either the City or
customers of Grantee, a channel for Waldorf College, Forest City, Iowa, when
the current system is upgraded to 35 channels.



   7.   Grantee shall provide a copy of all reports required under 47
CFR Ch. 1, Section 76.403 and Section 76.611 filed with the Federal
Communications Commission to the City.



   8.   It is expressly understood the Grantee herein shall upgrade the
system located within the corporate area of Grantor to provide for a two-way
communication capability system-wide with a minimum of 77 channels
capacity.  It is also expressly agreed by the Grantee that over and above
any upgrade heretofore mentioned or any upgrade contemplated herein will
include compression when available and as needed.  This upgrade will be
completed by December, 1999.



   9.   All educational channels, both current and future will be
upgraded with sufficient equipment to be able to transmit onto the system;
said equipment will be provided only in the event of a system upgrade under
subsection 8 of this section.  This equipment includes a modulator or its
equivalent, which is sufficient to transmit audio and video onto the system.



   10.   Grantee will provide cable service to each public building and
school at no charge.  In addition to the cable service, Grantee will provide
a line to the building, one converter and one outlet.



   11.   If and when menu-based channel offerings are available in Lake
Mills, Iowa, the same option for menu-based channel offerings will be
completed with the City.



 


Notes

9 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  Ordinance No. 550, adopting a cable television
franchise for the City, was passed and adopted on March 17, 1997.



CHAPTER 115
CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS



 



115.01  Purpose and Scope
 
115.20  Alternatives to Revocation


115.02  Definitions
 
115.21  Service Rules and Regulations


115.03  Grant of Authority
 
115.22  Subscriber Service Rates


115.04  Compliance with Applicable Law
 
115.23  Billing Practices and Customer Lists


115.05  Signal Quality
 
115.24  Franchise Fees


115.06  Minimum System Capacity
 
115.25  Maps, Plats and Reports


115.07  Operation and Maintenance
 
115.26  Service to the City and Other Public or Private Institutions


115.08  Line Extensions
 
115.27  Public Service Installations


115.09  Service Standards Deviations
 
115.28  Change of Control of Grantee


115.10  Continuity of Service
 
115.29  Inspection


115.11  Cable Commission; Complaint Procedures
 
115.30  Filings and Communications with Regulatory Agencies


115.12  Performance Evaluation Hearings; Reviews
 
115.31  Discrimination Prohibited


115.13  Program Alternation Prohibited
 
115.32  Rights of Individuals


115.14  Removal of Existing Antenna
 
115.33  Hold Harmless


115.15  Safety Requirements
 
115.34  Insurance


115.16  Conditions of Street Occupancy
 
115.35  Rights Reserved to the City


115.17  Placement and Use of Poles
 
115.36  Miscellaneous Provisions


115.18  Removal of Equipment
 
115.37  Acceptance of Terms


115.19  Revocation of Franchise
 
115.38  Cable Television Commission




 



115.01    PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



The purpose of this chapter is to require that all cable communication
systems within the corporate limits of the City operate pursuant to City
franchise and this chapter and to regulate such activity consistent with the
Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1992, the Federal Communications
Commission rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, as well as any and
all other applicable statutes and regulations.



115.02    DEFINITIONS.



Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a
different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, have the following meanings.  The definitions shall also control
and be applicable to the Grantee’s cable communication franchise.



   1.   “Affiliate” means an entity which owns or controls, is
owned or controlled by or is under common ownership with the Grantee.



   2.   “Basic service” means any service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals representing at least
one of each of the three major broadcast networks (ABC, CBS and NBC), at
lease one public television channel and retransmission of one or more
channels available at no costs to Grantee via satellite broadcast and all PEG
channels.



   3.   “Cable service” means (i) the one-way transmission to
subscribers of video programming or other programming service and (ii)
subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such
video programming or any other lawful communication service.



   4.   “Cable system” means a facility, consisting of a set of
closed transmission paths and associated with antennas, cables, wires, lines,
towers, waveguides, or other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities
designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving,
transmitting, amplifying and distributing audio, video and other forms of
electronic or electrical signals, designed to provide cable service and other
service to subscribers.  Any such system that serves only subscribers in one
or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control or
management, no part of which system uses City right-of-way, is not included
in this definition.



   5.   “Channel” means the portion of the electrical magnetic
frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of
delivering a television channel.



   6.   “Converter” means a device capable of providing more than
the number of channels on a standard television receiver.



   7.   “FCC” means Federal Communications Commission.



   8.   “Franchise” means a legal contract between the City and a
person or company, which contract contains terms and conditions for
constructing and operating a cable communication system.



   9.   “Grantee” means a person holding a franchise to operate a
cable communication system within the corporate limits of the City.



   10.   “Gross revenues” means the monthly cable service revenues
received by the Grantee from subscribers of the cable system, including (but
not limited to) revenues from subscriber rates, pay services, leased
channels, installations, connection charges, data transmission, microwave
activity, local advertising revenues; provided, however, such phrase does not
include revenues received from any national advertising carried on the cable
system, nor shall such phrase include any taxes on cable service which are
imposed directly or indirectly on any subscriber thereof by any governmental
unit or agency, and which are controlled by the Grantee on behalf of such
governmental unit or agency.



   11.   “Net revenues from sale of pay television” means gross
revenues derived from the sale of pay television less the cost to the Grantee
for acquiring the signal.



   12.   “Outlet” means the point of connection of the cable or
wire to a television or radio receiver.



   13.   “Pay television” means cable programming services which
are billed at a separate rate on a per-view, per-channel, per-tier or any
other subscription basis.



   14.   “PEG channels” means channels dedicated to public service,
educational or governmental purposes.



   15.   “Subscriber” means a person who purchases cable television
services.



115.03    GRANT OF AUTHORITY.



   1.   A Grantee shall have a nonexclusive right and privilege to
construct, erect, operate, maintain and remove, in, upon, along, across,
above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places,
including any and all public easements held by the City for utility purposes,
now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto,
in the City poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other
cable conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in
the City of a cable communications system, to be used for the sale and
distribution of cable services to the residents of the City; subject,
however, to the following:



      A.   Laws and Regulations.  The Grantee shall comply with all
governmental laws, ordinances, rules or regulations as may now or hereafter
be applicable thereto.  The City herein reserves the right to amend this
chapter, following the procedure provided in paragraph B.



      B.   Periodic Evaluation Sessions.  The field of cable
communications is a relatively new and rapidly changing one which may see
many regulatory, technical, financial, marketing and legal changes during the
term of the franchise.  Therefore, in order to provide for a maximum degree
of flexibility in this franchise, and to help achieve a continued advanced
and modern system, the following evaluation provisions will apply:



         (1)   The City may require, at its sole discretion,
evaluation sessions at any time during the term of the franchise; provided,
however, there shall not be more than one evaluation session during any
two-year period.



         (2)   Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation
session include (but are not limited to) rates, channel capacity, the system
performance, programming, access, municipal uses of cable, subscriber
complaints, judicial rulings, FCC rulings and any other topics the City or
Grantee deem relevant.



         (3)   During an evaluation session, Grantee shall fully
cooperate with the City and shall provide without cost such reasonable
information and pertinent documents as the City may request, within 30 days
of said request, to perform the evaluation.



         (4)   If at any time during its evaluation, the City
determines that reasonable evidence exists of inadequate system performance,
the City may require Grantee to perform tests and analysis directed toward
such suspected inadequacies at Grantee’s expense, if the system performance
is not substantially in compliance, and at the City’s expense if the system
performance is in substantial compliance.  Grantee shall fully cooperate
with the City in performing such testing.  Any testing and analysis shall be
completed within 60 days of written notice to commence the testing or
analysis.



         (5)   As a result of an evaluation session, the City or
Grantee may determine that a change in the terms of the franchise may be
required, that the system or franchise requirements should be updated,
changed, revised, or that additional services should be provided.  If the
change is consistent with the terms of this chapter, the needs of the City
and existing state-of-the-art (or due to regulatory, technical, financial,
marketing, inflation or legal requirements) and implementation of a change
would not unreasonably add to the cost of providing cable television
services, Grantee and the City, will in good faith, negotiate the terms of
the change any required amendment to this chapter.  In the event the parties
are unable to agree upon the terms of the change in any required amendment to
this chapter, the matter shall be submitted to arbitration, pursuant to
Sections 115.20(2) and (3).  The parties acknowledge Section 115.20(2)
requires written agreement to arbitrate; however, solely for the purpose of
this subsection, the parties expressly waive the written agreement as a
condition precedent for arbitration.  Upon adoption of such a chapter
amendment, if one is required, the change will become effective and Grantee
shall accept the same.



      C.   Restrictions.  The Grantee shall not use or occupy or
permit public property or private property to be used or occupied or do or
permit anything to be done on or about public property or private property
which will, in any manner:



         (1)   Impair the owner’s interest in or title thereto;



         (2)   Impair any mortgage or lease as may now or
hereinafter be applicable thereto;



         (3)   Adversely affect the then value or character
thereof;



         (4)   Cause or be likely to cause structural damage
thereto, or any part thereof;



         (5)   Cause or be likely to cause any damage or injury
to any utility service available thereto;



         (6)   Create a public or private nuisance, cause
offensive or obnoxious vibrations, noise, odor or undesirable effect or
interfere with the safety, comfort or convenience of the owner thereof and
persons lawfully on or about the same;



         (7)   Violate the rules, regulations and requirements of
any person furnishing utilities or services thereto; and



         (8)   Make void or voidable any insurance then in force
affecting the same or cause an increase in the rates applicable thereto.



   2.   The Grantee may use private property within the City with the
owner’s permission and subject to the above restrictions contained in
subsection 1 of this section.



   3.   The term of a franchise shall be as set forth in a separate
ordinance for each Grantee, such period not exceeding fifteen (15) years.



115.04    COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW.



All cable communication activity within the City shall be undertaken pursuant
to a franchise granted by the City and shall be in accord with the provisions
of this chapter.  A Grantee shall at all times comply with the rules and
regulations of the FCC as well as with all other applicable Federal and State
statutes.  FCC rules and regulations shall in all cases be controlling if
any part of this chapter or any cable television franchise is in conflict
with any FCC rules and regulations.



115.05    SIGNAL QUALITY.



   1.   Because of the rapid technological advances occurring in
telecommunications, any set of standards is quickly outdated, and because
this chapter seeks a continually updated cable system with highest quality
technical performances and delivered services, the performance standards
shall be regularly reviewed.  The local Cable Commission shall review the
technical performance standards, tests and measurements, and complaints
concerning the Grantee’s system at a minimum of every three (3) years in
connection with its regular performance reviews, and shall recommend to the
Council, such updated standards to reflect the needs of the community.  The
Council may, after public hearing, adopt such updated standards which shall
then be binding on all Grantees when adopted and until succeeded by yet
another set of standards.  Any standards adopted will not exceed current FCC
standards.



   2.   The Grantee will meet or exceed FCC Standards as to system
performance on all cable television channels as measured at any subscriber
terminal.



115.06    MINIMUM SYSTEM CAPACITY.



As minimum system requirements, the Grantee shall undertake all reasonable
steps to install and maintain a cable network designed with an initial
capacity equivalent to a minimum of thirty-five (35) channels.  Capacity
shall be increased as demand for additional channel utilization exceeds this
minimum, and the then present technology renders such upgrade cost-effective
to the Grantee and not cost prohibitive to subscribers.  Compliance with
this section may be reviewed by the Cable Commission at any time.



115.07    OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.



Grantee shall perform the following with regard to the operation and
maintenance of a cable television system.



   1.   Maintain an office or agent within five miles of the City,
which office shall be open to the public during all normal business hours
with a directory listed telephone.  Grantee will provide adequate telephone
line capability and staff to enable requests for repairs to be received on a
24-hour basis, regardless of the location.  Grantee’s overall staffing
shall include a system manager with the authority to make timely resolutions
of operating emergencies and subscriber complaints.



   2.   Maintain a repair and maintenance crew which responds to
subscriber complaints or requests for service with appropriate repairs or
service within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of the complaint, except in
service outages beyond Grantee’s control, e.g., acts of God.  Upon failing
to correct total loss of customer service within 24 hours, an amount equal to
one-thirtieth of the subscriber’s monthly charges shall be credited to the
subscriber’s account for each 24-hour period following the receipt of the
subscriber complaint during which no service is provided.  No charge shall
be made to the subscriber for maintenance or repair services unless the
service call is a result of damage caused by the subscriber.



   3.   Construct and maintain all parts of the cable system in good
working condition throughout the entire franchise period.



   4.   Provide service calls to subscribers for all malfunctions,
damage or system related problems not caused by subscriber misuse or
negligence.



   5.   Disconnect cable service without charge after request of a
subscriber for termination of service.



   6.   Render efficient service, make repairs promptly and properly,
and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible.  Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by
notice and shall occur during periods of minimum system use.



   7.   Distribute television signals to subscribers as require by the
Federal Communications Commission.



   8.   Take all reasonable steps to assure that its operation does not
interfere with television reception of persons who are not subscribers, and
that its system does not interfere with obstruct or hinder in any manner, the
operation of the various other utilities and or electronic or radar
surveillance systems serving the residents of the City.



115.08    LINE EXTENSIONS.



Grantee shall extend its trunk line or otherwise make available upon request
its cable television system to all existing residences located within the
City limit as they existed on January 1, 1994, and shall further service all
newly annexed areas as rapidly as possible, unless the Grantee obtains a
waiver of this section as hereafter provided.  Grantee may, under the
following procedures, defer service for those residences where, due to unique
circumstances such a sparse population or unusually difficult construction
conditions, this requirement would constitute a hardship to Grantee. 
Whenever an extension of service otherwise required by this section would be
economically non-compensatory, a Grantee may seek waiver of this requirement
pursuant to the following procedures. 



   1.   The Grantee shall file with the Cable Commission and publish
once each week for two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City a map of the City on which there shall be clearly and precisely shown
those residences to which the Grantee intends to defer service together with
a notice, stating:



      A.   That the extension of service to such areas or residences
would be economically non-compensatory to the Grantee and that a written copy
of the projected costs and revenues from an extension of service to such
areas or residences is on file with the City Clerk and at the Forest City
Public Library for examination and copying by any interested person.



      B.   That any interested person opposed to a waiver of the
requirements of this section for all or any part of the area or residences
covered by the notice may file a written protest in the office of the City
Clerk on or before a date specified which shall not be less than 10 days
after the date of last publication.



   2.   A copy of such notice shall be mailed by ordinary mail to each
residence within the affected area for which a wavier is sought to the extent
the identity of such residents is reasonably available to Grantee or to
“occupants” if such identity is not reasonably available.  A failure of
a resident to receive a copy of the notice by mail shall not be a basis for a
denial of a waiver or withdrawal of a waiver granted pursuant to this section.



   3.   If no written objection is filed by 4:00 p.m. on the date
specified in the notice, the waiver shall be granted by the Cable Commission.



   4.   When a protest is filed for any residence for which a deferral
is sought, the Cable Commission shall, after notice and for public hearing,
approve or deny the deferral of service.  At the hearing an affected
property owner, resident, or other interested party may provide evidence or
argument that the Grantee’s projected costs of service are unreasonably
high or their projected revenues are unreasonably low.



   5.   After hearing the evidence and arguments, the Cable Commission
may grant the requested waiver if it finds the Grantee will realize a rate of
return of less than 8% per annum from an extension of such services as
determined by dividing projected gross receipts from customer services to the
residences for which the waiver is sought by the costs of construction of
such extensions or if it finds due to other unique or unusual circumstances
the requirements of this section would constitute a hardship to the Grantee.



   6.   Any final action by the Cable Commission shall be reviewable by
a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to State and Federal law.



115.09    SERVICE STANDARDS DEVIATIONS.



The Grantee shall continue, through the term of the franchise, to maintain
the technical, operational, maintenance and service standards set forth in
its franchise agreement with the City and this chapter.



115.10    CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.



   1.   All subscribers shall receive continuous service, except for
circumstances beyond Grantee’s control, so long as their financial and
other obligations to the Grantee are satisfied.  In the event that the
Grantee elects to rebuild or modify the system, the Grantee shall take all
reasonable steps within its control to act so as to ensure that all
subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service.  In the event of a
change of Grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, the
Grantee shall cooperate with the City and new Grantee or operator in
maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers.  During such interim
period, Grantee shall be entitled to the cable system revenues for any period
during which it actually operates the system, in order to cover the
reasonable costs for continuing its services.



   2.   Upon request of the City, the Grantee shall fully inform the
City of any cessation of operations of six or more hours’ duration, its
causes, and the steps being taken to remedy such cases.



   3.   The Grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with
the provisions of the franchise, or suffer any enforcement or penalty
relating thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by
strikes, acts of God, power outages, or other events reasonably beyond its
ability to control.



115.11    CABLE COMMISSION; COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.



   1.   The Forest City Cable Television Commission shall be
responsible for the City’s continuing administration of the franchise,
including Grantee’s complaint procedures.



   2.   The Grantee shall establish standard procedures for receiving,
acting upon, and resolving subscriber complaints which procedures, at the
City’s request, shall be in writing and filed with the Clerk’s office. 
Such procedures shall be subject to review by the Forest City Cable
Television Commission.



   3.   The Grantee shall keep at its general offices a computer
printout of service complaints.  The computer printout of complaints and
resolution shall be made available upon request for inspection by the Forest
City Cable Television Commission.  All service complaint records shall be
retained on file for a period consisting of the most recent three years.



   4.   When a number of similar complaints have been made or when
there appears in the judgment of the Cable Television Commission
circumstances indicative of unreliable and/or poor quality cable service
being delivered to subscribers, the Commission shall notify the Grantee in
writing and establish a meeting in order to give the Grantee an opportunity
for comment.  The Commission and the Grantee shall negotiate in good faith
in an effort to resolve the problem.



   5.   The Cable Television Commission may, should the circumstances
appear to merit such attention, require that such tests and analyses be
supervised and/or conducted by an independent professional engineer hired at
the cost of the City and supervised by an employee of the Grantee, with the
requisite expertise in cable television operations who is not a member of the
staff of the Grantee.  The engineer responsible for the testing shall sign
all records of the special tests and shall prepare a report interpreting the
results of the tests and recommending corrective actions to be taken by the
Grantee.  The Grantee shall forward to the Cable Television Commission such
records without revisions, deletions or substitutions.



115.12    PERFORMANCE EVALUATION HEARINGS; REVIEWS.



On the third, sixth and ninth anniversaries of the effective date of the
franchise, the Forest City Cable Television Commission may require review of
this franchise, subject to the following:



   1.   Any such review shall be open to the public and announced in
the official City newspaper.  The Grantee shall reasonably notify its local
subscribers of review sessions by announcing same through either public
notices or inserts in subscribers’ billing statements.



   2.   Topics to be discussed at any scheduled review session may
include (but will not be limited to) franchise fees, free or discounted
services, application of new technologies, system performance, services
provided, programming offered, customer complaints, privacy, amendments to
this chapter, judicial and FCC rulings, line extension policies, and existing
or perspective rules or regulations of the Grantee or the City.



   3.   Members of the general public may add topics by requesting of
the City that such topics be added to the agenda of its meeting.



   4.   During a review or evaluation of the City, the Grantee shall
fully cooperate with the City and shall provide such non-confidential
information and documents as the City may need to reasonably perform the
review.



115.13    PROGRAM ALTERATION PROHIBITED.



All programs of broadcasting stations carried by a Grantee shall be carried
in compliance with FCC regulations.  However, a Grantee herein shall be
required to do the following:



   1.   Minimum Carriage Requirements.  The Grantee shall comply with
the must-carry rules as contained in Federal law for one each of the
following, NBC, CBS, ABC, and PBS.



In the event the cable company is unable to carry NBC, ABC, CBS or PBS, the
Grantee shall provide, at no cost to the customer/consumer, switchers to
switch from the cable system to the customer’s antenna.



   2.   Educational Access Channels.  The Grantee shall provide a
minimum of two educational access channels.



   3.   Notice Requirements for PEG Channel Movement.  Prior to the
movement of a PEG channel, Grantee shall comply with the notice requirements
under the granting ordinance of the franchisee and give a minimum of sixty
(60) days’ notice of any proposed movement of a PEG channel to the Cable
Commission before changing the channel location of a channel.



115.14    REMOVAL OF EXISTING ANTENNA.



A Grantee shall in no way tamper with or remove an existing television
antenna without the owner’s consent.



115.15    SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.



A Grantee shall at all times employ reasonable care in the installation and
maintenance of a cable television system.  A Grantee shall install and
maintain its wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in accordance with
the requirements of all applicable local, State and Federal codes.  All
structures, lines, equipment, or connections in, over, under, or upon the
streets, sidewalks, alleys and public ways or places of the City shall at all
times be kept and maintained in a safe condition and in good working order
and repair and shall not in any way interfere with any installation of the
City of any public utility serving the City.  When installation of cable on
poles is insufficient, or when holders of other public licenses or franchises
have both installed underground cable, then in that event, the cable used by
the Grantee shall be installed underground.



115.16    CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY.



A Grantee shall be allowed to use the City streets, alleys, right-of-ways and
other public ways and places, including any and all public easements held by
the City for utility purposes, for the construction and operation of its
cable television system pursuant to the granting of a franchise; provided,
however, in such use and occupancy a Grantee shall be subject to all
applicable City ordinances and that all transmission and distribution
structures, lines and equipment erected by the Grantee within the City shall
be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of
streets, alleys and other public ways and places and to cause minimum
interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places.  The
Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit
issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its cables to permit the
moving of buildings.  The expense of such temporary removal, raising or
lowering of cables shall be paid by the person requesting the same and the
Grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance.  The
Grantee shall be given not less than twenty (20) days’ advance notice to
arrange for such temporary cable changes.



115.17    PLACEMENT AND USE OF POLES.



   1.   Where poles or other wire-holding structures already serving
the City are available for use by any Grantee, but Grantee does not make
arrangements for such use, the City may require a Grantee to use such poles
and structures if the City determines that the public health, welfare, and
safety would be enhanced thereby and if the terms of the use available to the
Grantee are just and reasonable.



   2.   No Grantee shall erect or maintain any poles or aerial wires or
cables within any underground districts which have been established by the
City or which may hereafter be established by the City.  Furthermore, no
poles or aerial wires or cables shall be installed or maintained in any area
where other utilities are required by law to be underground or where such
other utilities are already installed underground with the exception of
service drops located on private property.



115.18    REMOVAL OF EQUIPMENT.



Upon the expiration or termination of any cable television franchise, a
Grantee shall remove its poles, cable television transmission and
distribution systems, and all other appurtenances from the streets, sidewalks
and public ways of the City, when ordered to do so by the City, and shall
restore the same to their original condition, unless, upon such expiration or
termination the cable system, including all such equipment is transferred to
a subsequent Grantee to be utilized pursuant to a franchise granted by the
City; however, the Grantee shall in all cases have the right of abandonment
of its property.  If a Grantee refuses to remove such items or fails to
remove such items in a reasonable time after notification by the City, the
City shall have the right and authority to remove such poles, cable
television transmission and distribution systems and other appurtenances from
the City streets, sidewalks, and public ways.



115.19    REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE.



   1.   In the event of a material breach of terms and conditions of
the Grantee’s franchise and the subsequent failure of the Grantee to
correct its default under or noncompliance with the terms of its franchise,
the Council may revoke the franchise and all rights of Grantee thereunder,
provided the City gives the Grantee adequate notice and an opportunity to
cure.  A material breach of the franchise shall include, but not be limited
to:



      A.   The Grantee’s violation of any material provision of
the franchise; or



      B.   The Grantee’s attempt to evade any material provision
of the franchise or to practice any fraud or deceit upon the subscribers, the
City or the general public; or



      C.   The Grantee’s failure to begin or complete system
construction or system extension as provided in the franchise; or



      D.   The Grantee’s material misrepresentation of a fact in
the application for or negotiation of the franchise or in any other
appearance before or document submitted to the Council or to subscribers.



   2.   The Council shall not revoke Grantee’s franchise if the
interruption in service is without fault of the Grantee or occurs as a result
of circumstances beyond its control; however, the Grantee shall not be
excused by mere economic hardship or by misfeasance or malfeasance of its
shareholders, directors, officers or employees.



   3.   Upon a material breach, the Cable Television Commission shall
make written demand that the Grantee immediately comply with any such
provision, rules, order or determination under or pursuant to its
franchise.  If the violation by the Grantee continues for a period of 60
days following such written demand without the submission of written proof
that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively and
expeditiously pursued, the Cable Television Commission may recommend
revocation of the franchise to the Council.  If recommended, the Cable
Television Commission shall cause to be served upon Grantee, at least 20 days
prior to the date of such Council hearing, a written notice of intent to
request such revocation and the time and place of the hearing.  Public
notice shall be given not less than four days or more than 20 days prior to
the hearing and shall include a description of the issue which the Council is
to consider.



   4.   The Council shall hear and consider the issue and shall hear
any person interested therein, and may determine in its discretion, whether
or not any violation by the Grantee of the franchise has occurred.



   5.   If the Council determines that a violation of the franchise has
occurred, the Council may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of the
Grantee shall be revoked and terminated unless there is compliance within
such period as the Council may fix, such period not to be less than 30 days,
provided no opportunity for compliance shall be granted for a violation by
reason of fraud or misrepresentation.



   6.   At the expiration of said period, the Council shall determine
whether Grantee has achieved compliance.  The Council then may revoke the
franchise forthwith on finding that Grantee has failed to achieve compliance
or may further extend the period, at its discretion.



115.20    ALTERNATIVES TO REVOCATION.



   1.   In the alternative to the foregoing remedies, if the Council
determines that the Grantee is in default of any provision of the franchise,
the Council may:



      A.   Foreclose on all or any part of any security including
without limitation, any bonds or other surety; provided, however, the
foreclosure shall only be in such a manner and such amount as the Council
reasonably determines is necessary to remedy the default.



      B.   Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek
other equitable relief.



      C.   Seek specific performance of any provision, which
reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damage.



      D.   In the case of a substantial default of a material
provision of the chapter, and after giving the Grantee ninety (90) days’
written notice, with the opportunity to be heard, and opportunity to cure,
assess a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day until the substantial
default is cured.  In the event that Grantee is prevented or delayed in the
performance of any of its obligations under the franchise by reasons of acts
of God, floods, fire, tornadoes, earthquakes, or other unavoidable
casualties, insurrection, war, riot, vandalism, strikes, sabotage, boycotts,
lockouts, labor disputes, shortage of qualified labor, freight embargo,
shortages or unavailability of materials or supplies, unusually severe
weather conditions, acts or omissions of the City or any other similar event
beyond the reasonable control of the Grantee, the Grantee shall have a
reasonable time under the circumstances to perform its obligations under the
franchise or to procure a substitute for such obligation which is subject to
the reasonable satisfaction of the City.



   2.   With the exception of subsection 1 herein, any controversy
between the City Council and the Grantee regarding the rights, duties or
liabilities of either party under this section may, upon written agreement by
both parties, be settled by arbitration conducted under the auspices of the
American Arbitration Association and in accordance with Chapter 679A of the
Iowa Code.  Such arbitration shall be before three (3) disinterested
arbitrators, one named by the City, one named by the Grantee, and one named
by the two thus chosen.  The decision of the arbitrators shall be conclusive
and shall be enforced in accordance with the laws of the State of Iowa.



   3.   Any final action by the City adverse to Grantee’s interest
and disputed by Grantee shall be reviewable by court of competent
jurisdiction pursuant to State and Federal law.



115.21    SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS.



A Grantee shall have the right to prescribe reasonable service rules and
regulations not inconsistent with this chapter and not inconsistent with the
laws of the State of Iowa and the United States of America.  A Grantee shall
also submit to the City, at the City’s request, the form of its service
agreements between the Grantee and its subscribers and shall furnish any
amendments or alterations to the service agreement.



115.22    SUBSCRIBER SERVICE RATES.



The City and the Grantee acknowledge that the City’s authority to regulate
rates of basic cable service is derived from Section 623 of the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission adopted pursuant to that section.  The right of
the City to regulate the basic cable rates of a Grantee shall be governed by
such statutes and regulations and any amendments or laws repealing and/or
replacing such statutes and regulations, as finally legally determined.



115.23    BILLING PRACTICES AND CUSTOMER LISTS.



   1.   No Grantee shall utilize any form of “proactive” billing
whereby an extra charge for optional programming or service is added to a
subscriber’s monthly bill without the subscriber’s prior express
permission or a prior specific request for such extra cost service.



   2.   No Grantee shall sell or otherwise make available a list of its
subscribers except as may be required by governmental agencies.



115.24    FRANCHISE FEE.



   1.   The franchisee shall pay to the City a franchise fee equal to
one percent (1%) of gross revenues received by the franchisee from the
operation of the cable system to provide cable services on a semiannual
basis.  For the purpose of this section, the 12-month period applicable
under the franchise for the computation of the franchise fee shall be a
calendar year unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City and the
franchisee.  The franchise fee payment shall be due and payable ninety (90)
days after the close of the preceding semiannual period.  Each payment shall
be accompanied by a report from a representative of the franchisee itemizing
the basis for the computation.



   2.   No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord
that the amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall such
acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the City
may have for further or additional sums payable under the provisions of this
section.



   3.   Any franchise fees which remain unpaid after the dates
specified above shall be delinquent and shall thereafter accrue interest at
the maximum legal rate until paid.



   4.   Upon request by the City, Grantee shall submit a statement of
revenues for the determination of whether franchise fees are accurately
calculated for the City operation.



   5.   Applicable State statutes of limitations shall apply to both
City and Grantee.



   6.   In the event the City shall elect to exercise rate regulatory
powers under the terms and provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act
of 1992, as amended, a Grantee shall provide full financial statements as may
be required by the FCC.



115.25    MAPS, PLATS AND REPORTS.



A Grantee shall submit to the line superintendent, upon request of the City,
maps and plats showing the trunk and distribution system of all existing and
proposed cable television installations in the City.  A Grantee shall make
periodic reports, at request of the City, concerning cable television
operations.  Grantee shall submit with such reports any and all business
records necessary to make a full and complete presentation of its cable
communication operations within the City.



115.26    SERVICE TO THE CITY AND OTHER PUBLIC OR PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS.



   1.   PEG (Education and Government Access) Channels.  The Grantee
shall initially provide at least two dedicated channels for educational and
governmental use, and once the requirements of subsection 2 of this section
are met, the Grantee shall provide at least one additional dedicated channel
for educational and governmental use.  There shall be no charge made to
users of the channels by the Grantee, unless this practice is specifically
prohibited by FCC regulations.  Furthermore, a Grantee shall also supply
installation to public and private buildings and institutions as specified in
this section and Section 115.27 upon the request of the Board of Directors of
the Forest City Community School District, the Waldorf College Board of
Directors, the Forest City Council or other governing bodies, as the case may
be, unless it is commercially impracticable for the Grantee to comply with
this requirement.



   2.   Additional Channels.  Whenever the channels as required by
this section are in use during eighty percent (80%) of the weekdays (Monday
through Friday) for 80% of the time during any consecutive three-hour period,
with at least fifty percent (50%) of the programming being original and not
duplicated, for six (6) consecutive weeks, the Grantee shall make an
additional channel available for the same purpose.



   3.   Local Origin of Studio and Production Facilities.  The Grantee
shall provide for local origination of cable programs within six (6) months
of the granting of the franchise, including channel space and equipment as
defined in Section 114.02(9), as amended, for the purpose of transmitting
signals onto the cable system.



   4.   Interconnection of Schools with the Master Head-End.  The
Grantee shall provide for interconnection from the schools, both public and
private, to the cable system’s master head-end by two-way communications by
either bidirectional amplification or a second return line or an equivalent
current technology for the educational channels.  It is expressly understood
this will not obligate Grantee to connect schools, both public and private,
to the institutional network.



   5.   Instructional Television Fixed Service and Educational
Television Station Connections.  The Grantee shall connect with the master
control of any instructional television system in the franchise area.



   6.   FM Radio Station Connections.  The Grantee shall be required
to connect to and carry all local FM educational radio stations.  The City
or Cable Commission is required to obtain the Retransmission Consent
Agreement.



   7.   Converters for Nonstandard Channels.  The Grantee shall
provide, at cost, converters for each television set at the schools, both
public and private, or other local buildings designated by the City for
nonstandard channels.



   8.   Telecast of Educational Activities.  The Grantee shall not
cablecast, tape, reproduce or otherwise convey to its subscribers the
activities of any recognized educational authority, public or private,
without the written consent of the governing body of such authority.



115.27    PUBLIC SERVICE INSTALLATIONS.



A Grantee shall, without charge for installation, maintenance, or service,
make single installations of its basic and expanded basic cable television
service facilities with one converter at each of the following locations of
the City:



   1.   City Hall;



   2.   Fire Station;



   3.   Police Station;



   4.   Public Library;



   5.   North Central Regional Library;



   6.   All public school buildings of the Forest City Community School
District;



   7.   All accredited private schools for elementary and secondary
education, but not to include day care centers and nursery schools;



   8.   Waldorf College;



   9.   Senior Citizens’ Center;



   10.   All existing hookups to public buildings as of September 1,
1995.



115.28    CHANGE OF CONTROL OF GRANTEE.



Prior approval of the City Council shall be required where ownership or
control of more than 50 percent of the right of control of a Grantee is
acquired by a person or several persons acting in concert, none of whom
already own or control 50 percent or more of such right of control,
singularly or collectively; provided that no approval will be required for a
transfer, assignment or sale to an affiliate.  Any such acquisition
occurring without prior approval of the City Council shall constitute a
violation of a Grantee’s franchise, provided that such approval was not
unreasonably withheld.  No such approval shall be required, however, for a
transfer in trust, by mortgage, by any other hypothecation, or by assignment
of any rights, title or interest of the Grantee in the franchise or cable
system in order to secure indebtedness.



115.29    INSPECTION.



The City shall have the right to inspect any construction or installation
work performed by any Grantee in the City and make such inspections as it
finds necessary to insure compliance with the terms of any cable television
franchise, this chapter or other pertinent provisions of law.



115.30    FILINGS AND COMMUNICATIONS WITH REGULATORY AGENCIES.



Copies of all petitions, applications and communications and reports
submitted by any Grantee to the FCC, Securities and Exchange Commission, or
any other Federal or State regulatory commission or agency having
jurisdiction in regard to any matters affecting cable television within the
corporate limits of the City shall also be submitted to the City at the
City’s request.



115.31    DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.



A Grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, services, service facilities,
rules and regulations, or in any other respect, make or grant any undue
preference or advantage to any person, or subject any person to prejudice or
disadvantage based upon race, religion, creed, color, sex, national origin or
ancestors.  Nothing in this section, however, shall be deemed to prohibit
promotional campaigns to stimulate basic service subscriptions to the system
or deemed to prohibit the charging of special rates for such service.  A
Grantee shall not discriminate against any person on the basis of race,
religion, creed, color, sex, national origin or ancestry.  Furthermore, a
Grantee shall also take affirmative action to recruit employees from members
of minority groups.



115.32    RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.



   1.   No signals shall be transmitted from a subscriber terminal for
purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the
express written permission of the subscriber.  The request for such
permission shall be·contained in a separate document with a prominent
statement that the subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge
of its provision.  The authorization shall be revocable at any time by the
subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever.  Such authorization shall
be required for each type or classification of two-way cable communications
activity planned; except that the Grantee shall be entitled to conduct
system-wide or individually addressed “sweep” for the purpose of
verifying system, integrity, controlling return-path transmission, or billing
for pay services.



   2.   The Grantee and any of its agents or employees shall not,
without the specific written authorization of each subscriber involved, sell
or otherwise make available to any party, except as is necessary to the
conduct of Grantee’s business:



      A.   Lists including the name and address of such subscriber,
or



      B.   Any list which identifies the individual viewing habits
of such subscriber.



115.33    HOLD HARMLESS.



   1.   A Grantee shall at all times defend, indemnify, protect, and
hold harmless the City from and against any and all liability, losses, and
damage to property or bodily injury or death to any person including payments
made under workmen compensation laws, which may arise out of or be caused by
the erection, construction, replacement, removal, maintenance or operation of
a Grantee’s cable television system, and caused by any act or failure to
act on the part of a Grantee, its agents, officers or employees; provided
however, a Grantee shall not hold the City harmless for any activities or
omissions that are the result of gross negligence or deliberate acts or
omissions by the City, its officers, employees, or others who represent the
City.  A Grantee shall hold the City harmless against any damages resulting
from legal action which may be brought against it in connection with the
establishment or operation of a Grantee’s cable television system in the
City and shall defend at its own expense any action brought against the City
by reason of the erection, construction, replacement, removal, maintenance or
operation of a Grantee’s cable television system.



   2.   This hold harmless and indemnity agreement shall include any
claim arising out of the nonobservance by the Grantee of the provisions of
any laws, statutes, ordinances, resolutions, regulations or rules duly
promulgated by any governmental entity which may be applicable directly or
indirectly, to rights, privileges, and authority, and the obligations and
liabilities, assumed by the Grantee under the franchise, and/or the
nonobservance by the Grantee of any of the terms and conditions of the
franchise, and/or the granting of the franchise by the City.



   3.   The Grantee shall pay all reasonable expenses necessarily
incurred by the City in defending itself with regard to all damages, penal
ties or other claims resulting from the acts of the Grantee, its assigns,
employees, agents, invitees, or other persons.  Said expenses shall include
all out-of-pocket expenses such as attorney’s fees provided that the
Grantee is permitted to select said attorney.



115.34    INSURANCE.



A Grantee shall promptly provide, after the granting of a Grantee’s
franchise, public liability insurance for personal injuries and/or death
growing out of any one accident or other cause in the following amounts: 
$300,000 as to any one person, $500,000 as to any one occurrence for injury
or death to persons, and $100,000 for damages to property, with, as to
Grantee, so-called umbrella coverage of at least $1,000,000; worker’s
compensation insurance as provided by the laws of the State of Iowa as
amended; and automobile insurance with limits of not less than
$300,000/$500,000 of public liability coverage and automobile property damage
insurance with a limit of not less than $100,000 covering all automotive
equipment, with, as to Grantee, so-called umbrella coverage of at least
$1,000,000.  A Grantee shall maintain such insurance with insurance
underwriters authorized to do business in the State of Iowa and holding a
rating by Best of at least “A-.”  In addition, the City shall receive at
least 30 days’ prior written notice of any cancellation or change in any
said insurance policy or policies.  A Grantee shall furnish the City with a
certificate of insurance from Grantee’s carrier indicating that there is
such insurance coverage as herein provided.



115.35    RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY.



The City may, from time to time, add to, modify or delete provisions of this
chapter as it shall deem necessary in the exercise of its lawful police
powers provided that such additions or revisions are reasonable and do not
place an undue financial burden on the Grantee.  Such additions or revisions
shall be made only after a public hearing for which the Grantee shall have
received written notice at least thirty (30) days prior to such hearing.



115.36    MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   1.   Restoration of Ground Surface.  In case of any disturbance of
pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the Grantee shall, at its
own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the City, replace and
restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, or surface of any street or alley
disturbed, in as good a condition as before said work was commenced.



   2.   Alteration of Grade and Removing and Relocating Wires.  In the
event that during the term of the franchise the City shall elect to alter or
change the grade of any street, alley, or public way, the Grantee, upon
reasonable notice by the City, shall remove, relay, and relocate its poles,
wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures at its own
expense.  Upon written request, the Grantee shall remove and replace all
wires during movement of oversized loads at no charge to private or public
parties.



   3.   Tree Trimming.  The Grantee shall have the authority to trim
trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places of
the City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact
with the cables of the Grantee.  All trimming shall be done at the expense
of the Grantee.



115.37    ACCEPTANCE OF TERMS.



The Grantee acknowledges by the acceptance of this chapter and the franchise
ordinance that it has carefully read its terms and conditions and it is
willing to and does accept all the obligations of such terms and conditions
and further agrees that it will not set up as against the City the claim that
any provision of this chapter as adopted and any franchise granted hereunder
is unreasonable, arbitrary, invalid or void.



115.38    CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION.



There is hereby created and established as an administrative agency of the
City a commission to be entitled the Forest City Cable Television Commission.



   1.   Composition; Term.  The Commission shall consist of seven (7)
citizens of the City appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the
City Council, for staggered terms of four (4) years.  All members of the
Commission shall be residents of the City and subscribers of cable services
and it is recommended that at least one member be an officer, agent, employee
or board member of a public school system or other nonprofit organization
utilizing the services of a cable television franchise for educational or
other public service purposes.



   2.   Powers and Duties.  The powers and duties of the Commission
shall be as follows:



      A.   To exercise all powers and duties provided elsewhere in
this chapter.



      B.   To establish and promulgate such rules for the
implementation of the provisions of this chapter and as necessary to carry
out its functions as it shall deem necessary or useful, provided such rules
shall not exceed the scope of the provisions of this chapter and shall not be
in conflict with any provision of this chapter.



      C.   To receive and investigate such complaints, disputes or
disagreements as may be directed or referred to the City, between subscribers
or potential subscribers and Grantees of cable television franchises.



      D.   To resolve disputes or disagreement between subscribers
or potential subscribers and a Grantee of a cable television franchise should
such parties be unable to first resolve their dispute.  The Commission shall
conduct a public hearing upon any petition by any person seeking resolution
of a dispute concerning the operation of any franchise granted hereunder.  A
Grantee shall be provided with a copy of each petition promptly on receipt by
the City and shall be given not less than 10 days’ notice of a hearing on
such petition.  The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to rules adopted by
the Commission.  Following a hearing the Commission shall issue its finding
or determination which shall be final.  Any person aggrieved may seek relief
therefrom in the District Court of Iowa as provided by law.



      E.   To review and audit all reports, records, communications
or other documents submitted to the City by a cable television Grantee as
required by this chapter.



      F.   From time to time as the Commission shall deem
appropriate, to make recommendations to the Council for any amendments to
this chapter deemed by the Commission to be advisable.



      G.   From time to time, but less than every three (3) years,
to make reports to the Council on the status, progress and development of the
cable television service and programming in the City.



      H.   To confer with Grantees and advise on the interconnection
of their cable systems with other cable systems or communication systems.



      I.   To conduct evaluations of the system at least every three
(3) years with Grantees and make recommendations to the Council concerning
system improvements and amendments to this chapter.



      J.   To administer sanctions as authorized by this chapter for
failure to comply with the terms of this chapter or any franchise agreement
and to make such recommendations for action by the Council as otherwise
acquired by this chapter.



   3.   Compensation.  Members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation except that actual expenses incurred by a member in performance
of duties may be reimbursed in accordance with such procedures as are
established by the Commission and the finance officer of the City.



CHAPTER 116
REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION RATES



 

116.01  Authority
 
116.04  Notice of Rate Change


116.02  Rate Regulation Proceedings
 
116.05  Delegation of Power


116.03  Certification
 



 



116.01    AUTHORITY.



The City has the legal authority to administer and shall enforce against any
non-municipally owned cable television system operator, as permitted therein,
the provisions of Part 76, Subpart N of the Rules and Regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), concerning Cable Rate Regulation, 47
C.F.R. §§76.900 et. seq., as they currently read and hereafter may be
amended, which are herewith incorporated by reference.



116.02    RATE REGULATION PROCEEDINGS.



Any rate regulation proceedings conducted hereunder shall provide a
reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of any interested
party, including but not limited to, the City or its designee, the Cable
Operator, subscribers, and residents of the franchise area.  In addition to
all other provisions required by the laws of the State of Iowa and by the
City, and in order to provide for such opportunity for consideration of the
views of any interested party, the City shall take the following actions:



   1.   The City shall publish notice as provided in Section 362.3 of
the Code of Iowa and shall mail, by certified mail, to the Cable Operator a
notice of the intent to conduct a public proceeding on basic service tier
rates and/or charges for equipment to receive such basic service tier, as
defined by the FCC.



   2.   The public notice shall state, among other things, that cable
television rates are subject to municipal review and explain the nature of
the rate review in question; that any interested party has a right to
participate in the proceeding; that public views may be submitted in the
proceeding, explaining how they are to be submitted and the deadline for
submitting any such views; that a decision concerning the reasonableness of
the cable television rates in question will be governed by the Rules and
Regulations of the FCC; and that the decision of the City is subject to
review by the FCC.



   3.   The City shall conduct a public proceeding to determine whether
or not the rates or proposed rate increases are reasonable.  The City may
delegate the responsibility to conduct the proceeding to any duly qualified
and eligible individual or entity. If the City or its designee cannot
determine the reasonableness of a proposed rate increase within the time
period permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, it may announce the
effective date of the proposed rates for an additional period of time as
permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, and issue any other necessary or
appropriate order and give public notice accordingly.



   4.   In the course of the rate regulation proceeding, the City may
request additional information from the Cable Operator that is reasonably
necessary to determine the reasonableness of the basic service tier rates and
equipment charges.  Any such additional information submitted to the City
shall be verified by an appropriate official of the cable television system
supervising the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and
submitted by way of affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the
response is true and accurate to the best of that person’s knowledge,
information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry.



   5.   The City may request proprietary information, provided that the
City shall consider a timely request from the Cable Operator that said
proprietary information shall not be made available for public information,
consistent with the procedures set forth in Section 0.459 of the FCC Rules
and Regulations.  Furthermore, said proprietary information may be used only
for the purpose of determining the reasonableness of the rates and charges or
the appropriate rate level based on a cost-of-service showing submitted by
the Cable Operator.



   6.   The City may exercise all powers under the laws of evidence
applicable to administrative proceedings under the laws of the State of Iowa
and by the City to discover any information relevant to the rate regulation
proceeding, including, but not limited to, subpoena, interrogatories,
production of documents, and deposition.



   7.   Upon termination of the rate regulation proceeding, the City
shall adopt and release a written decision as to whether or not the rate or
proposed rate increase is reasonable or unreasonable, and, if unreasonable,
its remedy, including prospective rate reduction, rate prescription, and
refunds.



   8.   The City may not impose any fines, penalties, forfeitures or
other sanctions, other than permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, for
charging an unreasonable rate or proposing an unreasonable rate increase.



   9.   Consistent with FCC Rules and Regulations, the City’s
decision may be reviewed only by the FCC.



   10.   The City shall be authorized, at any time, whether or not in
the course of a rate regulation proceeding, to gather information as
necessary to exercise its jurisdiction as authorized by the Communications
Act of 1934, as amended, and the FCC Rules and Regulations.  Any information
submitted to the City shall be verified by an appropriate official of the
cable television system supervising the preparation of the response on behalf
of the entity, and submitted by way of affidavit or under penalty of perjury,
stating that the response is true and accurate to the best of that person’s
knowledge, information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry.



116.03    CERTIFICATION.



The City shall file with the FCC the required certification form (FCC Form
328) on September 1, 1993, or as soon thereafter as appropriate.  Thirty
days later, or as soon thereafter as appropriate, the City shall notify the
Cable Operator that the City has been certified by the FCC and that it has
adopted all necessary regulations so as to begin regulating basic service
tier cable television rates and equipment charges.



116.04    NOTICE OF RATE CHANGE.



With regard to the cable programming service tier, as defined by the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and the FCC Rules and Regulations,
and over which the City is not empowered to exercise rate regulation, the
Cable Operator shall give notice to the City of any change in rates for the
cable programming service tier or tiers, any change in the charge for
equipment required to receive the tier or tiers, and any changes in the
nature of the services provided, including the program services included in
the tier or tiers.  Said notice shall be provided within five (5) business
days after the change becomes effective.



116.05    DELEGATION OF POWER.



The City may delegate its powers to enforce this chapter to municipal
employees or officers (the “cable official”).  The cable official will
have the authority to:



   1.   Administer oaths and affirmations;



   2.   Issue subpoenas;



   3.   Examine witnesses;



   4.   Rule upon questions of evidence;



   5.   Take or cause depositions to be taken;



   6.   Conduct proceedings in accordance with this chapter;



   7.   Exclude from the proceeding any person engaging in contemptuous
conduct or otherwise disrupting the proceedings;



   8.   Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the
issues by consent of the parties; and



   9.   Take actions and make decisions or recommend decisions in
conformity with this chapter.



CHAPTER 117
REMOVAL OF UTILITY FACILITIES



 

117.01  Definitions
 
117.04  Appeal Procedure


117.02  Relocate or Remove
 
117.05  Violation


117.03  Notice
 



 




117.01    DEFINITIONS. 




For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.  When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in
the singular number include the plural number.



   1.   “Company” means any individual, partnership, cooperative,
business association, or corporation owning or operating, within the
corporate limits of the City, any facilities for furnishing electricity,
cable TV, and telephone to the public for compensation.



   2.   “Facilities” means any overhead electrical, cable TV, and
telephone transmission or distribution line, along with related equipment and
appurtenances.



   3.   “Person” means an individual, partnership, cooperative,
association, organization, corporation, or any lawful successor, transferee,
or assignee of said individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
organization, or corporation.



   4.   “Street” means each of the following which have been, or in
the future are, dedicated to the public, maintained under public authority,
and located within the City limits:  streets, roadways, highways, avenues,
lanes, alleys, sidewalks, City-owned easements, rights-of-way, and similar
public ways and extensions and additions thereto.



   5.   “Superintendent” means the “Superintendent of Electric
Transmission” of the City.



117.02    RELOCATE OR REMOVE. 



A company shall, at no expense to the City, relocate or remove, permanently,
any of its facilities when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, the same is
required by reason of removal of Forest City Municipal electric wires and
poles or any other company’s facilities, whether acting in a governmental
or proprietary capacity and any general program under which the City shall
undertake to cause all such facilities to be located underground.



117.03    NOTICE. 



The Superintendent shall give written notice to the company, whose facilities
are required to be moved.  Said notice shall include location of facilities
to be removed, the date by which facilities will be removed, and will be
mailed to the person responsible for the facilities within the City.



117.04    APPEAL PROCEDURE. 



Within 10 days of the mailing of the notice, heretofore discussed in Section
117.03, the company may file with the Clerk a written Notice of Appeal.  The
written Notice of Appeal shall state the location of the facilities to be
removed and the reason the company does not wish to remove said facilities. 
Within 30 days of the receipt of said notice, the Clerk shall place the
appeal on the agenda of a regularly scheduled Council meeting, or at a
special Council meeting called for the purpose of hearing the appeal.  The
Clerk shall give written notice to the company of the trust place of the
hearing.  At said hearing the company may present evidence.  The Council
shall make a final determination within 30 days of the hearing.



117.05    VIOLATION. 



Each day a violation of any provision of this chapter occurs shall be treated
as a separate offense.



CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS



 

120.01  License or Permit Required
 
120.04  Action by Council


120.02  General Prohibition
 
120.05  Prohibited Sales and Acts


120.03  Investigation
 
120.06  Amusement Devices



 



120.01    LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.



No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for
sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor control
license, wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171)



120.02    GENERAL PROHIBITION.



It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale, possess
or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the
Code of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil
penalty may be imposed for a violation thereof. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)



120.03    INVESTIGATION.



Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer permit, the
Clerk may forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an
investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts
averred in the application.  The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to
determine if they conform to the requirements of the City.  The Council
shall not approve an application for a license or permit for any premises
which does not conform to the applicable law and ordinances, resolutions and
regulations of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)



120.04    ACTION BY COUNCIL.



The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of the liquor
control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its approval
or disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application, necessary
fee and bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic Beverages
Division of the State Department of Commerce for such further action as is
provided by law. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])



120.05    PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.



A person or club holding a liquor license or retail wine or beer permit and
the person’s or club’s agents or employees shall not do any of the
following:



   1.   Sell, dispense or give to any intoxicated person, or one
simulating intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])



   2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on the
premises covered by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday, and between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday; however,
a holder of a license or permit granted the privilege of selling alcoholic
liquor, beer or wine on Sunday may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, beer or
wine between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. of the following
Monday, and further provided that a holder of any class of liquor control
license or the holder of a class “B” beer permit may sell or dispense
alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on Monday when that Monday is New
Year’s Day and beer for consumption off the premises between the hours of
8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is
the day before New Year’s Day.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b and 2k] & 123.150)



   3.   Sell alcoholic beverages, wine or beer to any person on credit,
except with a bona fide credit card.  This provision does not apply to sales
by a club to its members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide
registered guests or to retail sales by the managing entity of a convention
center, civic center or events center.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])



   4.   Employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the sale or
serving of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises
where sold.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])



   5.   In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow
the mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine or
any other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])



   6.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa
law, or knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])



   7.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the
premises covered by the license or permit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])



   8.   Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any
alcoholic liquor in any container except the original package purchased from
the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce and
except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate
consumption.  However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are mixed on the
premises and are not for immediate consumption may be consumed on the
licensed premises, subject to rules adopted by the Alcoholic Beverages
Division.



(Ord. 730 – Sep. 12 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])



   9.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or
receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or
adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents or remaining
contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly
possess any original package which has been reused or adulterated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])



   10.   Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee or
employees of the licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed
premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or other container which is
designed for the transporting of such beverages, except as allowed by State
law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])



   11.   Sell, give, possess or otherwise supply a machine which is
used to vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a
vaporized form.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])



   1.   12.   Permit or allow any person under twenty-one (21) years
of age to remain upon licensed premises unless over fifty percent (50%) of
the dollar volume of the business establishment comes from the sale and
serving of prepared foods or as otherwise allowed in this chapter.  This
provision does not apply to holders of a class “C” beer permit only.



(Ord. 711 – Oct. 10 Supp.)



   2.   13.   Any person 18, 19 or 20 years of age, may remain upon
a licensed premises when less than fifty percent (50%) of the dollar volume
of the business establishment comes from the sale and serving of prepared
foods under the following terms and conditions:



      A.   During the hours of operation there will be a full-time
person at the door checking ID’s to establish the age of all persons
entering said premises and using a reliable method of designating the persons
21 years of age or older.



      B.   During the hours of operation, any establishment
operating under this subsection shall be required to monitor periodically
throughout the evening to ensure that no individual under the age of 21 years
of age is consuming alcoholic beverages.



(Ord. 711 – Oct. 10 Supp.)



120.06    AMUSEMENT DEVICES.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.10C)



   1.   As used in this section an “electronic or mechanical
amusement device” means a device that awards a prize redeemable for
merchandise on the premises where the device is located and which is required
to be registered with the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals.



   2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
to participate in the operation of an electrical or mechanical amusement
device.



   3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing an electrical
or mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing
an electrical or mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a person
under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of an electrical or
mechanical amusement device.



   4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the
operation of an electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under
the age of 21.



CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS



 

121.01  Definitions
 
121.06  Refunds


121.02  Permit Required
 
121.07  Persons Under Legal Age


121.03  Application
 
121.08  Self-service Sales Prohibited


121.04  Fees
 
121.09  Permit Revocation


121.05  Issuance and Expiration
 



 



121.01    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)



   1.   “Carton” means a box or container of any kind in which ten
or more packages or packs of cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for
sale, sold or otherwise distributed to consumers.



   2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in
part of tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape
and irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored,
adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper
or cover made of paper or any other material.  However, this definition is
not to be construed to include cigars.



   3.   “Package” or “pack” means a container of any kind in
which cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or otherwise
distributed to consumers.



   4.   “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes or
tobacco products are sold, stored or kept for the purpose of sale or
consumption by a retailer. 



   5.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or
offers for sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for
consumption, cigarettes, irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number
of sales or who engages in the business of selling tobacco products to
ultimate consumers.



   6.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product display,
placement or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take
possession of the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the
retailer or employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a
restricted access location.



   7.   “Tobacco products” means the following:  cigars; little
cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready
rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco;
fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings,
cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco
prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or
otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.



121.02    PERMIT REQUIRED.



   1.   Cigarette Permits.  It is unlawful for any person, other than
a holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes at retail and no retailer
shall distribute, sell or solicit the sale of any cigarettes within the City
without a valid permit for each place of business.  The permit shall, at all
times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be easily seen
by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of business.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)



   2.   Tobacco Permits.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in
the business of a retailer of tobacco products at any place of business
without first having received a permit as a tobacco products retailer for
each place of business owned or operated by the retailer.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)




A retailer who holds a cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a
tobacco permit.  However, if a retailer only holds a cigarette permit and
that permit is suspended, revoked or expired, the retailer shall not sell any
cigarettes or tobacco products during such time.




121.03    APPLICATION.



A completed application on forms furnished by the State Department of Revenue
or on forms made available or approved by the Department and accompanied by
the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk.  Renewal applications shall
be filed at least five (5) days prior to the last regular meeting of the
Council in June.  If a renewal application is not timely filed, and a
special Council meeting is called to act on the application, the costs of
such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)



121.04    FEES.



The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows: 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)



 

FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:
 
FEE:


July, August or September
 
$ 75.00


October, November or December
 
$ 56.25


January, February or March
 
$ 37.50


April, May or June
 
$ 18.75



 



121.05    ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.



Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be
issued.  Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for
which it is issued and shall be nonassignable.  All permits expire on June
30 of each year.  The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for
a permit, and any permit issued, to the Iowa Department of Public Health
within thirty (30) days of issuance.



121.06    REFUNDS.



A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
City, except during April, May or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa. 



(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 & 453A.47A)



121.07    PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.



No person shall sell, give or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco products
or cigarettes to any person under eighteen (18) years of age.  The provision
of this section includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing cigarettes or
tobacco products from a vending machine.  If a retailer or employee of a
retailer violates the provisions of this section, the Council shall, after
written notice and hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for
such violation, assess the following:



   1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil
penalty in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00).  Failure to pay
the civil penalty as ordered under this subsection shall result in automatic
suspension of the permit for a period of fourteen (14) days.



   2.   For a second violation within a period of two (2) years, the
retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for
a period of thirty (30) days.  The retailer may select its preference in the
penalty to be applied under this subsection.



   3.   For a third violation within a period of three (3) years, the
retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and the retailer’s permit shall be suspended
for a period of thirty (30) days.



   4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three (3) years, the
retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and the retailer’s permit shall be suspended
for a period of sixty (60) days.



   5.   For a fifth violation with a period of four (4) years, the
retailer’s permit shall be revoked.




The Clerk shall give ten (10) days’ written notice to the retailer by
mailing a copy of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the
application for a permit.  The notice shall state the reason for the
contemplated action and the time and place at which the retailer may appear
and be heard. 




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])



121.08    SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.



Beginning January 1, 1999, except for the sale of cigarettes through a
cigarette vending machine as provided in Section 453A.36(6) of the Code of
Iowa, a retailer shall not sell or offer for sale cigarettes or tobacco
products, in a quantity of less than a carton, through the use of a
self-service display.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)



121.09    PERMIT REVOCATION.



Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by
the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of
Iowa or any rule adopted thereunder.  If a permit is revoked, a new permit
shall not be issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any
other person for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until
one year has expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the
contrary is shown to the Council.  The Clerk shall report the revocation or
suspension of a retail permit to the Iowa Department of Public Health within
thirty (30) days of the revocation or suspension.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)



CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



 



122.01  Purpose
 
122.11  Revocation of License


122.02  Definitions
 
122.12  Notice


122.03  License Required
 
122.13  Hearing


122.04  Application for License
 
122.14  Record and Determination


122.05  License Fees
 
122.15  Appeal


122.06  Bond Required
 
122.16  Effect of Revocation


122.07  License Issued
 
122.17  Rebates


122.08  Display of License
 
122.18  License Exemptions


122.09  License Not Transferable
 
122.19  Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations


122.10  Time Restriction
 




 



122.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against
fraud, unfair competition and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by
licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants.



122.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise
who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise
from house to house or upon the public street. 



   2.   “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to
solicit from house to house or upon the public street any contribution or
donation or any order for goods, services, subscriptions or merchandise to be
delivered at a future date.



   3.   “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a
temporary or itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such
business  hires, leases or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or
who operates out of a vehicle which is parked anywhere within the City
limits.  Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer, trader or
auctioneer, or conduct of such transient business in connection with, as a
part of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer
does not exempt any person from being considered a transient merchant.



122.03    LICENSE REQUIRED.



Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in the business of a transient
merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein provided is
in violation of this chapter.



122.04    APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



An application in writing shall be filed with the Clerk for a license under
this chapter.  Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name,
permanent and local address and business address if any.  The application
shall also set forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s
address, the nature of the applicant’s business, the last three places of
such business and the length of time sought to be covered by the license. 
An application fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall be paid at the time of filing
such application to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated therein.



122.05    LICENSE FEES.



The following license fees shall be paid to the Clerk prior to the issuance
of any license.



   1.   Solicitors.  In addition to the application fee for each
person actually soliciting (principal or agent), a fee for the principal of
ten dollars ($10.00) per year.



   2.   Peddlers or Transient Merchants.



      A.   For one day   $   15.00



      B.   For one week   $   25.00



      C.   For up to six (6) months   $   50.00



      D.   For one year or major part thereof   $   100.00



122.06    BOND REQUIRED.



Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant, an
applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a
bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of
Iowa.



122.07    LICENSE ISSUED.



If the Clerk finds the application is completed in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be
correct and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately.



122.08    DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times
while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective
customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all
requirements of this chapter.  Each transient merchant shall display
publicly such merchant’s license in the merchant’s place of business.



122.09    LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.



Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application.



122.10    TIME RESTRICTION.



All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses
are in force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.



122.11    REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



After notice and hearing, the Clerk may revoke any license issued under this
chapter for the following reasons:



   1.   Fraudulent Statements.  The licensee has made fraudulent
statements in the application for the license or in the conduct of the
business.



   2.   Violation of Law.  The licensee has violated this chapter or
has otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.



   3.   Endangered Public Welfare, Health or Safety.  The licensee has
conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare,
safety, order or morals.



122.12    NOTICE.



The Clerk shall send a notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local
address, not less than ten (10) days before the date set for a hearing on the
possible revocation of a license.  Such notice shall contain particulars of
the complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State
statutes allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the
matter.



122.13    HEARING.



The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any
complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in
the complaint and notice.  Should the licensee, or authorized
representative, fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a
determination of the complaint.



122.14    RECORD AND DETERMINATION.



The Clerk shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and
shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the Clerk
finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter
or State law.



122.15    APPEAL.



If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall make a
part of the record the reasons therefor.  The licensee, or the applicant,
shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next regular
meeting.  The Council may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the
Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall
carry out the decision of the Council.



122.16    EFFECT OF REVOCATION.



Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any
license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the
revocation.



122.17    REBATES.



Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to a
rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it
expires.  The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total
license fee by the number of days for which the license was issued and then
multiplying the result by the number of full days not expired.  In all
cases, at least five dollars ($5.00) of the original fee shall be retained by
the City to cover administrative costs.



122.18    LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.



The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.



   1.   Newspapers.  Persons delivering, collecting for or selling
subscriptions to newspapers.



   2.   Club Members.  Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy
Scout, Girl Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America and similar
organizations.



   3.   Local Residents and Farmers.  Local residents and farmers who
offer for sale their own products.



   4.   Students.  Students representing the Forest City School
District conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the
school.



   5.   Route Sales.  Route delivery persons who only incidentally
solicit additional business or make special sales.



   6.   Resale or Institutional Use.  Persons customarily calling on
businesses or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or
institutional use.



122.19    CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.



Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating
under the provisions of Chapter 504A of the Code of Iowa desiring to solicit
money or to distribute literature are exempt from the operation of Sections
122.04 and 122.05.  All such organizations are required to submit in writing
to the Clerk the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are
sought, names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization, the period during which such activities are to be carried on,
and whether any commissions, fees or wages are to be charged by the solicitor
and the amount thereof.  If the Clerk finds that the organization is a bona
fide charity or nonprofit organization the Clerk shall issue, free of charge,
a license containing the above information to the applicant.  In the event
the Clerk denies the exemption, the authorized representatives of the
organization may appeal the decision to the Council, as provided in Section
122.15 of this chapter.



CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS



 

123.01  House Mover Defined
 
123.06  Insurance Required


123.02  Permit Required
 
123.07  Permit Issued


123.03  Application
 
123.08  Public Safety


123.04  Approval by Clerk
 
123.09  Time Limit


123.05  Bond Required
 
123.10  Removal by City



 



123.01    HOUSE MOVER DEFINED.



A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a house, building
or similar structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the
building or structure exceeds the legal width, height or length limitations
established in Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa or is of such size that it
requires the use of skids, jacks, dollies or any other specialized moving
equipment.



123.02    PERMIT REQUIRED.



It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as
herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building
or similar structure to be moved.  Buildings of less than one hundred (100)
square feet are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.



123.03    APPLICATION.



Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the
Clerk.  The application shall include:



   1.   Name and Address.  The applicant’s full name and address and
if a corporation the names and addresses of its principal officers.



   2.   Building Location.  An accurate description of the present
location and future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.



   3.   Building Weight.  A statement that there shall be at least one
inch of wheel for each 1,000 pounds of weight of the building or structure
and that the building or structure to be moved will not exceed 25,000 pounds
per axle.



   4.   Erection of Protective Fence.  A statement that on the day the
building or structure is moved, the property owner will erect a protective
fence around any depression, opening or ditch remaining after the movement of
the building or structure.



   5.   Statement by Contractor.  A written statement by a contractor
that all sanitary drains shall be blocked by four to six inches of concrete;
that four 2¢ x 2¢ holes shall be opened in the concrete basement floor; and
that the opening, depression or ditch shall be filled in, graded and returned
to as near its natural state as reasonably possible within thirty (30) days
after the building is moved.  In lieu of this provisions, within thirty (30)
days there may be filed with the Clerk plans for construction (commencing
within six months) of a new building or structure on the premises complying
with all zoning laws.



123.04    APPROVAL BY CLERK.



The Clerk shall approve the application and shall attach such approval to the
application stating the following:



   1.   Police Escort.  The necessary police escort or an escort by a
person with an official escort authorization card has been obtained.  If a
police escort is used, a deposit for payment of the police escort has been
paid, and the Police Chief or person with an official escort authorization
card has investigation the proposed route over which the building or
structure will be moved and has approved the route.



   2.   Utilities Disconnected.  The utilities have been disconnected
or will be disconnected by the date the building or structure will be moved.



   3.   Removal of Overhead Lines.  A public utility official has
investigated the proposed route and the necessary provisions have been made
for disconnections of any overhead electrical lines, overhead telephone wires
or cable television wires and that a deposit for payment of such
disconnections (of both the building itself and the overhead wires) has been
paid.




The amount of the deposits referred to herein shall be in amounts reasonably
calculated to assure substantial payment of the costs for escort and utility
disconnections.




123.05    BOND REQUIRED.



The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the minimum sum of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized to
issue such bonds in the State.  The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s
payment for any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of
all costs incurred by the City in the course of moving the building or
structure.



123.06    INSURANCE REQUIRED.



Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the
applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration
of the permit and stating that the insurance covers house moving activities
for the applicant and all agents and employees for the following minimum
amounts:



   1.   Bodily Injury/Property Damage – $500,000.



   2.   General Liability – $500,000 each occurrence.



   3.   Worker’s Compensation – statutory limits (if the move is
for hire).



   4.   Iowa Contractor’s License (if the move is for hire).



123.07    PERMIT ISSUED.



Upon approval of the application and filing of bond and insurance
certificate, the Clerk shall issue a written permit signed by the Mayor.  A
separate permit shall be required for each house, building or similar
structure to be moved.



123.08    PUBLIC SAFETY.



At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any
street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain
flagmen at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to
the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure.  At all times when
the building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk or
public property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights
at the intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of
the building or structure.



123.09    TIME LIMIT.



No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to
remain upon any street or other public way for a period of more than twelve
(12) hours without having first secured the written approval of the City.



123.10    REMOVAL BY CITY.



In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation of
Section 123.09, the City is authorized to remove such building or structure
and assess the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the
permit holder’s bond.



CHAPTER 124
JUNK DEALERS AND JUNK YARDS



 

124.01  Definitions
 
124.05  Revocation of Permit


124.02  Permit Required
 
124.06  Right of Entry


124.03  Notification of Application
 
124.07  Requirements for Junk Yards


124.04  Permit Nontransferable
 
124.08  Other Requirements



 



124.01    DEFINITIONS.



Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions
apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:



   1.   “Inoperable motor vehicle” means any motor vehicle which
lacks (a) current registration or (b) two or more wheels or other component
parts the absence of which renders the vehicle totally unfit for legal use on
the highways.



   2.   “Junk” means old or scrap copper; brass; lead or other
nonferrous metal; old rope; rags; batteries; paper; trash; rubber debris;
waste; dismantled or inoperable vehicles, machinery and appliances; iron,
steel or other old or scrap ferrous material; old discarded glass, tinware,
plastic or discarded household goods or hardware.



   3.   “Junk dealer” means any person who buys, sells, transfers,
delivers or stores junk, including all persons who carry on such business at
a junk shop or junk yard or as a peddler and any person who by advertisement,
sign or otherwise, holds himself or herself out as a junk dealer, or dealer
in old discarded metals, machinery, rags, paper stock and the like.



   4.   “Junk shop” means any building or structure in which a junk
dealer stores or places junk in connection with a business of buying, selling
or trading junk.



   5.   “Junk yard” means any place not fully enclosed in a
building, used in whole or in part for the storage or deposit of junk,
whether in connection with a business or not, which encompasses a place where
more than two inoperable motor vehicles or used parts and materials thereof,
when taken together, equal the bulk of two motor vehicles, are stored or
deposited.



124.02    PERMIT REQUIRED.



   1.   Every person who carries on the business of junk dealer in the
City shall first obtain a permit as herein required.



   2.   Application for a junk dealer’s permit shall be made to the
Council at least twenty (20) days prior to the issuance of such permit.  The
application shall include:



      A.   The name and permanent address of the owner;



      B.   The name and address of the operator if different from
the owner;



      C.   The location of the proposed site for a junk yard or junk
shop;



      D.   A sketch showing the specific area that will be covered
by the permit;



      E.   A list of the names and addresses of all adjacent
property owners; and



      F.   Proof that a zoning permit has been obtained for use of
the proposed site as a junk yard or junk shop.



   3.   Any person wishing to expand a junk yard or junk shop beyond
the specific area approved for a permit shall obtain a new permit and any
person conducting several or separate places of business as a junk dealer
shall pay the permit fee and procure a permit for each such place.



   4.   The fee for application for a junk dealer’s permit is $150.00
and is nonrefundable.



124.03    NOTIFICATION OF APPLICATION.



The Council shall send written notification to all adjacent landowners of the
proposed site of the junk yard or junk shop that an application for junk
dealer’s permit has been received for that location.  The Council shall
also publish notice in the City newspapers stating that an application for
junk dealer’s permit has been received, the location of the proposed site
and when the application will be acted on.  The Council shall consider all
information and comments received concerning the application, but all final
determinations shall rest with the Council.



124.04    PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE.



If control of a junk yard is acquired by any owner or operator other than the
person holding a permit for the junk yard or junk shop, that person shall,
within 15 days, apply for a new permit in the name of the new owner or
operator.



124.05    REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



After giving a permit holder 30 days’ notice and the opportunity for a
hearing, the Council may revoke any permit issued under this chapter if the
permit holder fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter or has
otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner or if the permit
holder has presented any false information to the City.



124.06    RIGHT OF ENTRY.



As a condition of issuance of every permit, members of the Council, the
Police Chief or designees shall have the right of entry to, upon or through
any junk yard or junk shop for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of
this chapter.



124.07    REQUIREMENTS FOR JUNK YARDS.



A junk yard, as defined in this chapter, must be surrounded with a solid,
opaque fence of uniform design and color and not less than six feet high,
which substantially screens the area in which junk is stored or deposited. 
The fence must be kept in good repair and shall not be used for advertising
displays or signs.  Suitable gates, likewise opaque, are required, and such
gates shall be closed and locked after business hours or when the junk yard
is unattended.  A portion of any gate, not to exceed 10 feet in length, may
be constructed of a non-opaque material to permit observation of the fenced
premises after business hours.  No junk shall be permitted to be stored or
deposited outside of the fence, nor shall junk be stacked higher than the
fence within 30 feet of the fence, nor shall junk be stored in any flood
hazard area.  If a portion of the perimeter of the junk yard is not in any
way subjected to public view, the Council may allow a buffer planting screen
of coniferous trees in lieu of the solid opaque fence as required above.



124.08    OTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   1.   Segregation of Specific Items.  Upon order of the Police
Chief, each junk dealer shall segregate specific items or categories of items
and hold such items until authorized to dispose of the items by the Police
Department.  The holding period shall be a reasonable time and shall not
exceed 45 days.



   2.   Concealing Articles to Prevent Identification.  No junk dealer
shall conceal, secrete or destroy any article purchased or received by the
junk dealer to prevent identification of such article or of any person
claiming the same by law enforcement officers.



   3.   Disposing of Stolen Goods or Good for Which There is Adverse
Claim.  No junk dealers shall sell, melt, break up or otherwise dispose of
any article which the dealer has reason to believe has been stolen or which
is adversely claimed by any person or which the dealer has been notified not
to sell or otherwise dispose of by any law enforcement officer without first
obtaining a permit in writing from the Police Chief.



   4.   Clerks, Agents and Employees.  Every clerk, agent or employee
of any junk dealer shall be subject to and bound by all the provisions of
this chapter and liable to the same penalties and to the same extent as the
employer or principal for any violation thereof.



   5.   Conditions Subject to Abatement.  If any junk yard or junk
shop is kept or operated in a way detrimental to the health and welfare of
the public to the extent that a public or private nuisance exists, or is kept
or operated contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the Council, in
addition to other remedies, may find that the condition constitutes a
nuisance and have it abated as provided in Chapter 50 of this Code of
Ordinances.



CHAPTER 125
TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL OF SEPTIC TANK AND CESSPOOL REFUSE



 

125.01  Vehicle Permit Required
 
125.05  Cleaning of Tanks


125.02  Fee For Permit
 
125.06  Sanitary Disposal Requirements


125.03  Maintenance and Identification of Vehicle
 
125.07  Discharge Into Sewage Treatment System Unlawful


125.04  Tank Required
 
125.08  Unlawful Transport or Discharge



 



125.01    VEHICLE PERMIT REQUIRED.



The owner of every vehicle used for the purpose of cleaning or disposing of
waste materials from sewage disposal systems shall obtain a written permit
annually from the Clerk.  In order to secure a permit, the owner shall
provide the following information to the City:



   1.   Full name;



   2.   Address;



   3.   Vehicle make;



   4.   Vehicle license;



   5.   Truck tank capacity in gallons.



125.02    FEE FOR PERMIT.



No vehicle used for the purpose of cleaning sewage disposal systems or
disposing of waste removed from sewage disposal systems may be operated or
used for that purpose in the City without first obtaining a $25.00 annual
permit from the City.



125.03    MAINTENANCE AND IDENTIFICATION OF VEHICLE.



The owner of every vehicle used for the purpose of cleaning sewage disposal
systems or disposing of waste removed from sewage disposal systems shall keep
the vehicle and equipment in clean, well-painted and sanitary condition, and
shall have lettered thereon in three-inch-high letters the name, address and
registration certificate number of each truck.



125.04    TANK REQUIRED.



Every vehicle used for the purpose of cleaning sewage disposal systems or
disposing of waste removed from sewage disposal systems shall have a tank
which is completely enclosed and liquid-tight.



125.05    CLEANING OF TANKS.



Any tank used for the purpose of cleaning sewage disposal systems or
disposing of waste removed from sewage disposal systems shall be cleaned each
day or after being used for the above purposes.



125.06    SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS.



The collection, storage, transportation and disposal of all human excreta
shall be carried out in a sanitary manner which does not endanger the public
health or create a nuisance condition.



125.07    DISCHARGE INTO SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM UNLAWFUL.



It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any
cleanings or other materials originating from a septic tank, cesspool or
other sanitary sewage treatment device from any vehicles into the City’s
sanitary sewage treatment system in any manner, at any location in the City.



125.08    UNLAWFUL TRANSPORT OR DISCHARGE.



A peace officer who discovers that any cleanings or other materials
originating from a septic tank, cesspool or other sanitary sewage treatment
device are or have been discharged from any vehicle or container into the
City public sanitary sewer system at any location in the City shall summarily
arrest the offender and likewise seize the conveyance used to effect the
transportation and discharge of the cleanings or other materials originating
from a septic tank, cesspool or other sanitary sewage treatment device.



CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE



 



135.01  Removal of Warning Devices
 
135.09  Excavations 


135.02  Obstructing or Defacing
 
135.10  Maintenance of Parking or Terrace


135.03  Placing Debris On
 
135.11  Failure to Maintain Parking or Terrace


135.04  Playing In
 
135.12  Dumping of Snow 


135.05  Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
 
135.13  Accumulation of Snow at Corners


135.06  Use for Business Purposes
 
135.14  Driveway Culverts


135.07  Washing Vehicles
 
135.15  Paving of Alleys


135.08  Burning Prohibited
 




 



135.01    REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.



It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy or carry
away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article
or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon
for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said
street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1) 



135.02    OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.



It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface, or injure any street or
alley in any manner.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



135.03    PLACING DEBRIS ON.



It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any
glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish,
litter, offal, leaves, grass or any other debris likely to be washed into the
storm sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any
person, animal or vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)



135.04    PLAYING IN.



It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled or play games on streets or
alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])



135.05    TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.



It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street
or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed
thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer
or member of the fire department.



135.06    USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.



It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering
same for sale, without permission of the Council.



135.07    WASHING VEHICLES.



It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street or alley for
the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business.  This
does not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle
or equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.



135.08    BURNING PROHIBITED.



No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish or other combustible material
in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.



135.09    EXCAVATIONS.



No person shall excavate on City property where any facilities, as herein
defined, are placed or cause excavation on City property where any facilities
are located without having fully complied with the following provisions:



   1.   Definitions.  For use in this section the following terms are
defined:



      A.   “Excavation” means a cavity formed by cutting,
digging or scooping.



      B.   “Facilities” means any of the following underground
lines, along with their related equipment and appurtenances:



         (1)   Electrical underground transmission or
distribution line;



         (2)   Natural gas, petroleum or liquid transmission or
distribution line;



         (3)   Water transmission or distribution mains or lines;



         (4)   Sanitary sewer transmission or distribution mains
or lines;



         (5)   Storm sewer transmission or distribution mains or
lines;



         (6)   Cable television transmission or distribution
mains or lines; and



         (7)   Telephone communication transmission or
distribution mains or lines.



   2.   Permit Required.  A person must obtain an excavation permit
from the Clerk prior to the excavating on City property where facilities are
located.  The Clerk shall issue the excavation permit or reject the
application in writing within two working days of the date of application.



   3.   Application.  At least two working days prior to the time the
excavation is to commence, an application shall be filed with the Clerk and
shall include a list of persons other than the City who own facilities
located within the area where the excavation is to occur.  The application
should also include a sworn affidavit that the notice was in fact given to
the persons who own the facilities located within such area.  The
application shall be of sufficient detail to show the location and depth of
the facilities in relation to property lines, easements and other facilities.



   4.   Certificate of Insurance.  The application shall be
accompanied by a certificate of insurance naming the City as the insured (or
in the case of a facility owned by someone other than the City, the owner of
the facility) and showing liability amounts of not less than the following:



      A.   $250,000 per person;



      B.   $500,000 per incident or accident.



The application does not require the certificate of insurance if the
applicant has filed annually a certificate of insurance conforming to the
requirements of this subsection.



   5.   Permit Fee.  The application shall be accompanied by a permit
fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per project, unless the applicant
has a current excavation license.  Said excavation license must be renewed
annually and the City shall determine the annual license fee by resolution of
the Council.



   6.   Review of Plans and Specifications.  The Clerk shall review
the plans and specifications and shall immediately contact the various
departments within the City who may have facilities located within the area
where the proposed excavation is to be completed.  The Clerk may require
such changes and revisions as are necessary to insure that the plans and
specifications meet the standards established by the City and coordinate
placement of facilities within City property so as not to provide
interference with other facilities.



   7.   Return of Plans and Specifications.  One set of plans and
specifications showing any changes or revisions by the Clerk shall be
returned to the person with the excavation permit.  Construction shall not
deviate from the approved plans and specifications without the approval of
the Clerk.



   8.   Expiration.  Each permit shall expire within thirty (30) days
after the date of issuance, and no such permit shall authorize any work being
done after such time.  The Clerk and the permit holder may agree to an
alternative expiration date if the project is of sufficient size that
completion within 30 days is not possible.



   9.   Timing.  After holding a preconstruction conference with the
person making the application, the Clerk may postpone the effective date of
an excavation date on an excavation permit until such time as the permit
holder’s work will not interfere with the street construction or with the
construction of other public utilities.



   10.   Denial of Permit.  Violation by a person of any requirements
of this section shall be grounds for the Clerk to deny an excavation permit
for any work to be done by or for that person until such time as the
violation has been corrected.  These should be the only grounds for the
denial of an excavation permit.  Within two (2) working days after discovery
of a violation, the Clerk shall notify the permit holder in writing.  A
denial of an excavation permit may be appealed by said person to the Council.



   11.   As-built Plans.  Within sixty (60) days after the completion
of the construction, the permit holder shall file with the Clerk one set of
as-built plans.  Such plans shall be of sufficient detail to show the exact
location and depth of other facilities, if any, in relation to property
lines, easements, topographical and geographical features.



   12.   Emergency Work.  In emergency situations a company may
initiate work without first obtaining an excavation permit.  However, said
person shall notify the Clerk before back filling.  Within two (2) working
days after the commencement of the work, the person shall file an application
for permit.  All emergency work must conform to other applicable provisions
of this section, except that the plans and specifications may be filed at the
time of making the application for an excavation permit.



   13.   Observation and Inspection.  The Clerk is charged with
enforcing the provisions of this chapter.  In order to insure compliance
with this section and with an excavation permit, the Clerk shall have the
right to observe and inspect all excavation prior to back filling.  The
Clerk may order the repair of any damaged facilities.



   14.   Excavation Standards.  All excavation within the City upon
City property shall:



      A.   Be located so as to cause minimum interference with the
proper use of City property and to cause minimum interference with the right
or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any City property
where said excavation is located;



      B.   Be located so as to provide adequate site distances and
so as not to obstruct any traffic signals or signs.



If any site distances are inadequate or any traffic signals or signs are
obstructed by the person, that person shall, at no expense to the City and in
accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways, temporarily relocate either the City’s facilities or the traffic
signals or signs.



   15.   Completion by the City.  Should any excavation in any street
or alley be left open or unfinished for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or
should the work be improperly done, the City has the right to finish or
correct such work and the expense shall be charged to the permit
holder/property owner.



   16.   Responsibility for Costs.  All costs and expenses incident to
the excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/ or property owner. 
The permit holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.



   17.   Indemnification.  The person shall defend at his or her own
expense in the name of and on behalf of the City and shall indemnify and save
harmless the City from any and all claims, suites, losses, damages, costs or
expenses, whether caused or contributed to by the negligence of the person or
the City on account of injury or damage to any person or property, caused or
occasioned, or allegedly caused or occasioned, in whole or in part, by reason
of or rising out of the excavation.  However, the person shall not be
obligated to defend, indemnify and save harmless the City for any cost or
damages arising from the sale negligence of the City.  The duty of the
person to defend, indemnify and save harmless the City shall extend to
officers, employees and agents of the City to the extent the City is
obligated to defend, indemnify and save harmless by law, said officers,
employees and agents.



   18.   Notification.  At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the
commencement of the excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays, the person performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide
Notification Center and provide the center with the information required
under Section 480.4 of the Code of Iowa.



135.10    MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE.



It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain all
property outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines upon
the public streets, except that the abutting property owner shall not be
required to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly owned property
or right-of-way. Maintenance includes timely mowing, trimming trees and
shrubs and picking up litter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])



135.11    FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PARKING OR TERRACE.



If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the
above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required
action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in
the same manner as a property tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e]) 



135.12    DUMPING OF SNOW.



It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be thrown,
pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct
gutters, or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to
create a hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large
commercial drives in the business district it is absolutely necessary to move
the snow onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be
removed promptly by the property owner or agent.  Arrangements for the
prompt removal of such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])



135.13    ACCUMULATION OF SNOW AT CORNERS.



It is unlawful for any person to throw, push or place or cause to be thrown,
pushed or placed any ice or snow on private property at the corners of
intersections of traveled streets so as to obstruct the view of motorists as
they approach the corner, except when in the cleaning of a large commercial
driveway or parking lot it is absolutely necessary to move the snow into the
corner temporarily, and only after first making arrangements for the removal
of the accumulation at the owner’s cost within a reasonably short time.



135.14    DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.



The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert
deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s
property, and before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained
from the City.  In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to
culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make such
repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the
right to make the repairs.  If the property owner fails to reimburse the
City for the cost of said repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County
Treasurer and specially assessed against the property as by law provided.



135.15    PAVING OF ALLEYS.



Proposed plans for any alley paving project shall be submitted for
consideration by the Council prior to October 1 of each year in order for
said paving to be considered for the next fiscal year.  Estimates as to the
cost of paving an alley shall be submitted with the proposed plan.  The City
may participate in the paving project if it is determined by the Council that
the project benefits the community as a whole.  If the Council agrees to
participate in the project, written approval shall be given on completion of
the following:



   1.   Agreement with the Street Department that the project is in
compliance with the policies adopted by resolution of the Council pertaining
to paving of alleys.



   2.   Written and signed assurances that the City will only be
responsible for its share of a project (25%).



   3.   Unless otherwise provided, affected property owners shall
secure the bids to have the alley paved.



   4.   Cash deposit to cover costs other than the City’s share.



   5.   Approval of design or paving method by City.



CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS



 



136.01  Purpose
 
136.11  Interference with Sidewalk Improvements


136.02  Definitions
 
136.12  Awnings 


136.03  Removal of Snow, Ice and Accumulations
 
136.13  Encroaching Steps


136.04  Responsibility for Maintenance
 
136.14  Openings and Enclosures


136.05  City May Order Repairs
 
136.15  Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks


136.06  Sidewalk Construction Ordered
 
136.16  Defacing


136.07  Permit Required
 
136.17  Debris on Sidewalks


136.08  Sidewalk Standards
 
136.18  Merchandise Display


136.09  Barricades and Warning Lights
 
136.19  Sales Stands


136.10  Failure to Repair or Barricade
 




 



136.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the City.



136.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by
sweeping the sidewalk when it is hardening. 



   2.   “Defective sidewalk” means any public sidewalk exhibiting
one or more of the following characteristics:



      A.   Vertical separations equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or
more. 



      B.   Horizontal separations equal to one (1) inch or more.



      C.   Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or
more and at least four (4) inches in diameter. 



      D.   Spalling over fifty percent (50%) of a single square of
the sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to one-half (½) inch or more.



      E.   Spalling over less than fifty percent (50%) of a single
square of the sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to three-fourths
(¾) inch or more. 



      F.   A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that
no part thereof has a piece greater than one square foot.   



      G.   A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full
depth.



      H.   A change from the design or construction grade equal to
or greater than three-fourths (¾) inch per foot.



   3.   “Established grade” means that grade established by the
City for the particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.   



   4.   “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of
the concrete is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.



   5.   “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property
abutting any sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of
notification required herein.  For all other purposes, “owner” includes
the lessee, if any. 



   6.   “Portland cement” means any type of cement except
bituminous cement. 



   7.   “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business,
residential or suburban areas.



   8.   “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction,
reconstruction, repair, replacement or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or
the excavating, filling or depositing of material in the public right-of-way
in connection therewith. 



   9.   “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by
smoothing the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.



136.03    REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE AND ACCUMULATIONS.



It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to remove snow, ice
and accumulations promptly from sidewalks.  If a property owner does not
remove snow, ice or accumulations within 24 hours, the City may do so and
assess the costs against the property owner for collection in the same manner
as a property tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])



136.04    RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.



It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to repair, replace
or reconstruct, or cause to be repaired, replaced or reconstructed, all
broken or defective sidewalks and to maintain in a safe and hazard-free
condition any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb
lines or traveled portion of the public street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c]) 



136.05    CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.



If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the
Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the
owner to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time
and if such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the
Council may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the
abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d & e])



136.06    SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.



The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street
or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such improvement to
abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 384 of
the Code of Iowa. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)



136.07    PERMIT REQUIRED.



No person shall remove, reconstruct or install a sidewalk unless such person
has obtained a permit from the City and has agreed in writing that said
removal, reconstruction or installation will comply with all ordinances and
requirements of the City for such work. 



136.08    SIDEWALK STANDARDS.



Sidewalks repaired, replaced or constructed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards:



   1.   Cement.  Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the
construction and repair of sidewalks. 



   2.   Construction.  Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction. 



   3.   Sidewalk Base.  Concrete may be placed directly on compact and
well-drained soil.  Where soil is not well drained, a three-inch sub-base of
compact, clean, coarse gravel or sand shall be laid.  The adequacy of the
soil drainage is to be determined by the City. 



   4.   Sidewalk Bed.  The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the
constructed sidewalk will be at established grade.



   5.   Length, Width and Depth.  Length, width and depth requirements
are as follows:



      A.   Residential sidewalks shall be at least four and one-half
(4½) feet wide and four (4) inches thick, and each section shall be no more
than four (4) feet in length.



      B.   Business District sidewalks shall extend from the
property line to the curb.  Each section shall be four (4) inches thick and
no more than six (6) feet in length.



      A.   Driveway areas shall be not less than six (6) inches in
thickness.



   6.   Location.  Residential sidewalks shall be located with the
inner edge (edge nearest the abutting private property) one foot outside the
property line, unless the Council establishes a different distance due to
special circumstances.



   7.   Grade.  Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the
street which shall be the established grade.



   8.   Elevations.  The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an
elevation even with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half (½) inch
above the curb for each foot between the curb and the sidewalk.   



   9.   Slope.  All sidewalks shall slope one-quarter (¼) inch per
foot toward the curb.



   10.   Finish.  All sidewalks shall be finished with a “broom”
or “wood float” finish. 



   11.   Curb Ramps and Sloped Areas for Persons with Disabilities. 
If a street, road, or highway is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or
sloped area shall be constructed or installed at each intersection of the
street, road, or highway with a sidewalk or path.  If a sidewalk or path is
newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed
or installed at each intersection of the sidewalk or path with a street,
highway, or road.  Curb ramps and sloped areas that are required pursuant to
this subsection shall be constructed or installed in compliance with
applicable Federal requirements adopted in accordance with the Federal
Americans with Disabilities Act, including (but not limited to) the
guidelines issued by the Federal Architectural and Transportation Barriers
Compliance Board.



(Ord. 712 – Oct. 10 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)



136.09    BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.



Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue,
highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or
when any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all
persons having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner,
agent, or lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may
be deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous
places at each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material
deposited in the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or
flares, and to keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect
sufficient barricades both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. 
The party or parties using the street for any of the purposes specified in
this chapter shall be liable for all injuries or damage to persons or
property arising from any wrongful act or negligence of the party or parties,
or their agents or employees or for any misuse of the privileges conferred by
this chapter or of any failure to comply with provisions hereof.



136.10    FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.



It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the
owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of
failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or
erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.



136.11    INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.



No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or
upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall
remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or
shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy,
mar, remove or deface any notice provided by this chapter.



136.12    AWNINGS.



It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any sidewalk
unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight (8) feet above the
surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or
other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely
fastened to the building, without any posts or other device that will
obstruct the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of
pedestrians.



136.13    ENCROACHING STEPS.



It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any
building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of
the Council.



136.14    OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.



It is unlawful for a person to:



   1.   Stairs and Railings.  Construct or build a stairway or
passageway to any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk,
or to enclose any portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by
resolution of the Council. 



   2.   Openings.  Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any
vault on any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to
protect the public. 



   3.   Protect Openings.  Neglect to properly protect or barricade
all openings on or within six (6) feet of any sidewalk.



136.15    FIRES OR FUELS ON SIDEWALKS.



It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to
place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.



136.16    DEFACING.



It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or writing
on any sidewalk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)   



136.17    DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.



It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass,
nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal or vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2]) 



136.18    MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.



It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods or
merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with the
free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case
shall more than three (3) feet of the sidewalk next to the building be
occupied for such purposes.



136.19    SALES STANDS.



It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand for
the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any
sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.



CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS



 

137.01  Power to Vacate
 
137.04  Findings Required


137.02  Planning and Zoning Commission
 
137.05  Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys


137.03  Notice of Vacation Hearing
 
137.06  Disposal by Gift Limited



 



137.01    POWER TO VACATE.



When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of the
City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds, the
Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])



137.02    PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds
shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council. 
The Commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the
Council within thirty (30) days after the date the proposed vacation is
referred to the Commission. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



137.03    NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.



The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the
time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.



137.04    FINDINGS REQUIRED.



No street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds shall be vacated
unless the Council finds that:



   1.   Public Use.  The street, alley, portion thereof or any public
ground proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and
therefore, its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified. 



   2.   Abutting Property.  The proposed vacation will not deny owners
of property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their
property.



137.05    DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.



When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the
City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public
ground, the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section
364.7, Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)



137.06    DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.



The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental
body for a public purpose.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7[3])



 

EDITOR’S NOTE


The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.


ORDINANCE NO.
 
ADOPTED
 
ORDINANCE NO.
 
ADOPTED




132
 
August 3, 1939
 
 


159
 
December 1, 1949
 
 


160
 
April 6, 1950
 
 


170
 
July 3, 1952
 
 


179
 
April 11, 1957
 
 


185
 
April 7, 1960
 
 


192
 
August 3, 1961
 
 


194
 
July 5, 1962
 
 


195
 
October 4, 1962
 
 


196
 
December 6, 1962
 
 


207
 
May 2, 1968
 
 


220
 
March 1, 1971
 
 


221
 
March 1, 1971
 
 


232
 
December 18, 1972
 
 


287
 
February 7, 1977
 
 


291
 
May 2, 1977
 
 


308
 
September 5, 1978
 
 


330
 
December 13, 1979
 
 


365
 
August 1, 1983
 
 


387
 
January 6, 1986
 
 


388
 
February 18, 1986
 
 


418
 
January 3, 1989
 
 


438
 
August 28, 1989
 
 


447
 
December 4, 1989
 
 


490
 
July 5, 1994
 
 


532
 
August 19, 1996
 
 


535
 
September 16, 1996
 
 


538
 
October 7, 1996
 
 


575
 
September 20, 1999
 
 


586
 
February 21, 2000
 
 


590
 
July 17, 2000
 
 


596
 
September 18, 2000
 
 


609
 
February 18, 2002
 
 


614
 
April 15, 2002
 
 


616
 
August 5, 2002
 
 


617
 
October 21, 2002
 
 


656
 
September 19, 2005
 
 


657
 
September 19, 2005
 
 


702
 
May 3, 2010
 
 


804
 
October 7, 2019
 
 




 



CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES



 

138.01  Established Grades
 
138.02  Record Maintained



 



138.01    ESTABLISHED GRADES.



The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which have been heretofore
established by ordinance are hereby confirmed, ratified and established as
official grades.



138.02    RECORD MAINTAINED.



The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.



 

EDITOR’S NOTE


The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.


ORDINANCE NO.
 
ADOPTED
 
ORDINANCE NO.
 
ADOPTED




111
 
September 6, 1928
 
 


137
 
November 7, 1940
 
 


223
 
August 2, 1971
 
 


280
 
June 7, 1976
 
 


281
 
August 16, 1976
 
 


316
 
December 18, 1978
 
 


325
 
July 16, 1979
 
 


353
 
October 5, 1981
 
 


501
 
March 6, 1995
 
 


504
 
July 5, 1995
 
 


628
 
November 17, 2003
 
 


633
 
April 5, 2004
 
 


693
 
June 29, 2009
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 




 



CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS



 

139.01  Naming New Streets
 
139.04  Official Street Name Map


139.02  Changing Name of Street
 
139.05  Revision of Street Name Map


139.03  Recording Street Names
 



 



139.01    NAMING NEW STREETS.



New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:



   1.   Extension of Existing Street.  Streets added to the City that
are natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the
existing street.



   2.   Resolution.  All street names, except streets named as a part
of a subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.



   3.   Planning and Zoning Commission.  Proposed street names shall
be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and
recommendation.



139.02    CHANGING NAME OF STREET.



The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.



139.03    RECORDING STREET NAMES.



Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk
shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and County
Assessor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)



139.04    OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.



Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map
which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter.  The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature
of the Mayor, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: 
“This is to certify that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to
in Section 139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of Forest City, Iowa.”



139.05    REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.



If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in
street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map
promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry on
the Official Street Name Map as follows:  “On (date), by official action
of the City Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street
Name Map:  (brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor
and attested by the Clerk.



CHAPTER 140
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES



 

140.01  Exercise of Police Power
 
140.05  Unlawful Use of Controlled Access Facility


140.02  Definition
 
140.06  Speed Limits


140.03  Right of Access Limited
 
140.07  Parking Restricted


140.04  Access Controls Imposed
 



 



140.01    EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER.



This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City
under Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and for the promotion of the general welfare.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1) 



140.02    DEFINITION.



The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or street
especially designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or
occupants of abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only
a controlled right or easement of access, light, air or view by reason of the
fact that their property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for
any other reason.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2) 



140.03    RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED.



No person has any right of ingress or egress to or from abutting lands onto
or across any controlled access facility, except at such designated points at
which access is permitted.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4) 



140.04    ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED.



There are hereby fixed and established controlled access facilities within
the City, described as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3) 



   1.   U.S. No. 69.  On Primary Road U.S. No. 69 within the City,
described as follows:



      Beginning at Station 560+99.0, the south corporation line, thence
northerly 8276.4 feet to Station 643+75.4, the north corporation line



   2.   Iowa No. 9.  On Primary Road Iowa No. 9 within the City,
described as follows:



      Beginning at Station 1284+04.4, the junction of U.S. No. 69 and
Iowa No. 9, thence easterly 2290.6 feet to Station 1306+95, the east
corporation line



regulating access to and from abutting properties along said highways.



140.05    UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY.



It is unlawful for any person to:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3 and 321.366)



   1.   Cross Dividing Line.  Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any
curb, central dividing section, or other separation or dividing line on such
controlled access facilities.



   2.   Turns.  Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn except
through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section,
separation or line.



   3.   Use of Lanes.  Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane
provided for that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of the
central dividing curb, separation, section or line.



   4.   Enter Facility.  Drive any vehicle into the controlled access
facility from a local service road except through an opening provided for
that purpose in the dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line which
separates such service road from the controlled access facility property. 



140.06    SPEED LIMITS.



Speed limits are established and speed limit signing will specify
respectively:



   1.   35 MPH on Highway 69 from 100 feet south of Woodland Drive to
1200 feet south of “J” Street.



   2.   45 MPH on Highway 69 from 1200 feet south of “J” Street to
1800 feet north of County Road B14 West.



   3.   45 MPH on Highway 69 from 500 feet north of Sunset Drive to 100
feet south of Woodland Drive.



   4.   50 MPH on Highway 69 from 1800 feet north of County Road B14
west to 400 feet south of County Road B14 East.



140.07    PARKING RESTRICTED.



The parking of vehicles on or along controlled access facilities is
restricted as follows:



   1.   Minor Street Approaches.  Parking shall be prohibited on all
minor street approaches for a distance of thirty-five (35) feet in advance of
the stop sign. 



   2.   Primary Roads.  Parking is prohibited on U.S. 69 and Iowa 9.



   3.   Bridge to Intersection.  Parking shall be prohibited on Secor
Avenue from Station 1611+70.4, the north end of the Winnebago River Bridge,
to Station 1615+63.2, the intersection of Secor Avenue with U.S. No. 69.



CHAPTER 141
MAILBOXES



 

141.01  Purpose
 
141.05  Custom-Built Mailbox Requirements


141.02  Definitions
 
141.06  Curbside Mailbox Requirements


141.03  Custer-Style Mailbox Required in New Developments
 
141.07  Responsibilities of Property Owner


141.04  Custer-Style Mailbox Requirements
 



 



141.01    PURPOSE.



The City’s right-of-way is held by the City primarily for the purpose of
pedestrian and vehicular passage and for the City’s provision of essential
public safety services, including police, fire and emergency medical response
services, and public health services, including sanitary sewer, water and
storm drainage.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for
mailboxes in order to maintain the safety and the visual character of the
City’s right-of-way.



141.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Breakaway support” means a supporting post which shall be
no larger than a 4-inch x 4-inch wood post or a metal post with strength no
greater than a 2-inch diameter Schedule 40 steel pipe and which is buried no
more than 24 inches deep.  Such a support post shall not be set in concrete
unless specifically designed as a breakaway support system as defined in A
Guide for Erecting Mailboxes on Highways published by the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, May 24, 1984
(ASHTO).



   2.   “Clear zone” means an unobstructed flat area adjacent to
the traveled portion of a roadway that is used for the recovery of errant
vehicles.



   3.   “Cluster-style mailbox” means a style whereby mailboxes
meeting the specifications of the United States Postal Service (“USPS”)
with the inscriptions “U.S. MAIL” and “APPROVED BY THE POSTMASTER
GENERAL” plainly legible are assembled and grouped together on a single
area of land so that they are regarded as one unit.  Cluster-style mailboxes
must be manufactured cluster-style mailboxes approved by both the City and
the USPS.



   4.   “Curbside mailbox” means a mailbox consisting of a
lightweight sheet metal or plastic box meeting the specifications of the USPS
with the inscriptions “U.S. MAIL” and “APPROVED BY THE POSTMASTER
GENERAL” plainly legible, which is erected at the edge of a roadway or
curbside of a street and is mounted on a breakaway support post and is
intended or used for the collection of mail and is to be served by a mail
carrier from a vehicle.



   5.   “Custom-built mailbox” means a mailbox erected at the edge
of a roadway or curbside of a street constructed using materials that do not
meet the definition of a “curbside mailbox” and “breakaway support.”



141.03    CUSTER-STYLE MAILBOX REQUIRED IN NEW DEVELOPMENTS.



All new residential or commercial developments constructed after the
enactment of the 2007 Code of Ordinances, which are situated on any public
cul-de-sac street, avenue or other roadway that is maintained by the City and
which receive curbside delivery of mail shall have cluster-style mailboxes. 
Any housing development constructed and already receiving mail service before
enactment of the 2007 Code of Ordinances is not required to have
cluster-style mailboxes.



141.04    CUSTER-STYLE MAILBOX REQUIREMENTS.



Cluster-style mailboxes serving housing developments situated on any public
street or roadway shall be located between the sidewalk and curb, outside of
the three-foot clear zone.  Cluster-style mailboxes shall not be installed
anywhere within a cul-de-sac bulb.  Cluster-style mailboxes shall have a
4-foot concrete access from the public street and the public sidewalk.  The
location of the cluster-style mailbox shall not exceed 600 feet from the
property line of those residents served by the cluster-style mailbox. 
Cluster-style mailboxes shall be located on property lines on the same side
as where the future no-parking areas will be.  The location of the
cluster-style mailbox is to be approved by the City and by the USPS.



The cost of installation, including (but not limited to) box units and
concrete pad, shall be borne by the developer.  No driveway or street access
shall be constructed within five feet of a cluster-style mailbox.



141.05    CUSTOM-BUILT MAILBOX REQUIREMENTS.



A custom-built mailbox may be installed in developments constructed and
already receiving mail service before the adoption of the 2007 Code of
Ordinances if an application for approval of a custom-built mailbox is
submitted to the City for review and is approved.  A custom-built mailbox
must conform to the following requirements and the rules set forth in the
application:



   1.   The structure supporting the mailbox shall be at least 12
inches from the back of curb.



   2.   The mailbox structure shall not exceed the dimensions of two
feet in width, two feet in depth, five feet in height, with the mailbox
receptacle to be no more than 42 inches from top of curb.



   3.   The mailbox structure shall be located on a 2¢6² wide x
2¢6² deep x 4² thick concrete pad.  The mailbox structure shall not be
permanently affixed to the concrete pad in an attempt to make structure rigid.



   4.   The local postmaster shall approve and sign off on the
application before submittal to the City.



   5.   The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of
the custom-built mailbox.  If the mailbox is damaged beyond use by the City,
a standard curbside mailbox and breakaway post as defined in this chapter
will be provided or the property owner can be reimbursed up to a maximum
replacement fee of $25.00, set by the Council.  If the property owner
performs the replacement, reimbursement will not exceed the established cost
for a standard curbside mailbox and breakaway post.  Property owner must
submit an application for a custom-built mailbox with the City prior to
making any needed repairs.



141.06    CURBSIDE MAILBOX REQUIREMENTS.



Curbside mailboxes shall not be set closer than 75 feet to an intersection;
said intersection shall be determined by measuring 75 feet from the middle of
the intersecting street down the street the mailboxes are to be placed
upon.  Mailboxes shall not be placed closer than 10 feet from any alley,
away from any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it
may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized
traffic control device.  A curbside mailbox must conform to the following
requirements and the rules set forth in the application:



   1.   The bottom of the mailbox shall be 42 inches from the top of
the curb.  On streets without curbs, the bottom of the mailbox shall be 48
inches from the edge of the pavement, as defined by USPS installation
requirements.



   2.   Mailboxes meeting the above specifications may be placed in the
street right-of-way, provided that the support thereof shall be at least two
feet behind the curb or edge of the traveled way and no portion of the box or
support shall extend beyond the inner edge of the curb.  Said boxes shall
not obstruct a paved sidewalk for pedestrians and where the roadway has a
shoulder to be maintained, said boxes and support shall be placed so as not
to interfere with road maintenance, snow removal or garbage pickup.



   3.   The owner or postal patron shall be responsible for all costs
of erecting, maintaing and replacing any mailbox located pursuant to this
section.  Such responsibility is that of the owner or patron regardless of
the cause for any needed maintenance or replacement.



   4.   The City shall not be responsible for surfacing, grading or
maintaining said approaches.  If snow removal near a mailbox cannot be
satisfactorily accomplished by the City during snow removal operations, it
shall be the responsibility of the property owner or patron to remove the
snow obstruction.



   5.   All existing mailboxes in the City at the time of the effective
date of the 2007 Code of Ordinances will be allowed a period of six months to
meet requirements.  A mailbox installed after said effective date must meet
the requirements and specifications of this chapter.



141.07    RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROPERTY OWNER.



Any type of mailbox located in the City right-of-way is subject to damage or
destruction at any time, as a result of the City or a person with a utility
easement entering upon the City right-of-way to construct, repair or maintain
the utilities located in the City right-of-way, or as a result of the City
engaging in activities to maintain the public street or right-of-way, such as
snow removal, pavement repair or street cleaning.  If a curbside or
cluster-type mailbox located in the City right-of-way is damaged during such
activities, the City or the utility that damaged the mailbox shall replace
said mailbox with a mailbox of the same design, if it has been approved for
installation by the USPS with the proper markings inscribed “U.S.MAIL”
and “APPROVED BY THE POSTMASTER GENERAL,” and if it is still available
for purchase and complies with this chapter.  Property owner may choose to
be reimbursed in full to a value of replacement cost of not-to-exceed $25.00
or have the City reinstall a new mailbox meeting stated requirements.  If
the property owner chooses to purchase an approved mailbox and be reimbursed,
the City will install the mailbox at the property owner’s request.



CHAPTER 142
STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM DISTRICT



 

142.01  Storm Water Drainage Utility System District
 
142.04  Delinquency, Collection, Interest and Penalties


142.02  Classifications
 
142.05  Use of Fund


142.03  Rates Established
 



 



142.01    STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM DISTRICT.



It is found and determined to be necessary and conducive to the protection of
the public health, safety, welfare and convenience that all of the City of
Forest City, Iowa, shall be and is hereby declared to be a Storm Water System
District within the meaning and intent of, and for the purpose authorized by,
Section 384.84(1) Code of Iowa; that is, to establish and collect rates for a
storm water drainage utility system.  On an annual basis, the Council may
approve the capital expenditures for the Storm Water System District.



142.02    CLASSIFICATIONS.



   1.   There are established three classifications within the Storm
Water Drainage Utility System as follows:



      A.   Residential Unit means any of the following which have
either an electric service, water service, or both:



         (1)   A single-family dwelling including, if applicable,
an attached driveway or parking lot with a minimum lot size of 6,000 square
feet of which no more than 37% is impervious.



         (2)   Each apartment, townhouse or condominium within a
multi-family dwelling including, if applicable, an attached driveway or
parking lot.



         (3)   Mobile home dwelling including, if applicable, an
attached driveway or parking lot.



Residential Unit also means an unattached parking lot or other impervious
area located within the RS-Residential Single-Family District, RM-Residential
Multi-Family District or RMO-Residential Multi-Family Optional District and
MH-Mobile Home Zoning Districts.  For the purpose of this paragraph,
Residential Unit is defined by dividing the total impervious square footage
by 2,200 to arrive at the number of residential units.



      B.   Nonresidential Unit means any other real estate,
including, if applicable, an attached driveway or parking lot, which is not
classified as residence and not classified as agricultural which has either
an electric service, water service, or both.  Nonresidential Unit also means
an unattached parking lot or other impervious area located within the
AC-Arterial Commercial District, BC-Business Commercial District, LI-Light
Industrial District, HI-Heavy Industrial Zoning Districts.  For the purpose
of this section, Nonresidential Unit is defined dividing the total impervious
square footage by 3,520 to arrive at the number of Nonresidential Units.



      C.   Agricultural means any real estate located within the
Storm Water Drainage Utility System assessed as agricultural by the Hancock
or Winnebago County Assessors.



   2.   Any property, regardless of its classification, which has its
own drainage system and does not in any way use or otherwise impact the
City’s storm sewer system shall not be required to pay any fees under this
chapter.



   3.   In the case of conflicts in classification, or appeals by
affected property owners, the Council shall make the final determination as
to the classification after following the procedure delineated hereinafter:



      A.   Any person who disagrees with the classification shall
submit, in writing, the following information:



         (1)   The address of the property and the current owner.



         (2)   The current classification.



         (3)   The classification sought.



         (4)   The reason for the change in classification.



      B.   The Street Committee shall meet after giving notice to
the affected property owner of the time, date and location of the meeting. 
At said meeting the affected property owner may submit additional information
to the committee.



      C.   The Street Committee shall make its recommendations to
the Council.  At the meeting in which the Street Committee gives its
recommendations to the Council, the Council shall either approve or deny the
same or ask for additional information.



      D.   The Street Committee may make any additional procedural
rules it deems necessary to carry out these appeals.



142.03    RATES ESTABLISHED.



   1.   With respect to each Residential Unit, a monthly rate of $5.00
shall be charged, paid and collected as the rate for the storm water drainage
utility system, from May 1, 2006.



   2.   With respect to each Nonresidential Unit, a monthly rate of
$8.30 per meter shall be charged, paid and collected as a rate for a storm
water drainage utility system, from May 1, 2006.



   3.   There will be no charge for real estate classified as
agricultural.



142.04    DELINQUENCY, COLLECTION, INTEREST AND PENALTIES.



   1.   Charges imposed under this chapter are deemed delinquent when
not paid in full by the due date provided in a billing for the charge.



   2.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person
to discharge wastewater into the City’s Storm Water Utility System.  It is
also unlawful and a violation of this chapter to maintain a connection to or
use the City’s Storm Water Utility System without paying the appropriate
charges and fees established in this section or any rule adopted pursuant
hereto.  Even if no billing is received, such charges shall be due and owing
and the user is obligated to pay any charges in a timely fashion.



   3.   Delinquent charges may be collected pursuant to the same
procedure as with delinquent utility bills by the City, with the assistance
of City legal counsel, without further action or authorization by the Council.



   4.   Delinquent charges may be recovered by the City in the same
manner as provided in the water billing procedure ordinance.



   5.   In addition to remedies provided for collection of a debt, the
City may seek a temporary or permanent injunction prohibiting continued
occupancy of premises, requiring disconnection of the premises from the
public storm water utility system, and termination of water and sewer service
to the user’s premises.



   6.   The Council may prescribe by Resolution and Order a schedule of
interest and penalty charges to be imposed upon delinquent charges.



   7.   In a collection action under this chapter, the City shall be
entitled to its costs and reasonable attorney fees, including at trial and on
appeal, if it is the prevailing party.



   8.   In addition to the right of the City to bring a civil action to
collect any delinquent charges or enforce any provision of this chapter, the
City may take any of the following actions to secure payment:



      A.   The City may refuse to issue any permit to any person who
is delinquent in any payment due under this chapter.



      B.   The City may terminate provision of storm and surface
water service premises used by the user.



      C.   The City may terminate sanitary sewer service to premises
used by the user.



      D.   The City may terminate water service to the premises used
by the user.



Termination of service pursuant to this subsection shall be according to
procedures adopted under Section 92.05 of this Code of Ordinances.  If the
City terminates service as provided in this section, the cost of such
disconnection shall be added to the amount of any other delinquent charges
and shall be recoverable in the same manner as are such charges.



   9.   The owner and the tenant must comply with the same procedure as
set out in Section 92.07 of this Code of Ordinances.  All obligations of the
owner and tenant shall be the same as stated in Iowa Code Section
384.84(3)(d).



   10.   Where a lien against the property can be imposed when the
owner is liable, it shall exist from the date the bill was last brought
current in the same manner as with a lien for water service.  The provisions
of Section 92.05 of this Code of Ordinances shall apply to delinquent storm
water utility bills.



142.05    USE OF FUND.



The money paid and collected pursuant to Section 142.02 shall be held by the
City in a special fund to be expended only for the purpose of constructing,
operating, repairing and maintaining all kinds of conduits, drains, storm
water detention devices, flow impediments, ponds, ditches, sloughs, streams,
filter strips, rip-raps, erosion control devices and any and all other things
useful to the proper control, management, collection, drainage and
disposition of storm water in the City.



CHAPTER 143
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT



 

143.01  Purpose
 
143.07  Ownership by City


143.02  Definitions
 
143.08  Private Ownership


143.03  Areas Requiring Storm Water Management Plan
 
143.09  Further Requirements


143.04  Storm Water Management Requirements
 
143.10  Exemptions


143.05  Management Plan Design Requirements
 
143.11  Penalties


143.06  Submission and Approval of Plan
 
143.12  Objections



 



143.01    PURPOSE.



It is the purpose of this chapter to establish policies to manage and control
Storm Water Runoff occurring from new development of commercial, industrial,
governmental, institutional, and in some cases residential areas, all of
which are located within City’s corporate limits.  The goal is to reduce
storm water runoff caused by development of the land.  This will result in
cost savings to the overall existing municipal storm sewer collection system
by either eliminating the need to make improvements to the existing municipal
storm sewer collection system or by reducing the size of improvements
required.  In addition, increased public safety and sediment and erosion
control are expected benefits.



143.02    DEFINITIONS.



Wherever used in the Ordinance and printed with an initial capital letter,
the terms listed below shall have the meanings indicated.  Words using the
present tense shall include the future; the singular shall include the
plural; the plural shall always include the singular.  The term ‘shall’
is always mandatory and the term ‘may’ is permissive.



   1.   “Capacity (of a storm water facility)” means the volume or
rate of conveyance available in a storm water management facility, including
freeboard, to store or convey storm water without damage to public or private
property.



   2.   “Civil engineer” means a professional engineer licensed in
the State of Iowa to practice in the field of civil works.



   3.   “Control structure” means part of a storm water management
facility designed to regulate the storm water runoff release rate.



   4.   “Design storm” means a storm with characteristics of the
average storm for the desired return frequency.



   5.   “Detention basin” means any facility designed for the
purpose of temporarily holding water which is then released at a
predetermined rate and controls the flow of storm water downstream.



   6.   “Development” means the changing of land from its existing
state or an area of land use change, usually involving the building of
housing, commercial, industrial, governmental, institutional, and
infrastructure structures.



   7.   “Developed condition” also referred to as “Post-developed
condition” means the hydraulic and hydrologic site characteristics that
occur upon completion of a development.



   8.   “Drainage area” means an area of land contributing to storm
water runoff.



   9.   “Green infrastructure” means natural drainage ways, wet
lands, infiltration systems, open green space, etc.



   10.   “Green space” means that area in and around a development
which is covered with grass, trees, shrubs, and other natural plantings that
naturally absorbs storm water.



   11.   “New development” means the platting of land for the
establishment of residential, commercial, industrial and/or agricultural lots
or improvements to existing platted parcels of land which contribute to use
and benefit of the land.



   12.   “Overflow path” means the path taken by storm water runoff
as a result of flows exceeding the capacity of the underground drainage
system or detention basin.  The path may include streets, channels, drainage
ways or areas of sheet flows, and be located on public property or private
property within an easement.



   13.   “Pre-developed condition” means the hydraulic and
hydrologic site characteristics that occur prior to a proposed development,
including natural storage areas, drainage ways, drainage tiles and highway
drainage structures.



   14.   “Regional storm water management facilities” means those
facilities designed to handle storm water runoff from several lots which may
include the entire subdivision, or multiple subdivisions, and may include
existing developed areas.



   15.   “Retention basin” means storm water management practice
that captures storm water runoff, and does not directly discharge to a
surface water body.  Water that is “retained” is “discharged” from
the basin either by infiltration or evaporation.



   16.   “Return frequency” means the statistic parameter that
defines the average occurrence time for a storm of a given magnitude.



   17.   “Site” means a lot, parcel or tract of land (or portion
thereof) where development is occurring or has occurred and which may or may
not require additional permits.



   18.   “Site plan” means an overall plan of the area to be
developed including, but not limited to:  proposed building location,
proposed parking and drive locations, proposed utilities including storm
sewer components and subsurface drain tile, proposed ground elevations with
drainage patterns highlighted, roof drainage outlet locations, other
underground utilities, and property boundaries.



   19.   “Storm sewer system” means facilities for the conveyance
of storm water runoff, a series of conduits and appurtenances, to accommodate
frequent storms not generating large peak discharges.  These facilities
usually include conduits, street gutters and swales.



   20.   “Storm water management facilities” means a
detention/retention basin and the associated appurtenances to make the system
functional.



   21.   “Storm Water Management Plan” means a site plan certified
by a Licensed Civil Engineer, including materials, construction phasing,
grading activities, and methods used for mitigation of increased storm water
runoff from the site.



   22.   “Storm water runoff” means the flow of water resulting
from precipitation upon a surface area, not absorbed by the soil or plant
material.



   23.   “Subdivision” – as defined in Chapter 170 –
Subdivision Regulations of this Code of Ordinances.



143.03    AREAS REQUIRING STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.



A storm water management plan shall be required for the following:



   1.   New residential subdivisions and re-subdivisions and new
developments consisting of multiple lots or properties the aggregate of which
is larger than one (1) acre in size and all new commercial, industrial,
governmental, and institutional subdivisions and developments of any size
consisting of multiple lots.



   2.   Single lot multi-residential, commercial, industrial,
governmental, and institutional developments with said lot being 10,000
square feet in size and larger.



   3.   Phased developments under one acre in size for residential, and
lots under 10,000 square feet in size for commercial, industrial,
governmental, institutional developments which are a part of a larger planned
development. 



   4.   Other developments may be required to submit a Storm Water
Management Plan at the discretion of the City Council.  No subdivision or
development plan will be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided
to an appropriate storm sewer, drainage watercourse, or storm sewer
management facility.



   5.   At the discretion of the City Council, a fee may be charged the
developer in lieu of providing storm water management facilities.  This may
be utilized when the City is constructing a larger regional storm water
management facility to handle multiple existing or proposed development.



143.04    STORM WATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS.



The storm water management plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:



   1.   Peak discharges for pre-developed and post-developed conditions
based upon the design storms.



   2.   Individual parameters used for determining discharges shall be
listed.



   3.   Hydraulic capacity of storm sewer inlets, pipes, open channels
or other means of conveying water.



   4.   Detention/retention basin design with capacity listed.



   5.   Control structure/outlet design.



   6.   Review of existing or proposed downstream conveyance capacities.



   7.   Storm water runoff calculations. Said calculations shall be
made utilizing one of the following approved methodologies:



      A.   Rational Formula,



      B.   TR-55  Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds as developed
by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service,



      C.   Hydrographs.



The calculations shall be certified by an engineer, architect, or landscape
architect licensed in the state of Iowa and familiar with such calculations.



143.05    MANAGEMENT PLAN DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.



The design requirements of the storm water management plan are as follow:



   1.   For new developments and or subdivisions where storm water
management facilities are required as set forth in this ordinance, the
maximum allowable storm water runoff from the site in the post-developed
condition as calculated for a 5-year design storm shall be limited to the
storm water runoff rate for the site in the pre-developed condition based on
a 5-year design storm.  The discharge rate shall be controlled at the
detention/retention facilities outlet and NOT by the size of the storm sewer
pipe serving the site.  Retention facilities may be used in lieu of
detention facilities with approval from the building official.



   2.   A safe overflow path shall be designed for storms exceeding the
capacity of the detention/retention basin.



   3.   Regional storm water management facilities are encouraged. 



   4.   For new residential developments, storm water detention is not
allowed within any front or side yard setbacks required by the Zoning
Ordinance, or within 25 feet from the estimated rear building line.  A
single lot detention or retention will not be allowed within 3 feet of rear
building lot line.



   5.   Dry-bottomed detention basins shall be oversized by 10% to help
offset anticipated sedimentation.  An alternative to over-sizing is the
construction of a series of sediment trapping fore bays in the basin with
firm bottoms which allow routine removal of sediment.



   6.   Maximum side slopes of detention/retention basins shall not
exceed 3:1.



   7.   Provisions shall be made to keep the bottom of the detention
basin dry unless a permanent pond or lake is being utilized for detention.



   8.   The proposed development shall be designed with proper regard
to topography, surface drainage, natural drains and streams, wooded areas,
and other natural features.  The design of the proposed improvements shall
make adequate provisions for surface and subsurface drainage so as to NOT
increase the danger of erosion, flooding, landslide or other endangerment of
adjoining or surrounding property.



143.06    SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF PLAN.



A Site Plan shall be a required attachment to a proposed Storm Water
Management Plan, all of which is to be submitted to the City Administrator
for review.  The Storm Water Management Plan, including proposed storm water
detention or retention facilities, shall be reviewed and approved by the City
Administrator (or a third party chosen by the Administrator) prior to the
issuance of any building permit for the proposed development.  The City may
inspect the site at any time to determine compliance with this chapter. 
Upon determination that a Site is not in compliance with this chapter, the
City may issue a stop work order until compliance is achieved.  The order
shall describe the problem, specify a completion date, and indicate the
penalties to be assessed for further noncompliance.  If a third party is
chosen by the City Administrator to review the Storm Water Management Plan
the cost for performing said review may be passed on to the developer or
applicant at the City Administrator’s discretion.



143.07    OWNERSHIP BY CITY.



Regional storm water management facilities which are of sufficient size may
be deeded to the City to be maintained by the City.  The conditions for City
ownership will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.  The City is under no
obligation to accept ownership of the facility.  If the City elects to
obtain ownership of the facility, the property owner shall dedicate to the
City any property on which public storm sewer detention/retention basins will
be located with a 25-foot perimeter (subject to change) to establish and
maintain a vegetative buffer.  Ingress-egress easements for maintenance of
public facilities shall be provided prior to final approval.



143.08    PRIVATE OWNERSHIP.



For sites on which privately owned storm water detention or retention
facilities are located, the property owner will be responsible for the
following:



   1.   All future grading, repairs, and maintenance.



   2.   Maintenance of the minimum storm water detention capacity, as
originally designed.



   3.   Maintenance of the detention/retention basin control structures
and discharge pipes to insure the maximum theoretical design release rate is
not increased.



   4.   The property owner shall not place fill material, or erect any
buildings, obstructions, or other improvements on the area reserved for storm
water detention or retention purposes, unless approved in writing by the City.



   5.   Maintenance of the facility so as to be in compliance with
Section 50.02 “Nuisances Enumerated” of this Code of Ordinances.



143.09    FURTHER REQUIREMENTS.



Compliance with this chapter does not relieve the developer or property owner
of other responsibilities relating to storm water discharge.  This includes,
but is not limited to, obtaining NPDES storm water discharge permits
regulated by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, and other State of
Iowa and Federal requirements such as storm water pollution prevention plans
and generally accepted erosion control measures.



143.10    EXEMPTIONS.



The following are exempt from the requirements of the chapter:



   1.   Agricultural use of land.



   2.   Emergencies posing an immediate danger to life or property, or
substantial flood or fire hazards.



   3.   Areas deemed appropriate by the City Council.



143.11    PENALTIES.



Any person who shall engage in development of a site within the area of
jurisdiction of this chapter before meeting the requirements of this chapter
shall be subject to the following:  No foundation permits or building
permits shall be issued for the property in question until the violations are
corrected.  Nothing contained herein shall limit the right of the City to
any other remedies available to the City for the enforcement of this chapter,
including the use of municipal infractions.  Enforcement of this section
shall be the responsibility of the City.



143.12    OBJECTIONS.



Any objections to decisions made pursuant to this chapter shall be reviewed
by the City Council with final determination and approval coming from the
City Council.



   1.   (Ch. 143 – Ord. 756 – May 16 Supp.)



CHAPTER 144
TRAIL REGULATIONS



 

144.01  Purpose
 
144.07  Trail Design Standard


144.02  Definitions
 
144.08  Barricades and Warning Lights


144.03  Removal of Snow, Ice and Accumulations
 
144.09  Interference with Trail Improvements


144.04  Responsibility for Maintenance
 
144.10  Fires or Fuels on Trails


144.05  Trail Construction Ordered
 
144.11 Defacing


144.06  Permit Required
 
144.12  Debris on Trails



 



144.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage and enjoyment by
citizens on trails be it by foot, bicycle or other non-motorized means of
transportation, to acknowledge that the maintenance, repair, replacement or
reconstruction of trails as being the responsibility of the City, and to
minimize the liability of the City.



144.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Broom finish” means a trail finish that is made by
sweeping the surface of the trail when it is hardening.



   2.   “Defective Trail” means any public Trail exhibiting one or
more of the following characteristics:



      A.   Vertical separations equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or
more.



      B.   Horizontal separations equal to one (1) inch or more.



      C.   Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or
more and at least four (4) inches in diameter.



      D.   Spalling over fifty percent (50%) of surface area of the
Trail with one or more depressions equal to one-half (½) inch or more.



      E.   Spalling over less than fifty percent (50%) of the
surface area of the Trail with one or more depressions equal to three-fourths
(¾) inch or more.



      F.   A segment of Trail cracked in such a manner that no part
thereof has a piece greater than one square foot.



      G.   A Trail with any part thereof missing to the full depth.



      H.   A change from the design or construction grade equal to
or greater than three­ fourths (¾) inch per foot.



   3.   “Established grade” means that grade established by the
City for the particular area in which a Trail is to be constructed.



   4.   “Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA)” means a pavement that is
constructed with materials consisting of, but not limited to, bituminous
cement (binder) and specifically graded aggregates as prepared, delivered and
placed by an asphalt paving firm.



   5.    “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of
the PCC is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.



   6.   “Property Owner” means the person owning the fee title to
property abutting or upon which any Trail has been constructed and includes
any contract purchaser.



   7.   “Portland Cement Concrete (PCC)” means a pavement that is
constructed with materials consisting of, but not limited to, portland
cement, aggregate, sand and water as prepared and delivered by a ready mix
concrete firm.



   8.   “Trail” or “Public Trail” means all permanent surfaced
recreational Shared Use Pathways located in business, residential or suburban
areas of the community. Said Trail shall be further located in either Public
Right Of Way, City owned properties, or within Permanent Easements upon
privately owned properties established for the purpose of constructing and
maintaining a Public Trail.



   9.   “Trail Improvements” means the construction,
reconstruction, repair, replacement or removal of a Public Trail and/or the
excavating, filling or depositing of material in connection therewith.



   10.   “Wood Float Finish” means a Trail finish that is made by
smoothing the surface of the PCC paved Trail with a wooden trowel.



144.03    REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE AND ACCUMULATIONS.



It is the responsibility of the City to remove snow, ice and accumulations
from all Public Trails as may be deemed appropriate for the use and enjoyment
of the public.  The City is under no obligation to remove snow, ice and
accumulations from any Public Trail unless the City Council determines
otherwise for specific segments of Trail.



144.04    RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.



It is the responsibility of the City to repair, replace or reconstruct, or
cause to be repaired, replaced or reconstructed, all broken or defective
Trails within a reasonable time and to maintain in a safe and hazard-free
condition any Public Trail.



144.05    TRAIL CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.



The City Council may order the construction of permanent Public Trails upon
any street, court, City owned property, or privately owned property where a
permanent easement has been acquired within the City as it may deem to be in
the best interests of the community as a whole.



144.06    PERMIT REQUIRED.



No person shall remove, reconstruct or install a Trail unless such person or
firm has obtained a permit from the City and has agreed in writing that said
removal, reconstruction or installation will comply with all ordinances and
requirements of the City for such work.



144.07    TRAIL DESIGN STANDARDS.



Public Trails repaired, replaced or constructed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards:



   1.   Pavement.  Either Portland Cement Concrete (PCC) pavement or
Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA) pavement shall be the only types of pavement used in
the construction and repair of Trails unless directed otherwise by the City
Council.



   2.   Design.  The design of all Public Trails shall meet the
accessibility requirements for Shared Use Pathways as set forth in the
following documents to the best extent possible:



      A.   AASHTO Bike Guide



      B.   AGODA - Accessibility Guidelines for Outdoor Developed
Areas



      C.   PROWAG - Proposed Accessibility Guidelines for Pedestrian
Facilities in the Public Right of Way.



      D.   Iowa SUDAS Design Manual, Chapter 12 for Sidewalks and
Bicycle Facilities.



If the Public Trail or Trail Improvement cannot be designed to fully meet the
minimum requirements as set forth in the above referenced documents, a
specific document should be developed to describe why the minimum
requirements cannot be met



   3.   Construction.  Pavements for Public Trails shall be either
one-course PCC construction or two course HMA construction unless otherwise
approved by the City Engineer.



   4.   Trail Base.  Pavement for Public Trails may be placed directly
on compact and well-drained soil.  Where soil is not well-drained, a
three-inch sub-base of compact, clean, coarse gravel or sand shall be laid. 
The adequacy of the soil drainage is to be determined by the City Engineer.



   5.   Trail Bed.  The Trail Bed shall be so graded that the
constructed Trail will be at the established grade.



   6.   Location/Function.  Public Trails and Shared Use Pathways are
defined as being one of three categories.  The categories, which in turn
generally define the function and location of the Trail with respect to
existing roadways, are defined as follows:



      A.   Type 1 Trail.  A Trail or Shared Use Pathway adjacent to
or in close proximity to the roadway.  This type of Trail functions similar
to a sidewalk.  Along rural roadways these Trails/Pathways are typically
located at the top of the fore slope. These Trails Pathways are generally
used for transportation purposes.



      B.   Type 2 Trail.  A Trail or Shared Use Pathway located
within an independent right of way or NOT in close proximity to a roadway. 
This type of Trail also functions as a transportation route to facilitate and
fulfill basic life needs and provide a safe route for non-drivers.



      C.   Type 3 Trail.  A Trail or Shared Use Pathway located
within an independent right of way or NOT in close proximity to a roadway. 
Although this type of Pathway I trail may fulfill a transportation function,
these Trails primarily serve a recreation and fitness benefit.



   7.   Length.  The length of the Trail or Pathway will be as
generally determined by the City Council upon identification of the terminus
points.  The exact length will be determined through the course of the Trail
design.



   8.   Width.  The typical Trail width is 10 feet to accommodate
two-way traffic. Trail width may be reduced to 8 feet where the following
conditions prevail:



      A.   Bicycle Traffic Volumes are expected to be Low.



      B.   Pedestrian Use is generally not expected.



      C.   Horizontal and Vertical alignments provide well-designed
passing and resting opportunities.



      D.   The Trail will NOT be regularly subjected to maintenance
vehicle loading conditions.



      E.   A physical constraint exists for a short duration/length
such as a utility structure, fence, etc.



Trail widths between 8 feet and 5 feet should be avoided and will not be
allowed unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer or City Council. 
Trails less than 5 feet in width do NOT meet ADA requirements and shall not
be allowed.



   9.   Grade/Horizontal Alignment.  Grades and horizontal alignment
for Trail construction shall be as follows:



      A.   Type 1 Trails.  Type 1 Trails shall meet/match the
grades of the adjoining roadway with the running slope not exceeding 5% where
ever possible.



      B.   Type 2 Trails.  Grades for Type 2 Trails shall be less
than or equal to 5% and all other Type 3 Trail requirements should be met.



      C.   Type 3 Trails.  Grades for Type 3 Trails are a function
of terrain and design (bicycle) speed of the Trail.  A minimum design speed
of 18 mph should be used unless posted for slower speeds or in areas of
steeper decline, in which case the design speed should be adjusted per Table
A below.



Table A
Minimum Design Speed and Horizontal Alignment



 


Terrain

 
Design Speed
(mph)
 
Minimum Radius 1
(Horizontal Curve - feet)


Grades Less than 2%
 
18
 
60


Grades less than or Equal to 5%
 
25
 
115


Grades 6% or more
 
30
 
166



1-Based on 20 degree maximum lean angle for bicycle.



There is no single design speed that is recommended for all Trails I
Pathways.  The minimum radius of curvature negotiable by a bicycle can be
calculated using the lean angle of the bicyclist or the super-elevation and
coefficient of friction of the Trail.  The minimum radii of curvature for a
paved Trail are shown in Table B below.




Table B
Minimum Radii for Lean Angle of Bicyclists




 

Design Speed (mph)
 
Minimum Radius 1
(Horizontal Curve - feet)




12
 
27


14
 
36


16
 
47


18
 
60


20
 
74


25
 
115


30
 
166




 



   10.   Elevations.  The street edge of a Type 1 Trail shall be at an
elevation of not less than one-quarter (¼) inch above the roadway curb for
each foot between the curb and the street edge of the Trail ( i.e. 2% grade
between top of roadway curb and street edge of Trail).  The elevations of
all Type 2 and Type 3 Trails shall be determined/established by the Design
Engineer.



   11.   Cross Slope.  All Trails must have the capabilities to serve
people with disabilities.  Cross slope of Trails shall not exceed 2%. A 1.5%
cross slope is recommended, but the cross slope shall be a minimum of 1%.



   12.   Minimum Surface Thickness.  The pavement depth for both PCC
and HMA pavements should be a minimum of 4” and a recommended thickness of
5”.  If pavement thickness is proposed to be less than 4”, a pavement
determination should be completed and documented.



   13.   Finish.  All Trails constructed of PCC shall be finished with
a “broom” or “wood float” finish.  All Trails constructed of HMA
shall receive a standard paving machine screed finish.



   14.   Curb Ramps and Sloped Areas for Persons with Disabilities. 
If a street, road, or highway is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or
sloped area shall be constructed or installed at each intersection of the
street, road, or highway with a Trail or Pathway.  If a Trail or Pathway is
newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed
or installed at each intersection of the Trail or Pathway with a street,
highway, or road.  Curb ramps and sloped areas that are required pursuant to
this subsection shall be constructed or installed in compliance with
applicable Federal requirements adopted in accordance with the Federal
Americans with Disabilities Act, including (but not limited to) the
guidelines issued by the United States Access Board titled “Public
Right-of-Way Accessibility Guidelines” or “PROWAG”.



   15.   Separation of Roadway and Trail.  A separation should be
provided between a two-way share use Trail and the adjacent roadway to
demonstrate to the Trail User and the Vehicle Driver that each facility is
independent of the other.  This is particularly important at night.  If the
separation distance from the face of the curb or the edge of the traveled way
to the linear edge of the Trail is less than 5 feet, a barrier or railing is
recommended.  The barriers or railings need not be of the size and strength
to redirect errant motorists unless a crashworthy barrier is needed due to
high vehicular traffic speeds and Clear Zone requirements.  Barriers serving
only as a separation device should be the height of a standard guardrail.



   16.   Lateral and Vertical Clearance.  Guidelines for lateral and
vertical clearance are important in order to develop safe and comfortable
Trail facilities by providing adequate clearance from a wide of variety of
potential obstructions that may be found along the prospective route and in
view of the wide range of riding proficiency found among riders.  Clearance
considerations must include:



      A.   Lateral Clearances to Fixed and Movable Obstructions.  A
2 foot minimum graded area with a 6:1 maximum cross slope (i.e. shoulder
area) should be provided for clearance from lateral obstructions such as
trees, poles, and bridge abutments measured from the edge of the Trail.  If
a barrier or rail is necessary, minimum of 1 foot lateral offset from the
edge of the Trail is desirable.  Barriers terminating within 2 feet of the
Trail should be marked with object markers.



      B.   Vertical Clearances to Overhead Obstructions.  The
minimum vertical clearance to a Trail is 10 feet.  In situations such as
tunnels and bridge underpasses the vertical clearance should be greater than
10 feet in order to accommodate maintenance and emergency vehicles.  In a
constrained area the vertical clearance may be reduced to a minimum of 8 feet.



   17.   Shoulder Width and Slope.  The minimum graded shoulder width
for a Trail is 2 feet.  The maximum shoulder area cross slope is 6:1.



   18.   Safety Rail.  Safety Rail should be a minimum of 42” in
height.  Provide safety rails at the outside of a structure.  On steep fill
embankments provide a safety rail or widen the shoulder area to 5 feet when
conditions are as noted below and shown in Figure 1.



      A.   Slopes 3:1 or steeper with a drop of 6 feet or greater.



      B.   Slopes 3:1 or steeper adjacent to a parallel body of
water or other substantial obstacle.



      C.   Slopes 2:1 or steeper with a drop of 4 feet or greater.



      D.   Slopes 1:1 or steeper with a drop of 1 foot or greater.



   Figure 1: Safety Rail between Trail and Adjacent Slope







144.08    BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.



Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any Trail or when Trail
improvements are being made or when any Trail is in a dangerous condition, it
shall be the duty of all persons having an interest therein, either as the
contractor or the City to put in conspicuous places at each end of such Trail
and at each end of any pile of material deposited on the Trail, a sufficient
number of approved warning lights or flares, and to keep them lighted during
the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades both at night and in the
daytime to secure the same.  The party or parties using the Trail for any of
the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable for all injuries or
damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act or negligence of
the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any misuse of the
privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply with
provisions hereof.



144.09    INTERFERENCE WITH TRAIL IMPROVEMENTS.



No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any Trail or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon
any portion of any completed Trail or approach thereto, or shall remove or
destroy any part or all of any Trail or approach thereto, or shall remove,
destroy, mar or deface any Trail at any time or destroy, mar, remove or
deface any notice provided by this chapter.



144.10    FIRES OR FUELS ON TRAILS.



It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any Trail or to
place or allow any fuel to remain upon any Trail.



144.11    DEFACING. It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any
paste, paint or writing on any Trail.



144.12    DEBRIS ON TRAILS.



It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any Trail any glass,
nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal or vehicle, both motorized and non-motorized.



(Ord. 759 – Dec. 16 Supp.)



CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



 

145.01  Enforcement Officer
 
145.05  Conduct of Hearing


145.02  General Definition of Unsafe
 
145.06  Posting of Signs


145.03  Unsafe Building
 
145.07  Right to Demolish


145.04  Notice to Owner
 
145.08  Costs



 



145.01    ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



The Mayor is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.



145.02    GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE.



All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not provided
with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise
dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a
hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose
of this chapter, unsafe buildings.  All such unsafe buildings are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure
specified in this chapter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 & 364.12[3a]) 



145.03    UNSAFE BUILDING.



“Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all
of the following criteria:



   1.   Various Inadequacies.  Whenever the building or structure, or
any portion thereof, because of (a) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay;
(b) faulty construction; (c) the removal, movement or instability of any
portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;
(d) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or (e) any
other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.



   2.   Manifestly Unsafe.  Whenever, for any reason, the building or
structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for
which it is being used.



   3.   Inadequate Maintenance.  Whenever a building or structure,
used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation,
decay, damage, faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health
officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition
that it is likely to cause sickness or disease.



   4.   Fire Hazard.  Whenever any building or structure, because of
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined
by the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.



   5.   Abandoned.  Whenever any portion of a building or structure
remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or
structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in
excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof
an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.



145.04    NOTICE TO OWNER.



The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building
or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such
is found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement
officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice
stating the defects thereof.  This notice may require the owner or person in
charge of the building or premises, within forty-eight (48) hours or such
reasonable time as the circumstances require, to commence either the required
repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or
structure or portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed within
ninety (90) days from date of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the
enforcement officer.  If necessary, such notice shall also require the
building, structure, or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not
reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements are completed,
inspected and approved by the enforcement officer. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h]) 



   1.   Notice Served.  Such notice shall be served by sending by
certified mail to the owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the
Code of Iowa, if the owner is found within the City limits.  If the owner is
not found within the City limits such service may be made upon the owner by
registered mail or certified mail.  The designated period within which said
owner or person in charge is required to comply with the order of the
enforcement officer shall begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.



   2.   Hearing.  Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or
she may request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a
written request for hearing within the time provided in the notice.



145.05    CONDUCT OF HEARING.



If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the
following:



   1.   Notice.  The owner shall be served with written notice
specifying the date, time and place of hearing.



   2.   Owner’s Rights.  At the hearing, the owner may appear and
show cause why the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.



   3.   Determination.  The Council shall make and record findings of
fact and may issue such order as it deems appropriate.† 10



145.06    POSTING OF SIGNS.



The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
building a notice to read:  “DO NOT ENTER.



UNSAFE TO OCCUPY.



CITY OF FOREST CITY, IOWA.”  Such notice shall remain posted until the
required repairs, demolition, or removal are completed.  Such notice shall
not be removed without written permission of the enforcement officer and no
person shall enter the building except for the purpose of making the required
repairs or of demolishing the building.



145.07    RIGHT TO DEMOLISH.



In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or
portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted
as a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement
officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice.  A statement of
the cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



145.08    COSTS.



Costs incurred under Section 145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury. 
Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied
as a special assessment against the land on which the building or structure
is located, and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for collection in
the manner provided for other taxes. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h]) 



 


Notes

10 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order
of the Council for the administration of this chapter are provided in the
APPENDIX to this Code of Ordinances.  Caution is urged in the use of this
procedure.  We recommend you review the situation with your attorney before
initiating procedures and follow his or her recommendation carefully.



CHAPTER 146
FIRE ZONE



 

146.01  Fire Zone Established
 
146.06  Special Permit


146.02  Plans Submitted
 
146.07  Removal of Buildings


146.03  Buildings Prohibited
 
146.08  Storage of Materials Restricted


146.04  Construction Standards
 
146.09  Keeping of Explosives Limited


146.05  Reconstruction Prohibited
 



 



146.01    FIRE ZONE ESTABLISHED.



A Fire Zone is established to include all of the following territory:



Blocks 33, 34, 47, 48, 49 and 50 and the South Half of Block 32, all in
Forest City, Iowa, and Blocks 3, 4 and 5 and the South Half of Block 2, all
in Rebecca A. Clark’s Addition to Forest City, Iowa.



146.02    PLANS SUBMITTED.



It is unlawful to build, enlarge or alter any structure, building or part
thereof, within the Fire Zone until a plan of the proposed work, together
with a statement of materials to be used, has been submitted to the Clerk and
signed by the Mayor, and the Clerk shall, if such plan is in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, issue a permit for the proposed work.



146.03    BUILDINGS PROHIBITED.



The erection of any building or structure of any kind, or additions thereto,
or substantial alterations thereof, involving partial rebuilding, are
prohibited in the Fire Zone, unless constructed in strict compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.



146.04    CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



The construction standards for all buildings, structures, or parts thereof
within the Fire Zone shall be of Type I, Type II, or, at a minimum, Type III
– 1-hour fire resistant construction, as specified in the Uniform Building
Code.



146.05    RECONSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.



Any building within the Fire Zone not constructed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, which may hereafter be damaged by fire, decay, or
otherwise, shall not be rebuilt, altered, or reconstructed except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



146.06    SPECIAL PERMIT.



The Council may, by four-fifths (4/5) vote, issue a special permit to improve
any property within the Fire Zone contrary to the provisions of this chapter,
on condition that such improvement shall not increase the rates for fire
insurance or the fire hazard potential of the area, or to allow any person to
erect or move in any building or structure for temporary purposes for a
period of time not exceeding six (6) months from the date of such permission.



146.07    REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS.



Any person who erects any building in the Fire Zone, contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall be given written notice by the Mayor to
remove or tear down the same, and if such removal or taking down is not
completed within thirty (30) days from the time of the service of such
notice, the Mayor shall cause the same to be removed or taken down.  The
Mayor shall report an itemized bill of the expense to the Clerk, and the same
shall be charged to the person owning such building.  The Clerk shall
present the bill to the owner of the property and if the bill is not paid
within ten (10) days from the date it is presented, the amount of the bill
shall be certified, by the Clerk, to the County Treasurer, as a lien against
the property and collected the same as other taxes.



146.08    STORAGE OF MATERIALS RESTRICTED.



No person shall have or deposit any hay stack, straw stack, grain stack, pile
of rubbish, explosives, hazardous chemicals or other flammable substance
within the Fire Zone, nor shall any person have or deposit any cord wood or
fire wood within the Fire Zone without written permission from the Mayor,
specifying the maximum amount of such cord wood or fire wood that may be
kept, stored, or deposited on any lot or part of a lot within the Fire Zone,
unless the same is within one of the buildings allowed by this chapter.  No
person shall build or allow any fires, whether trash fires or otherwise,
within the Fire Zone as described in this chapter.



146.09    KEEPING OF EXPLOSIVES LIMITED.   



No person shall keep more than twenty-five (25) pounds of gunpowder,
guncotton or explosive within the Fire Zone; however, gasoline kept in
underground storage tanks is not prohibited.



(Ord. 768 – July 17 Supp.)



CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING



 

150.01  Definitions
 
150.03  Building Numbering Plan


150.02  Owner Requirements
 



 



150.01    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Owner” means the owner of the principal building. 



   2.   “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or
subdivision thereof.



150.02    OWNER REQUIREMENTS.



Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:



   1.   Obtain Building Number.  The owner shall obtain the assigned
number to the principal building from the Clerk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])



   2.   Display Building Number.  The owner shall place or cause to be
installed and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a
conspicuous place to the street in figures not less than two and one-half
(2½) inches in height and of a contrasting color with their background.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])



   3.   Failure to Comply.  If an owner refuses to number a building
as herein provided, or fails to do so for a period of thirty (30) days after
being notified in writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place
the assigned number on the principal building and assess the costs against
the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



150.03    BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN.



Building numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the building numbering
plan on file in the office of the Clerk.



CHAPTER 151
TREES



 

151.01  Definition
 
151.05  Disease Control


151.02  Planting Restrictions
 
151.06  Inspection and Removal


151.03  Duty to Trim Trees
 
151.07  Removal of Non-Diseased Trees


151.04  Trees Overhanging Right-of-Way
 



 



151.01    DEFINITION.



For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street, avenue
or highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line
and the curb line; or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue or
highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually
traveled by vehicular traffic. 



151.02    PLANTING RESTRICTIONS.



No tree shall be planted in any right-of-way or parking except in accordance
with the following:



   1.   Alignment.  All trees planted in any right-of-way shall be
planted in the parking midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the
curb.  In the event a curb line is not established, trees shall be planted
on a line ten (10) feet from the property line.



   2.   Spacing.  Trees shall not be planted on any parking which is
less than nine (9) feet in width, or contains less than eighty-one (81)
square feet of exposed soil surface per tree.  Trees shall not be planted
closer than twenty (20) feet from street intersections (property lines
extended) and ten (10) feet from driveways.  If it is at all possible trees
should be planted inside the property lines and not between the sidewalk and
the curb.



   3.   Prohibited Trees.  No person shall plant in any right-of-way
any fruit-bearing tree, flowering tree, small ornamental tree or any tree of
the kinds commonly known as cottonwood, poplar, box elder, Chinese elm,
evergreen, willow or black walnut.



   4.   Supports.  Trees may be guyed or supported in an upright
position according to accepted arboricultural practices.  The guys or
supports shall be fastened in such a way that they will not girdle or cause
serious injury to the trees or endanger public safety.



   5.   Easements.  Trees shall not be planted on easements.



151.03    DUTY TO TRIM TREES.



The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on or
overhanging the sidewalks trimmed so that all branches will be at least nine
(9) feet above the sidewalks.  If the abutting property owner fails to trim
the trees, the City may serve notice on the abutting property owner requiring
that such action be taken within five (5) days.  If such action is not taken
within that time, the City may perform the required action and assess the
costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a
property tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c, d & e])



151.04    TREES OVERHANGING RIGHT-OF-WAY.



No unauthorized person shall trim or cut any tree overhanging the traveled
portion of the roadway.  Trimming of trees overhanging the right-of-way
shall be the responsibility of the City.



151.05    DISEASE CONTROL.



Any dead, diseased or damaged tree or shrub which may harbor serious insect
or disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to be
a nuisance.



151.06    INSPECTION AND REMOVAL.



The Council shall inspect or cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in the
City reported or suspected to be dead, diseased or damaged, and such trees
and shrubs shall be subject to the following:



   1.   City Property.  If it is determined that any such condition
exists on any public property, including the strip between the curb and the
lot line of private property, the Council may cause such condition to be
corrected by treatment or removal.  The Council may also order the removal
of any trees on the streets of the City which interfere with the making of
improvements or with travel thereon.



   2.   Private Property.  If it is determined with reasonable
certainty that any such condition exists on private property and that danger
to other trees or to adjoining property or passing motorists or pedestrians
is imminent, the Council shall notify by certified mail the owner, occupant
or person in charge of such property to correct such condition by treatment
or removal within fourteen (14) days of said notification.  If such owner,
occupant or person in charge of said property fails to comply within 14 days
of receipt of notice, the Council may cause the condition to be corrected and
the cost assessed against the property. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b & h])



151.07    REMOVAL OF NON-DISEASED TREES.



No abutting property owner shall cut or remove any tree on public property
without first securing permission from the Council.  If the Council grants
permission to remove a tree located on public property, the abutting property
owner shall agree in writing that all costs and expenses incident to the tree
removal shall be borne by the property owner, unless such removal is
determined to be a result of Section 151.06(1) of this chapter.



CHAPTER 152
GEOTHERMAL SYSTEMS



152.01    DISCHARGE OF WATER.



Geothermal systems of the open loop type shall not discharge water on top of
the ground.



CHAPTER 160
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS



 



160.01  Statutory Authority
 
160.15  Administration


160.02  Purpose
 
160.16  Flood Plain Development Permit Required


160.03  Definitions
 
160.17  Application for Permit 


160.04  Lands to Which Chapter Applies
 
160.18  Action on Permit Application 


160.05  Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries
 
160.19  Construction and Use to Be as Provided in Application and Plans


160.06  Compliance
 
160.20  Conditional Uses, Appeals and Variances


160.07  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
 
160.21  Factors Upon Which the Decision to Grant Variances is Based


160.08  Interpretation
 
160.22  Conditions Attached to Variances


160.09  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
 
160.23  Appeals to the Court


160.10  Establishment of Zoning (Overlay) Districts
 
160.24  Nonconforming Uses


160.11  Floodway (Overlay) District – FW
 
160.25  Penalties for Violations


160.12  Floodway Fringe (Overlay) district - FF
 
160.26  Severability


160.13  General Flood Plain (Overlay) District – FP
 
160.27  Amendments


160.14  Shallow Flooding (Overlay) District – SF
 




 



160.01    STATUTORY AUTHORITY.



The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, as
amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to secure
safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.



160.02    PURPOSE.



It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges and property of the City and its residents and to preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare and comfort and convenience of its
residents by minimizing flood losses with provisions designed to:



   1.   Reserve sufficient flood plain area for the conveyance of flood
flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased
substantially.



   2.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, or property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in
flood heights or velocities.



   3.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public
utilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the
time of initial construction or substantial improvement.



   4.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited
for intended purposes because of flood hazard. 



   5.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in
the community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood
Insurance Program. 



160.03    DEFINITIONS.



Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   1.   “Appurtenant Structure” means a structure which is on the
same parcel of the property as the principal structure to be insured and the
use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.



   2.   “Base flood” means the flood having one percent (1%) chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.  (See 100-year flood.)



   3.   “Base Flood Elevation” means the elevation floodwaters
would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.



   4.   “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has
its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides.  Also
see “lowest floor.”



   5.   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations.  “Development” does not include minor projects or
routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities as defined in the
section.  It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading.



   6.   “Existing construction” means any structure for which the
“start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map.  May also be referred to as
“existing structure.” 



   7.   “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a
factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) was completed before the effective date of these flood plain
management regulations.



   8.   “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or
subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to
be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads).



   9.   “Factory-built home” means any structure designed for
residential use which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated,
formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly
and installation on a building site.  For the purpose of this chapter,
factory-built homes include mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular
homes and also includes “recreational vehicles” which are placed on a
site for greater than 180 consecutive days and not fully licensed for and
ready for highway use.



   10.   “Factory-built home park” means a parcel or contiguous
parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or
lease.



   11.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow
of streams or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters
from any source. 



   12.   “Flood elevation” means the elevation floodwaters would
reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood.  For
instance, the 100-year flood elevation is the elevation of floodwaters
related to the occurrence of the 100-year flood.



   13.   “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map
prepared as part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study
which delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community. 



   14.   “Flood Insurance Study” means an examination, evaluation
and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations.



   15.   “Flood plain” means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water as a result of a flood.



   16.   “Flood plain management” means an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting
the wise use of flood plains, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and flood plain
management regulations. 



   17.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including
utility and sanitary facilities which will reduce or eliminate flood damage
to such structures. 



   18.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and
those portions of the flood plains adjoining the channel, which are
reasonably required to carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so
that confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot.



   19.   “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the flood plain,
other than the floodway, which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed
without causing substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.



   20.   “Highest Adjacent Grade” means the highest natural
elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed
walls of a structure. 



   21.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:



      A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places, maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing in the National Register;



      B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;



      C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or,



      D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified by either (i) an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior
in states without approved programs.



   22.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area
in a building including a basement except when all the following criteria are
met:



      A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize
hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the
provisions of Section 160.11(4)(A); and



      B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled,
etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access,
parking or storage; and



      C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater,
furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at
least one foot above the 100-year flood level; and



      D.   The enclosed area is not a “basement” as defined in
this section.



In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria A, B, C and D
above, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that
does not satisfy the criteria above.



   23.   “Minor Projects” means small development activities
(except for filling, grading and excavating) valued at less than $500. 



   24.   “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home
parks) means those structures or development for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of the Flood Insurance
Rate Map.



   25.   “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a
factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of these flood
plain management regulations.



   26.   “100-Year Flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has
a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or
which, on the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every one
hundred (100) years. 



   27.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:



      A.   Built on a single chassis;



      B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projection;



      C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and



      D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   28.   “Routine Maintenance of Existing Building and Facilities”
means repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition
that do not trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with
a general improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. 
Such repairs include;



      A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing,
replacing roofing tiles, and replacing siding;



      B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling,
carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finishing work;



      C.   Basement sealing;



      D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;



      E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating
or air conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.



   29.   “Special flood hazard area” means the land within a
community subject to the “100-year flood.”  This land is identified as
Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.



   30.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement,
and means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.  The
actual start means either the first placement or permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation
of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. 
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.



   31.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the
ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks and other
similar uses.



   32.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained
by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damage condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.



   33.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a
structure which satisfies either of the following criteria:



      A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either (i) before the “start of
construction” of the improvement, or (ii) if the structure has been
“substantially damaged” and is being restored, before the damage
occurred.  The term does not, however, include any project for improvement
of a structure to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe
conditions for the existing use.  The term also does not include any
alteration of an “historic structure,” provided the alteration will not
preclude the structure’s designation as an “historic structure.”



      B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a
building by twenty-five percent (25%) or more.  All additions constructed
after the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map, shall be added to
any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original
floor space would exceed twenty-five percent.



   34.   “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the
terms of the flood plain management regulations.



   35.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other
development to be fully compliant with this chapter.



160.04    LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.



The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the
jurisdiction of the City shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map as
being within the boundaries of the Floodway, Floodway Fringe, General Flood
Plain and Shallow Flooding (Overlay) Districts.  The Flood Insurance Rate
Maps for Hancock County, City of Forest City, Panels 19081C0069D, 0075D,
0088D, 0182D, 0201D, dated April 4th, 2018 which were prepared as part of the
Flood Insurance Study for Hancock County, are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.  The flood profiles and
all explanatory material contained with the Flood Insurance Study are also
declared to be a part of this chapter.†



160.05    RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



The boundaries of the zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling
distances on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.  When an interpretation is
needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Administrator shall make
the necessary interpretation.  The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide
appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.



160.06    COMPLIANCE.



No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be
located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply
to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.



160.07    ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall prevail. 
Any ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.



160.08    INTERPRETATION.



In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor
of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by State statutes.



160.09    WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



The standards required by this chapter are considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes.  This chapter does not imply that areas outside the
designated Flood Plain (Overlay) District areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.  This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.



160.10    ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS.



The flood plain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby
divided into the following districts: 



   1.   Floodway District (FW)



   2.   Floodway Fringe District (FF)



   3.   General Flood Plain District (FP)



   4.   Shallow Flooding District (SF).



The boundaries are as shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.  Within
these districts all uses not allowed as permitted uses or permissible as
conditional uses are prohibited unless a variance to the terms of this
chapter is granted after due consideration by the Board of Adjustment.



160.11    FLOODWAY (OVERLAY) DISTRICT - FW.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses shall be permitted within
the Floodway District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not include
placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstruction, the
storage of material or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse.



      A.   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture,
grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.



      B.   Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking
areas, airport landing strips.



      C.   Private and public recreational uses such as golf
courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game
farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet
ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.



      D.   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas
and play areas.



      E.   Such other open-space uses similar in nature to the above
uses.



   2.   Conditional Uses.  The following uses which involve structures
(temporary or permanent), fill, storage of materials or equipment, excavation
or alteration of a watercourse may be permitted only upon issuance of a
conditional use permit by the Board of Adjustment as provided for in Section
160.19.  Such uses must also meet the applicable provisions of the Floodway
District Performance Standards.



      A.   Uses or structures accessory to open-space uses.



      B.   Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement
enterprises.



      C.   Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside
stands, signs, and billboards.



      D.   Extraction of sands, gravel, and other materials.



      E.   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, and wharves.



      F.   Utility transmission lines and underground pipelines.



      G.   Other uses similar in nature to uses described in
Subsection 1 and in this subsection,  which are consistent with the
provisions of Subsection 3 and the general spirit and purpose of this chapter.



   3.   Performance Standards.  All Floodway District uses allowed as
a permitted or conditional use shall meet the following standards:



      A.   No use shall be permitted in the Floodway District that
would result in any increase in the 100-year flood level.  Consideration of
the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands.



      B.   All uses within the Floodway District shall:



         (1)   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.



         (2)   Use construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



         (3)   Use construction materials and utility equipment
that are resistant to flood damage.



      C.   No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the
channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or
any other facility or system.



      D.   Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems,
if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the Floodway
Fringe District and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum
possible resistance to flood flows.



      E.   Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage
potential and shall not be for human habitation.



      F.   Storage of equipment or materials that are buoyant,
flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited.  Storage of other material may be allowed if readily removable
from the Floodway District within the time available after flood warning.



      G.   Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes
and modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion.  In addition, such alterations or
relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.



      H.   Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have
some beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.



      I.   Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the
streambed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture
due to channel degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows.



160.12    FLOODWAY FRINGE (OVERLAY) DISTRICT - FF.



All uses within the Floodway Fringe District shall be permitted to the extent
that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning
district) and provided they meet applicable performance standards of the
Floodway Fringe District.  All uses must be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and shall meet the following applicable performance
standards.



   1.   All structures shall:



      A.   Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure.



      B.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.



      C.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize
flood damage.



   2.   Residential Buildings.  All new or substantially improved
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level.  Construction
shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one
foot above the 100-year flood level and extend at such elevation at least 18
feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon.  Alternate methods
of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed, subject to favorable
consideration by the Board of Adjustment, where existing topography, street
grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill.  In such cases, the
methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand
the various forces and hazards associated with flooding.  All new
residential structures shall be provided with a means of access which will be
passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.



   3.   Nonresidential Buildings.  All new or substantially improved
non-residential buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level, or together
with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a
level.  When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered
in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are
adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and
uplift forces and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that
the structure, below the 100-year flood level, is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water.  A record of the
certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to North
American to which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the
Administrator.



   4.   All new and substantially improved structures.



      A.   Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor” (not
including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters.  Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:



         (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.



         (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade.



         (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.



Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and
low damage potential storage.



      B.   New and substantially improved structures must be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.



      C.   New and substantially improved structures must be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.



   5.   Factory-built Homes.



      A.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes,
including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions,
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
structure is a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level.



      B.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes,
including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions,
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. 
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top
or frame ties to ground anchors.



   6.   Utility and Sanitary Systems.



      A.   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be
located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from
the system during flooding.



      B.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters.  Wastewater
treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a
level of flood protection equal to or greater than one foot above the
100-year flood elevation.



      C.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
Water supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be
provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above
the 100-year flood elevation.



      D.   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system
and the risk associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.



   7.   Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable,
explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless
elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level.  Other
material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or (i) not be
subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to
flood waters or (ii) be readily removable from the area within the time
available after flood warning.



   8.   Flood control structural works such as levees, flood-walls,
etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a
minimum of 3 feet of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior
drainage.  In addition, structural flood control works shall be approved by
the Department of Natural Resources.



   9.   Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to
maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion.  In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by
the Department of Natural Resources.



   10.   Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation
of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this
chapter.  Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide
all lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles
during the 100-year flood.  Proposals for subdivisions greater than five (5)
acres or fifty (50) lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-year flood
elevation data for those areas located within the Floodway Fringe (Overlay)
District.



   11.   Accessory Structures to Residential Uses.



      A.   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are
incidental to a residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation
requirements where the following criteria are satisfied:



         (1)   The structure shall not be used for human
habitation.  The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage
potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage.



         (2)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential.  Its size shall not exceed 600 sq. ft. in size.  Those
portions of the structure located less than 1-foot above the BFE must be
constructed of flood-resistant materials.



         (3)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters.



         (4)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement which may result in damage to other
structures.



         (5)   The structure’s service facilities such as
electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation.



         (6)   The structure’s walls shall include openings
that satisfy the provisions of CH 160.11 (4) A of this Ordinance.



      B.   Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements
for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance coverage of the structure and its contents.



   12.   Recreational Vehicles.



      A.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of
Section 160.12(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of
factory-built homes when the following criteria are satisfied.



         (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the
site for less than 180 consecutive days, and



         (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed
and ready for highway use.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.



      B.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for
more than 180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy
requirements of Section 160.11(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and
elevation of factory-built homes.



   13.   Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the
stream bed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture
due to channel degradation and meandering.



160.13    GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT - FP.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses shall be permitted within
the General Flood Plain District to the extent they are not prohibited by any
other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not
include placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other
obstructions; the storage of materials or equipment; excavation or alteration
of a watercourse.



      A.   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture,
grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.



      B.   Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking
areas, and airport landing strips.



      C.   Private and public recreation uses such as golf courses,
tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching
ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting
and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.



      D.   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas
and play areas.



   2.   Conditional Uses.  Any use which involves placement of
structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions; the storage of
materials or equipment; excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be
allowed only upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the Board of
Adjustment as provided for in Section 160.19.  All such uses shall be
reviewed by the Department of Natural Resources to determine (i) whether the
land involved is either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway
fringe and (ii) the 100-year flood level.  The applicant shall be
responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient
technical information to make the determination.



   3.   Performance Standards.



      A.   All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located
in the floodway as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall
meet the applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway (Overlay)
District (Section 160.10).



      B.   All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located
in the floodway fringe as determined by the Department of Natural Resources
shall meet the applicable standards of the Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District
(Section 160.11).



160.14    SHALLOW FLOODING (OVERLAY) DISTRICT - SF.



All uses within the Shallow Flooding District shall be permitted to the
extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying
zoning district) and provided they meet the applicable performance standards
of the Shallow Flooding District.  The performance standards for the Shallow
Flooding District shall be the same as the performance standards for the
Floodway Fringe District with the following exceptions:



   1.   In shallow flooding areas designated as an AO Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection elevation
shall be equal to the number of feet as specified on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (or a minimum of 2.0 feet if no number is specified) above the highest
natural grade adjacent to the structure.



   2.   In shallow flooding areas designated as an AH Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection elevation
shall be equal to the elevation as specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.



   3.   In shallow flooding areas required adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from the
proposed structures.



160.15    ADMINISTRATION.



The Clerk shall administer and enforce this chapter and will herein be
referred to as the Administrator.  The duties and responsibilities of the
Administrator include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:



   1.   Review all flood plain development permit applications to
assure that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.



   2.   Review all flood plain development permit applications to
assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from Federal, State or
local governmental agencies including approval when required from the
Department of Natural Resources for flood plain construction.



   3.   Record and maintain a record of (i) the elevation (in relation
to North American Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new or substantially improved structures or (ii) the elevation to which
new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.



   4.   Notify adjacent communities and/or countries and the Department
of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.



   5.   Keep a record of all permits, appeals, and such other
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this
chapter.



   6.   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report
concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administrator.



   7.   Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations
or modifications to the community’s boundaries.



   8.   Review subdivision proposals to insure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Council of
potential conflicts.



160.16    FLOOD PLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.



A Flood Plain Development Permit issued by the Administrator shall be secured
prior to any flood plain development (any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations) including the placement of factory-built homes.



160.17    APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



Application for a Flood Plain Development Permit shall be made on forms
supplied by the Administrator and shall include the following information.



   1.   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.



   2.   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be
done (i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that
will readily identify and locate the work to be done.



   3.   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work
is intended.



   4.   Elevation of the 100-year flood.



   5.   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a
building is to be floodproofed.



   6.   For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.



   7.   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.



160.18    ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION.



The Administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination as to
whether the proposed flood plain development meets the applicable standards
of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the application.  For
disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing, of the specific
reasons therefor.  The Administrator shall not issue permits for variances
except as directed by the Board of Adjustment.



160.19    CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATION AND PLANS.



Flood Plain Development Permits issued on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth
in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or
construction.  Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.  The applicant shall
be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land
surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished
fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing or other flood protection
measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.



160.20    CONDITIONAL USES, APPEALS AND VARIANCES.



The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide (i) applications for
conditional uses upon which the Board is authorized to pass under this
chapter; (ii) appeals, and (iii) requests for variances to the provisions of
this chapter; and shall take any other action which is required of the Board.



   1.   Conditional Uses.  Requests for conditional uses shall be
submitted to the Administrator, who shall forward such to the Board of
Adjustment for consideration.  Such requests shall include information
ordinarily submitted with applications as well as any additional information
deemed necessary by the Board of Adjustment.



   2.   Appeals.  Where it is alleged there is any error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal such
action.  The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment
and with the official from whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the
specific reason for the appeal.  The official from whom the appeal is taken
shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the documents constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.



   3.   Variances.  The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request
in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not
be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship.  Variances granted must meet the following applicable
standards.



      A.   Variances shall only be granted upon (i) a showing of
good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a
determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.



      B.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood would
result.  Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels
shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would
be allowed for similarly situated lands.



      C.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      D.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of
flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this
chapter, the applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the
Administrator that (i) the issuance of a variance will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage and (ii) such construction increases risks to life and
property.



      E.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or
approval of the Department of Natural Resources.



   4.   Hearings and Decisions of the Board of Adjustment.



      A.   Hearings.  Upon the filing with the Board of Adjustment
of an appeal, an application for a conditional use or a request for a
variance, the Board shall hold a public hearing.  The Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well as
due notice to parties in interest.  At the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence.  The
Board may require the appellant or applicant to provide such information as
is reasonably deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance
and/or evaluation of a professional engineer or other expert person or
agency, including the Department of Natural Resources.



      B.   Decisions.  The Board shall arrive at a decision on an
appeal, conditional use or variance within a reasonable time.  In passing
upon an appeal, the Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm wholly or in part, or
modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and
it shall make its decision, in writing, setting forth the findings of fact
and the reasons for its decision.  In granting a conditional use or
variance, the Board shall consider such factors as contained in this section
and all other relevant sections of this chapter and may prescribe such
conditions as contained in Section 160.21.



160.21    FACTORS UPON WHICH THE DECISION TO GRANT VARIANCES IS BASED.



In passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider all
relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:



   1.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments.



   2.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.



   3.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions.



   4.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.



   5.   The importance of the service provided by the proposed facility
to the City.



   6.   The requirements of the facility for a flood plain location.



   7.   The availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.



   8.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.



   9.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and flood plain management program for the area.



   10.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.



   11.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.



   12.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
(sewer, gas, electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.



   13.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.



160.22    CONDITIONS ATTACHED TO VARIANCES.



Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the Board of Adjustment may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purpose of this chapter.  Such conditions may include, but not
necessarily be limited to:



   1.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.



   2.   Limitation on periods of use and operation.



   3.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.



   4.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter.



   5.   Floodproofing measures designed consistent with the flood
protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, durations,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors
associated with the regulatory flood.  The Board of Adjustment shall require
that the applicant submit a plan or document certified by a registered
professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the
regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the
particular area.



160.23    APPEALS TO THE COURT.



Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the
Board of Adjustment may present to a court of record a petition, duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part,
specifying the grounds of illegality.  Such petition shall be presented to
the court within thirty days after the filing of the decision in the office
of the Board.



160.24    NONCONFORMING USES.



   1.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was
lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to
the following conditions:



      A.   If such use is discontinued for 18 consecutive months,
any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.



      B.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances
shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.



      C.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more
than fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.



   2.   Except as provided in subsection B above, any use which has
been permitted as a conditional use or variance shall be considered a
conforming use.



160.25    PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.



Violations of the provisions of this Chapter or failure to comply with any of
the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of Conditional Uses or Variances) shall
constitute a misdemeanor.  Any person who violates this Chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than Thirty (30) days. 
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
Nothing herein contained prevent the City of Forest City from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy violations.



160.26    SEVERABILITY.



If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this Ordinance is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.



160.27    AMENDMENTS.



The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time
be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed.  No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.




(Ch. 160 -Ord. 779 – May 18 Supp.)




CHAPTER 165
ZONING REGULATIONS



 



GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
 
165.23  Approved Action by Board


165.01  Short Title
 
165.24  Appeals from the Board of Adjustment


165.02  Purpose
 


165.03  Application of District Regulations
 
DISTRICT REGULATIONS


165.04  Official Zoning Map
 
165.25  Districts Established


165.05  Replacement of Official Zoning Map
 
165.26  AG – Agricultural District


165.06  Two-Mile Extension
 
165.27  CN – Conservation District


165.07  Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries
 
165.28  RS – Residential Single-Family District


165.08  Definitions
 
165.29  RM – Residential Multi-Family District


 
165.30  RMO – Residential Multi-Family Optional District


NONCONFORMITIES
 
165.31  MH – Mobile Home District


165.09  Intent
 
165.32  AC – Arterial Commercial District


165.10  Nonconforming Lots of Record
 
165.33  BC – Business Commercial District


165.11  Nonconforming Uses of Land (or Land with Minor Structures Only)
 
165.34  LI – Light Industrial District


165.12  Nonconforming Structures
 
165.35  HI – Heavy Industrial District


165.13  Nonconforming Uses of Structures or of Structures and Land in
Combination
 


165.14  Repairs and Maintenance
 
SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS


165.15  Uses Under Special Exception Provisions Not Nonconforming Uses
 
165.36  Residential Dwelling Standards


 
165.37  Supplementary Regulations for Residential Districts


ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
 
165.37A  Wind Turbines


165.16  Administrator
 
165.37B  Solar Farms


165.16  Administrator
 


165.17  Zoning/Building Permits Required
 
ENFORCEMENT AND AMENDMENTS


165.18  Board of Adjustment Created
 
165.38  Enforcement and Interpretation


165.19  Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment
 
165.39  Amendments


165.20  Administrative Review
 
165.40  Violation


165.21  Special Exceptions
 
165.41  Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses


165.22  Variances
 
165.42  Complaints Regarding Violations


 
165.43  Historic Preservation




 



GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS



165.01    SHORT TITLE.



This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Forest City,
Iowa, Zoning Ordinance.”



165.02    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to provide adequate light and air, to prevent
the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to
regulate the use of land, and to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare in the City of Forest City, Iowa.



165.03    APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.



The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or
land, and particularly, except as hereinafter provided:



   1.   No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or
occupied, no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in
conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located.



   2.   No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking
or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the
purpose of complying with this chapter, shall be included as part of a yard,
open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any
other building.



   3.   No yard or lot existing as of the effective date of this
chapter shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements
set forth herein.  Yards or lots created after the effective date of this
chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.



   4.   Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with
the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations,
ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that
imposing the higher standards shall govern.



   5.   All structures existing, as of the effective date of this
chapter and which comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter, shall
be considered lawful and be allowed to continue and exist or be reconstructed
as they currently exist.



165.04    OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



The City and surrounding unincorporated lands located in Winnebago County
which are within a two-mile radius of the City shall be divided into
districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map which, together with all
explanatory matter thereon, shall be adopted by ordinance.  One map shall
identify the unincorporated area and the other shall identify the
incorporated area.  Together, these two maps shall be known as the Official
Zoning Map.



   1.   The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of
the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, under the following words:  “This
is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section
165.04 of Ordinance No. 480 of the City of Forest City, Iowa,” together
with the date of adoption.



   2.   If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, changes are made in district boundaries or other
matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on
the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the
City Council, with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows:  “By
official action of the City Council, the following changes were made to the
Official Zoning Map.”  (Indicating the changes by ordinance numbers and
date of publication.)



   3.   No amendment of this chapter which involves matter portrayed on
the Official Zoning Map shall become effective until after such change and
entry has been made on said map.



165.05    REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or
difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and
additions, the City Council may by ordinance adopt a new Official Zoning Map
which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map.  The new Official
Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior
Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect ofamending
the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof.



   1.   The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the
signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bearing the Seal of
the City under the following words: “This is to certify that this Official
Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted as part of
Ordinance No. ______ of the City of Forest City, Iowa.”



   2.   Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been
totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining
shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its
adoption or amendment.



165.06    TWO-MILE EXTENSION.



All regulations within this chapter shall apply to lands located in Winnebago
County which are within two miles of the City as shown on the Official Zoning
Map of the City.  The exemption from regulation granted by Section 414.23,
Code of Iowa, to property used for agricultural purposes shall apply to said
unincorporated area.  The specific regulations and districts hereunder shall
be terminated within three months of the establishment of the administrative
authority for County zoning, or at such date as mutually agreed upon by the
City and County.



165.07    RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:



   1.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines
of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.



   2.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.



   3.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits
shall be construed as following such City limits.



   4.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be
construed to be midway between the main tracks.



   5.   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed
to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall
be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as
approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, or other bodies
of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.



   6.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in Subsections 1 through 5 above shall be so construed.  Distances
not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by
the scale of the map.



   7.   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered by Subsections 1 through 6 above, the Board of
Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries.



   8.   Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in
single ownership at the time of adoption of the Zoning Ordinance, the Board
of Adjustment may permit, as a special exception, the extension of the
regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the
district line into the remaining portion of the lot.



   9.   Whenever the Council vacates and disposes of a street or alley,
adjacent districts shall extend to the centerline of the vacation.



   10.   Whenever a variance exists between the Official Zoning Map and
the legal description on an amendment to this chapter, the legal description
applies.



165.08    DEFINITIONS.



For purposes of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows.  The words “used or occupied” include the words
“intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied.”  The word
“lot” includes the words “plot or parcel,” and the following terms
shall be defined as follows:



   1.   “Abutting” means having property or district lines in
common.



   2.   “Access” means a way of approaching or entering a property
from a public street or alley.



   3.   “Accessory building” means a subordinate building located
on the same lot with the main building, occupied by or devoted to an
accessory use.  Where an accessory building is attached to the main building
in a substantial manner, such as by a wall or roof, such accessory building
shall be considered part of the main building.



   4.   “Accessory use” means a use customarily incidental and
subordinate to the main use of the land or building and located on the same
lot therewith.  In no case shall such accessory use dominate, in area,
extent or purpose, the principal lawful use or building.



   5.   “Agriculture” means the production, keeping or maintenance,
for sale, lease, or personal use, of plants and animals useful to humans,
including but not limited to:  forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops;
dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock,
including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, mules, goats, or any mutations
or hybrids thereof including the breeding and grazing of any or all such
animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products;
fruits of all kinds; vegetables; or land devoted to a soil conservation or
forestry management program.



   6.   “Alley” means a public way, other than a street, 20 feet or
less in width, affording secondary means of access to abutting property.



   7.   “Basement” means a story having part but not more than
one-half (½) its height above grade.  A basement shall be counted as a
story if the vertical distance from the average adjoining grade to its
ceiling is over five feet.



   8.   “Bed and breakfast house” means a house or portion thereof
where short-term lodging, rooms, and meals are provided.  The operator shall
live on the premises.



   9.   “Board” means the Board of Adjustment.



   10.   “Boarding house” means a building other than a hotel
where, for compensation, meals and lodging are provided for four or more
persons.



   11.   “Building” means any structure designed or intended for
the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or
property, but not including signs or billboards and not including structures
or vehicles originally designed for transportation purposes.



   12.   “Building, height of” means the vertical distance from the
average natural grade at the building line to the highest point of the coping
of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mean height
level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.



   13.   “District” means a section or sections of the City within
which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the
height and area of buildings and premises are uniform.



   14.   “Dwelling” means any building or portion thereof designed
or used exclusively for residential purposes, but not including a tent,
cabin, trailer, or mobile home.



   15.   “Dwelling, multiple” means a building or portion thereof
designed for or occupied exclusively for residence purposes by two or more
families.



   16.   “Dwelling, single-family” means a building designed for or
occupied exclusively for residence purposes by one family.



   17.   “Dwelling, two-family” means a building designed for or
occupied exclusively for residence purposes by two families.



   18.   “Family” means one or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption occupying a single dwelling unit.  A family does not
include more than four persons unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption;
however, domestic employees employed on the premises may be housed on the
premises without being counted as a family or families.



   19.   “Family home” means a community-based residential home
which is licensed as a residential care facility under Chapter 135C of the
Code of Iowa or as a child foster care facility under Chapter 237 of the Code
of Iowa to provide room and board, personal care, habilitation services, and
supervision in a family environment exclusively for not more than eight
developmentally disabled persons and any necessary support personnel. 
However, “family home” does not mean an individual foster care family
home licensed under Chapter 237 of the Code of Iowa.



   20.   Garage” means a building or portion thereof in which a motor
vehicle containing gasoline, distillate or other volatile, flammable liquid
in its tank is stored, repaired, or kept.



   21.   “Garage, private” means a building or part thereof
accessory to a main building and providing for the storage of automobiles and
in which no occupation or business for profit is carried on.



   22.   “Garage, public or storage” means a building or part
thereof other than a private garage for the storage of motor vehicles and in
which service station activities may be carried on.



   23.   “Grade” means the average elevation of the finished ground
at the exterior walls of the main building.



   24.   “Health care facility” means any residential care
facility, intermediate care facility, or skilled nursing facility.



      A.   Residential Care Facility.  A residential care facility
is any institution, place, building, or agency providing for a period
exceeding 24 consecutive hours’ accommodation, board, personal assistance
and other essential daily living activities to three or more individuals, not
related to the administrator or owner thereof within the third degree of
consanguinity, who by reason of illness, disease, or physical or mental
infirmity are unable to sufficiently or properly care for themselves but who
do not require the services of a registered or licensed practical nurse
except on an emergency basis.



      B.   Intermediate Care Facility.  An intermediate care
facility is any institution, place, building or agency providing for a period
exceeding 24 consecutive hours’ accommodation, board, and nursing services,
the need for which is certified by a physician, to three or more individuals,
not related to the administrator or owner thereof within the third degree of
consanguinity, who by reason of illness, disease, or physical or mental
infirmity require nursing services which can be provided only under the
direction of a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse.



      C.   Skilled Nursing Facility.  A skilled nursing facility is
any institution, place, building, or agency providing for a period exceeding
24 consecutive hours’ accommodation, board, and nursing services, the need
for which is certified by a physician, to three or more individuals not
related to the administrator or owner thereof within the third degree of
consanguinity who by reason of illness, disease, or physical or mental
infirmity require continuous nursing care services and related medical
services, but do not require hospital care.  The nursing care services
provided must be under the direction of a registered nurse on a
24-hours-per-day basis.



   25.   “Home occupation” means an occupation conducted in a
dwelling unit, provided that:



      A.   Not more than two persons other than members of the
family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation, except
by special exception by the Board of Adjustment, which may allow one
additional person from outside the family to be employed.



      B.   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation
shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential
purposes by its occupants, and not more than 50% of the gross floor area of
one floor of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home
occupation. 



      C.   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the
building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home
occupation, other than one sign, not exceeding three square feet in area,
non-illuminated and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building.



      D.   No home occupation may be conducted in any accessory
building, except by special exception of the Board of Adjustment.



      E.   No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in
greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home
occupation shall be met by providing off-street parking and shall not be in a
required front yard.



      F.   No equipment or process shall be used in such home
occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation
is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if
conducted in other than a single-family residence.  No equipment or process
shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or
television receivers off the premises or cause fluctuations in line voltage
off the premises.



   26.   “Hospital” means an institution which is devoted primarily
to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment
or care over a period exceeding 24 hours of two or more non-related
individuals suffering from illness, injury, or deformity, or a place which is
devoted primarily to the rendering over a period exceeding 24 hours of
obstetrical or other medical or nursing care for two or more non-related
individuals, or any institution, place, building or agency in which any
accommodation is primarily maintained, furnished or offered for the care over
a period exceeding 24 hours of two or more non-related aged or infirm persons
requiring or receiving chronic or convalescent care; and shall include
sanitoriums or other related institutions.  Provided, however, this shall
not apply to hotels or other similar places that furnish only food and
lodging, or either, to their guests.  “Hospital” includes, in any event,
any facilities wholly or partially constructed with Federal financial
assistance, pursuant to Public Law 725, 79th Congress, approved August 13,
1946.



   27.   “Hotel” means a building occupied as the more or less
temporary residence of individuals who are lodged for compensation with or
without meals, in which there are sleeping rooms or suites of rooms with no
provision made for cooking in any individual room or suite of rooms, and
entrance is through a common lobby or office.



   28.   “Junk yard” means any area where waste, discarded or
salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled or packed, disassembled
or handled, including places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking
and structural steel materials and equipment; but not including areas where
such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building and
not including the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part
of manufacturing operations. 



   29.   “Kennel (commercial)” means an establishment in which dogs
or domestic animals more than one year old are housed, groomed, bred,
boarded, trained, or sold.



   30.   “Lodging house” means a building originally designed for
or used as a single-family, two-family, or multiple-family dwelling, all or a
portion of which contains lodging rooms or rooming units which accommodate
persons who are not members of the keeper’s family.  Lodging or meals, or
both, are provided for compensation.  The term “lodging house” shall be
construed to include:  boarding house, rooming house, fraternity house,
sorority house and dormitories.



   31.   “Lot” means, for purposes of this chapter, a parcel of
land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use,
coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are
herein required.  Such lot shall have frontage on an approved public street,
or on an approved private street, and may consist of:



      A.   A single lot of record;



      B.   A portion of a lot of record;



      C.   A combination of complete lots of record, or complete
lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of
record;



      D.   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds, provided
that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel
be created which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.



   32.   “Lot frontage” means the portion of a lot nearest the
street.  For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots
and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered
frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under “Yards” in this
section. 



   33.   “Lot measurements” include:



      A.   Width of a lot is the distance between straight lines
connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across
the building line; provided, however, width between side lot lines at their
foremost points (where they intersect with the street line or front property
line) shall not be less than 80% of the required lot width except in the case
of lots on the turning circle of a cul-de-sac where 80% requirement shall not
apply.



      B.   Depth of a lot is the distance between the mid-points of
straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front
and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.



   34.   “Lot of record” means a lot which is part of a subdivision
recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described
by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.



   35.   “Lot types” are shown in the chart on the following page
which illustrates terminology used in this chapter with reference to
“corner” lots, “interior” lots, “through” lots, and “reversed
corner” lots as follows:



      A.   A “corner” lot is a lot located at the intersection
of two or more streets.



      B.   An “interior” lot is a lot other than a corner lot
with only one frontage on a street other than an alley.



      C.   A “through” lot is a lot other than a corner lot with
frontage on more than one street other than an alley.  Lots with frontage on
two nonintersecting streets may be referred to as “through” lots.  All
accessory or principal buildings located in the rear yard of a through lot
must either comply with the minimum front yard set-back requirements of the
street abutting the rear yard or be placed so as to align with other existing
buildings abutting the street.



      D.   A “reversed corner” lot is a corner lot, the side
street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of
the first lot to its rear.



CHART - LOT







   36.   “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure, built
under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Section 5403, which was constructed on or
after June 15, 1976, and is required by Federal law to display a seal from
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.



   37.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used
or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance
upon the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed or
reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human
habitation by one or more persons, and also includes any such vehicle with
motive power not registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa.  A mobile home means
any such vehicle built before June 15, 1976, which was not built to a
mandatory building code and which contains no State or Federal seals.



   38.   “Modular home” means a factory-built structure built on a
permanent chassis which is manufactured to be used as a place of human
habitation, is constructed to comply with the Iowa State Building Code for
modular factory-built structures, and must display the seal issued by the
State Building Code Commissioner.



   39.   “Motel” (also motor hotel, motor court, motor lodge, or
tourist court) means a building or group of buildings designed to provide
sleeping accommodations to transient guests for compensation, and provides
near each guest room a parking space for the guest’s vehicle.  A swimming
pool, restaurant, meeting rooms, management offices and other such accessory
facilities may be included.



   40.   “Nonconformities” means lots, structures, uses of land and
structures, or characteristics of uses, which are prohibited under the terms
of the Zoning Ordinance but were lawful at the date of enactment of this
chapter.



   41.   “Nursing or convalescent home” means a building or
structure having accommodations and where care is provided for invalid,
infirm, aged, convalescent or physically disabled persons, not including
insane and other mental cases, inebriate or contagious cases.



   42.   “Parking space” means an area of not less than 180 square
feet either within a structure or in the open, exclusive of driveway or
access drives, for the parking of a motor vehicle.



   43.   “Permitted use” means a use by right which is specifically
authorized in a particular zoning district.



   44.   “Principal use” means the main use of land or structures
as distinguished from an accessory use.



   45.   “Projections” (into yards) means parts of buildings such
as architectural features that extend beyond the building’s exterior wall.



   46.   “Service station” (gas station) means a building or
premises used for dispensing or offering for sale at retail any automobile
fuels, oils, or having pumps and storage tanks therefor, or where battery,
tire or any similar services are rendered, and where vehicles are not parked
for purposes of inspection or sale.



   47.   “Setback” means the required distance between every
structure and lot line on the lot in which it is located.



   48.   “Sign” means any advertising device or surface outdoors,
on or off premises, on which letters, illustrations, designs, figures or
symbols are printed or attached and which conveys information or
identification.



   49.   “Sign, off-premises” means an advertising device including
the supporting structure which directs the attention of the general public to
a business, service, or activity not usually conducted or a product not
usually sold upon the premises where such a sign is located.  Such a sign
shall not include:  on-premises signs, directional or other official signs
which have a significant portion of their face devoted to giving public
service information (date, time, temperature, weather, information, etc.)



   50.   “Sign, on-premises” means an advertising device concerning
the sale or lease of the property upon which it is located and an advertising
device concerning activities conducted or products sold on the property upon
which it is located.



   51.   “Statement of intent” means a statement preceding
regulations for individual districts, intended to characterize the districts
and their legislative purpose.



   52.   “Story” means that portion of a building included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there
is no floor above, then the space between the floor and the ceiling and the
ceiling or roof next above.



   53.   “Story, half” means a space under a sloping roof which has
the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than four
feet above the top floor level.  A half-story containing independent
apartments or living quarters shall be counted as a full story.



   54.   “Street” means all property dedicated or intended for
public or private use for access to abutting lands or subject to public
easements therefor, and whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane,
place, circle, or however otherwise designated.



   55.   “Street line” means the right-of-way line of a street.



   56.   “Structural alteration” means any change in the supporting
members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or
girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls.



   57.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected which
requires location on the ground or attached to something having location on
the ground, including signs and billboards, and excluding temporary political
and real estate signs but not including fences or walls used as fences.



   58.   “Use” means the purpose or activity for which a piece of
land or its buildings is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is
occupied or maintained.



   59.   “Variance” means a device used by the Board of Adjustment
which grants a property owner relief from certain provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance when, because of the particular physical surrounds, shape or
topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in
particular hardship upon the owner, and which further meets the criteria
established in Section 165.22 of this chapter.



   60.   “Yard” means an open space on the same lot with a
building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the
ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein.  In measuring a yard for
the purpose of determining the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear
yard, the least distance between the lot line and the main building shall be
used.  Fences and walls are permitted in any yard, subject to height
limitations as indicated herein.  (See Chart on following page.)



   61.   “Yard, front” means a yard extending across the width of
the lot and measured between the front lot line and the building or any
projection thereof, other than the projection of the usual steps or
unenclosed porches.  On corner lots the front yard shall be either side for
the purpose of selecting the rear yard.  Corner lots shall meet the front
yard requirements on each street frontage.  (See Chart on following page.)



   62.   “Yard, rear” means a yard extending across the full width
of the lot and measured between the rear lot line and the building or any
projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. 
On both corner lots and interior lots the rear yard shall be the opposite end
of the lot from the front yard.  (See Chart on following page.)



   63.   “Yard, side” means a yard extending from the front yard to
the rear yard and measured between the side lot lines and the building.  On
corner lots the yard not designated as front or rear yard shall be considered
the side yard.  Each corner lot shall have two fronts, a rear and one side
yard.  (See Chart on following page.)



CHART - YARD







   64.   “Zoning/Building Administrator” means the local official
responsible for reviewing zoning and building permits and following a
determination by the Board of Adjustment for special exceptions and
variances.  Decision of the official may be appealed to the Board of
Adjustment.  Permits are issued by the Zoning/Building Administrator.



   65.   “Zoning district” means a section the City designated in
the text of the Zoning Ordinance and delineated on the Zoning Map in which
requirements for the use of land, the building and development standards are
prescribed.  Within each district, all requirements are uniform.



   66.   “Zoning Map” means the map delineating the boundaries of
districts which, along with the zoning text, comprises the Zoning Ordinance.



NONCONFORMITIES



165.09    INTENT.



Within the districts established by this chapter there exist:



   1.   lots,



   2.   structures,



   3.   uses of land and structures, and



   4.   characteristics of use,




which were lawful before these regulations were passed or amended, but which
are prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or
future amendments.  It is the intent of this chapter to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage
their survival.  Further, nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded or extended, except in conformity with the following rules. 
Nonconformities shall not be used as grounds for adding other structures or
uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.  To avoid undue hardship,
nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction
was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of
the Zoning Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been
carried on diligently.  Actual construction is hereby defined to include the
placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a
permanent manner.  Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing
building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such
excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual
construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently.




165.10    NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.



In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on
any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this chapter, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of the
chapter.  This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the
requirements for area or width, or both, if the lot shall conform to the
regulations for the district in which such lot is located.  Variance of yard
requirements shall be obtained only through the action of the Board of
Adjustment except that in the case of destruction, the same dimensions of any
building comprising the same location may be permitted.



165.11    NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND (OR LAND WITH MINOR STRUCTURES ONLY). 



Where at the time of adoption of the Zoning Ordinance lawful use of land
exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this
chapter, and where such use involves no individual structure with a
replacement cost exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the use may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:



   1.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance.



   2.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance. 



   3.   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for
a period of 12 months, then any subsequent use of such land shall conform to
the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land
is located unless a special exception is granted by the Board of Adjustment.



   4.   No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of
this chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of
land.



165.12    NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.



Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of the
Zoning Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height,
yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the
structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:



   1.   No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in
such a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion
thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity.



   2.   Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of
structure be destroyed by any means or to any extent, it shall be allowed to
be reconstructed to its previous dimensions or to dimensions which decrease
the nonconformity. 



   3.   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.



165.13    NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND LAND IN
COMBINATION.



If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, or of structure and premises in
combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this
chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions.



   1.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered except in changing the use
of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.



   2.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time
of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended
to occupy any land outside such building.



   3.   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of
a structure, or structure and premises, may as a special exception be changed
to another nonconforming use provided that the Board of Adjustment, either by
general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the
proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than
the existing nonconforming use.  In permitting such change, the Board of
Adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.



   4.   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on
which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may
not thereafter be resumed.



   5.   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and
premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for 12 consecutive
months or for 18 months during any three-year period (except when government
action impedes access to the premises) the structure, or structure and
premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity
with the regulations of the district in which it is located except by special
exception of the Board of Adjustment.



   6.   When nonconforming use status applies to a structure and
premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall
eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.  Destruction for the purpose
of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50 percent
of the replacement cost at time of destruction.  Replacement shall begin
within six months of the time of destruction or the nonconforming status
shall expire.  Said construction shall also be completed within 18 months of
the time of destruction or the nonconforming status shall expire.



165.14    REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.



On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work
may be done on ordinary repairs, provided that the square footage of floor
area of the building as it existed at the time of adoption or amendment of
this chapter shall not be increased.



165.15    USES UNDER SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROVISIONS NOT NONCON-FORMING USES.



Any use which is permitted as a special exception in a district under the
terms of this chapter (other than a change through Board of Adjustment action
from a  nonconforming use to another use not generally permitted in the
district) shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall
without further action be considered a conforming use.



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



165.16    ADMINISTRATOR.



A Zoning/Building Administrator designated by the Council shall administer
and enforce this chapter.  The Administrator may be provided with the
assistance of such other persons as the Council may direct.



165.17    ZONING/BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED.



No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, or added to, without
a permit therefor issued by the Zoning/Building Administrator.  No
zoning/building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, except after written order from the Board of
Adjustment.  Fees for zoning/building permits shall be as provided by
Council resolution.  Zoning/building permits shall be applied for with the
Clerk and shall expire two years after the date of issuance if work is begun
within 180 days of issuance or after 180 days if no substantial beginning of
construction has occurred.  Extensions of time may be granted in writing by
the Zoning/Building Administrator for good cause.  The construction or
erection of signs and billboards or buildings less than 10¢ x 12¢ in size
are exempt from the permit requirements of this section, but such work shall
comply with all other regulations in this Zoning Ordinance.  In addition,
development within the extra-territorial area to which these powers are
extended shall be required to secure only approval of a zoning permit and
shall not be required to obtain a permit under any building code provisions
of the City.



165.18    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT CREATED.



A Board of Adjustment is hereby established which shall consist of seven
members.  The term of office of the members of the Board and the manner of
their appointment shall be as provided by statute.  Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant.  Two
members shall be residents of the area outside the City limits which is
subject to this chapter.  Said members shall be appointed by the County
Board of Supervisors.  A majority of the members of the Board of Adjustment
shall be persons representing the public at large and shall not be involved
in the business of purchasing or selling of real estate.



165.19    PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its
affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this chapter.  Meetings shall
be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other time as the Board
may determine.  The Chairperson or, in the Chairperson’s absence, the
acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.  All meetings shall be open to the public.  The Board of
Adjustment shall, through its Secretary, keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question or if absent or failing to
vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office
of the Board and shall be a public record.  All actions of the Board
concerning special exceptions or variances shall also be recorded in the
Office of the County Recorder.  It shall be the responsibility of the
appellant to record said action and all corresponding stipulations and
further said action shall take effect upon the Board receiving sufficient
confirmation of the same.  A copy of said action shall also be filed in the
office of the Zoning/Building Administrator.



165.20    ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by the Zoning/Building Administrator in the enforcement of this chapter.



   1.   Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or
by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by any
decision of the Zoning/Building Administrator.  Such appeal shall be taken
within 60 days by filing with the Zoning/Building Administrator and with the
Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.  The
Zoning/Building Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken.



   2.   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal, and give not less than seven days or more than 20 days’ public
notice.  At said hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by
attorney. 



   3.   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed, unless the Zoning/Building Administrator from whom the appeal is
taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the Notice of Appeal is
filed with the Zoning/Building Administrator, that by reason of facts stated
in the certificate, a stay would, in the Zoning/Building Administrator’s
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.  In such case proceedings
shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by
the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to
the Zoning/Building Administrator from whom the appeal is taken and on due
cause shown.



165.21    SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide only such special exceptions as
the Board is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this chapter,
shall decide such questions as are involved in determining whether special
exceptions should be granted, and shall grant special exceptions with such
conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this chapter, or deny
special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this
chapter.  A special exception shall not be granted by the Board of
Adjustment unless and until:



   1.   A written application for a special exception is submitted
indicating the section of this chapter under which the special exception is
sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested.



   2.   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
special exception, and give not less than seven days or more than 20 days’
public notice.  At said hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or
by attorney.



   3.   The public hearing shall be held.  Any party may appear in
person, or by agent or attorney.



   4.   The Board of Adjustment shall make a finding that it is
empowered under the section of this chapter described in the application to
grant the special exception, and that the granting of the special exception
will not adversely affect the public interest. 



165.22    VARIANCES.



The Board of Adjustment shall authorize upon appeal in specific cases such
variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship.  A
variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by the Board of
Adjustment unless and until:



   1.   A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating
all of the following:



      A.   Special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district.



      B.   Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same district under the terms of this chapter.



      C.   The special conditions and circumstances do not result
from the actions of the applicant.



      D.   Granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other
lands, structures or buildings in the same district.



No nonconforming use or structure in the same district and no permitted or
nonconforming use or structure in other districts shall be considered grounds
for the issuance of a variance.



   2.   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
variance, and give not less than seven or more than 20 days’ public notice.



   3.   The public hearing shall be held.  Any party may appear in
person, or by agent or by attorney.



   4.   The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that requirements
of this section have been met by the applicant for a variance.



   5.   The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the
reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance,
and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the
reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.



   6.   The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the
granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or
otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 




In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter.  Violation of
such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.  Under no
circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance to allow a use
not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district involved or
any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter
in said district.




165.23    APPROVED ACTION BY BOARD.



The concurring vote of a majority of members of the Board of Adjustment shall
be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of
the Zoning/Building Administrator or to decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter upon with it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect
any variation in the application of this chapter.



165.24    APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of
the City, or other areas subject to this chapter aggrieved by any decision of
the Board of Adjustment may seek review by a court of record of such
decision, in the manner provided by the laws of the State and particularly by
Chapter 414, Code of Iowa.



DISTRICT REGULATIONS



165.25    DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.



The City is herewith divided into the following districts:



AG   Agricultural District



CN   Conservation District



RS   Residential Single-Family District



RM   Residential Multi-Family District



RMO   Residential Multi-Family Optional District



MH   Mobile Home District



AC   Arterial Commercial District



BC   Business Commercial District



LI   Light Industrial District



HI   Heavy Industrial District




These districts are established as identified on the Official Zoning Map
which, together with all explanatory matters thereon, is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be part of this chapter.




165.26    AG – AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.



This district is intended to provide for areas in which agriculture and
related uses are encouraged as the principal use of land.  However, uses
which may be offensive to the surrounding area or to the community as a whole
by reasons of noise, dust, smoke, odor, traffic or physical appearance or
other similar factors are not permitted.  The district prohibits urban
density residential use until these areas may be served by utilities and
services of the City.  This district is also intended to preserve land
suited for eventual development into other uses, pending proper timing for
economical and practical provisions of streets, utilities, schools and other
facilities so that reasonably compact development will occur and the fiscal
integrity of the City is preserved.  All newly annexed areas to the City
will automatically be placed into this district classification unless
otherwise suitably classified.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the AG
District:



      A.   Agriculture, including the usual agricultural buildings,
dwellings and structures, and excluding offensive uses.



      B.   Home occupations.



   2.   Accessory Uses.  Uses of land or structure customarily
incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the AG District including
(but not limited to) the following:



      A.   Living quarters of persons employed on the premises and
not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.



      B.   Private garages, barns and other farm buildings.



      C.   Roadside stands offering for sale only agricultural
products or other products produced on the premises.



      D.   Temporary buildings for the uses incidental to
construction work.  Such buildings shall be removed upon the completion or
abandonment of the construction work.



      E.   Satellite dishes.



   3.   Special Exceptions.  Certain uses may be permitted in the AG
District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make
them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.



      A.   Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums.



      B.   Commercial kennels.



      C.   Stables, private or public.



      D.   Greenhouses and nurseries.



      E.   Publicly operated sanitary landfills.



      F.   Private recreational camps, golf courses and recreational
facilities.



      G.   Public or private utility substations, relay stations,
etc.



      H.   Churches or accessory facilities (on or off site).



      I.   Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities.



      J.   Extraction of minerals or raw materials.




      K.   Bed and breakfast houses.




      L.   Solar Farms



(Ord. 780 – May 18 Supp.)



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide
for light and air around permitted uses and buildings in the AG District:



 

Use
 
Minimum Lot Area
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Front Yard
 
Minimum Side Yard
 
Minimum Rear Yard
 
Maximum Height (lesser of)



Dwelling

 

2 acres

 

150 feet

 

60 feet

 

50 feet

 

50 feet

 

2½ stories or 35 feet




Other Uses

 

10 acres

 

200 feet

 

60 feet

 

50 feet

 

50 feet

 

2½ stories or 35 feet, excluding farm buildings




 



   5.   Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking
requirements shall apply in the AG District:



      A.   Dwellings – two parking spaces on the lot for each
living unit in the building.



      B.   Churches – one parking space within 400 feet of the lot
for each five seats in the main auditorium.



      C.   Public Buildings and Facilities – one parking space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area or one parking space for each five
seats in the main assembly area.



      D.   Roadside Stands – one parking space for each 50 square
feet of enclosed floor area.



      E.   Greenhouses and Nurseries – one parking space per 1,000
square feet of enclosed floor area.



   6.   Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading
requirements shall apply in the AG District:



      A.   All activities or uses allowed in the AG District shall
be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicles
off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.



      B.   Loading shall not be permitted to block public
right-of-way.



   7.   Signs.  The following sign regulations shall apply to the AG
District:



      A.   Off-premises signs, except real estate or political
signs, are not permitted.



      B.   No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the
vision of the driver of any motor vehicle.



      C.   No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad
so as to render dangerous the use of the highway.



      D.   No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic
control sign, signal or device.



      E.   Signs shall not encroach or extend over public
right-of-way.



      F.   No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an
official traffic control sign, signal or device.



      G.   No advertisement or advertising structure shall be
posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or
warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other
governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights
simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs.



      H.   No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks,
fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public
utilities.



      I.   All signs must comply with the provisions of Section
165.37(17) of the Supplementary District Regulations.



165.27    CN – CONSERVATION DISTRICT.



This district is intended to prevent, in those areas which are subject to
periodic or potential flooding, such development as would result in a hazard
to health or safety or be otherwise incompatible with the public welfare. 
This district is also intended to provide for water conservation, erosion
control, protection of wildlife habitat, protection of natural erosion
control, protection of natural drainage ways and to generally provide for
ecologically sound land use of environmentally sensitive areas.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the CN
District:



      A.   Undeveloped and unused land in its natural condition.



      B.   Public parks and recreation open space.



   2.   Accessory Uses.  Uses of land or structure customarily
incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the CN District including
(but not limited to) the following:



      A.   Agriculture, exclusive of dwelling units.



      B.   Agricultural or recreational buildings or structures
whose use or value would not be impaired by being flooded.



      C.   Flood control structures.



      D.   Roadside stands offering for sale only agricultural
products or other products produced on the premises.



      E.   Temporary buildings for the uses incidental to
construction work.  Such buildings shall be removed upon the completion or
abandonment or the construction work.



   3.   Special Exceptions.  Certain uses may be permitted in the CN
District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make
them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.



      A.   Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums.



      B.   Stables, private or public.



      C.   Greenhouses and nurseries.



      D.   Private recreational uses.



      E.   Public or private utility substations, relay stations,
etc.



      F.   Publicly owned buildings and facilities.



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide
for light and air around permitted uses and buildings in the CN District:



 


Minimum Lot Area

 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Front Yard
 
Minimum Side Yard
 
Minimum Rear Yard
 
Maximum Height
(the lesser of)



5 acres

 

200 feet

 

50 feet

 

20 feet

 

50 feet

 

2½ stories or 35 feet, excluding farm buildings




 



   5.   Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking
requirements shall apply in the CN District:



      A.   Roadside Stands – one parking space for each 50 square
feet of floor area.



      B.   Greenhouses and Nurseries – one parking space per 1,000
square feet of enclosed floor area.



   6.   Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading
requirements shall apply in the CN District:



      A.   All activities or uses allowed in the CN District shall
be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicles
off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.



      B.   Loading shall not be permitted to block public
right-of-way.



   7.   Signs.  The following sign regulations shall apply to the CN
District:



      A.   Off-premises signs, except real estate or political
signs, are not permitted.



      B.   No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the
vision of the driver of any motor vehicle.



      C.   No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad
so as to render dangerous the use of the highway.



      D.   No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic
control sign, signal or device.



      E.   Signs shall not encroach or extend over public
right-of-way.



      F.   No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an
official traffic control sign, signal or device.



      G.   No advertisement or advertising structure shall be
posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or
warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other
governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights
simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs.



      H.   No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks,
fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public
utilities.



      I.   All signs must comply with the provisions of Section
165.37(17) of the Supplementary District Regulations.



165.28    RS – RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT.



This district is intended to provide for a variety of single-family and
two-family residential areas where public utilities and services are
available and to encourage a suitable living environment through the
promotion of public health, safety and welfare.  Low and medium population
density neighborhoods are recognized and provided for.  Criteria such as
topography, soil types, access, traffic load on streets, schools, utilities,
recreation and other public facilities shall be taken into consideration when
the lot area requirement is established for the various single-family
residential areas of the City.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the RS
District:



      A.   Single-family detached dwellings.



      B.   Two-family dwellings.



      C.   Family homes.



      D.   Home occupations.



   2.   Accessory Uses.  Uses of land or structure customarily
incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the RS District:



      A.   Private garages.



      B.   The keeping or raising of pigs, sheep, goats, cattle or
horses is prohibited.  The raising and keeping of other animals and fowl are
prohibited on a commercial basis.



      C.   Private recreational facilities.  Private swimming pools
shall have a non-climbable fence of at least 6 feet in height and be secured
against public access.



      D.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction
work.  Such buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of
the construction work.



   3.   Special Exceptions.  Certain uses may be permitted in the RS
District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make
them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.



      A.   Nursery schools.



      B.   Public or private utility substations, relay stations,
etc.



      C.   Churches.



      D.   Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities.



      E.   Senior high schools, elementary, junior high schools,
colleges, universities, institutions of higher learning and equivalent
private and parochial schools.



      F.   Golf courses but not miniature courses or separate
driving tees.



      G.   Bed and breakfast houses.



      H.   Hospitals.



      I.   Home occupations in accessory buildings.



      J.   Satellite dishes.  Satellite dish antennas, either
permanent or temporary, are considered as accessory buildings.  When the
dish is attached to a main building or other structure, the owner must adhere
to the Uniform Building Code.  No satellite dish shall exceed a diameter of
12 feet except for commercial use.



      K.   Retail Nurseries.



      L.   Solar Farms     (Ord. 780 – May 18 Supp.)



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide
for light and air around permitted residential uses and buildings in the RS
District:



 

Minimum Lot Area
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Front Yard
 
Minimum Side Yard
 
Minimum Rear Yard
 
Maximum Height (the lesser of)



6,000 square feet*

 

50 feet

 

20 feet

 

6 feet

 

20 feet

 

2½ stories or 35 feet




* Where public sewer facilities are not available, not less than one acre of
lot area is required.




 



   5.   Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking
requirements shall apply in the RS District:



      A.   Dwellings – two parking spaces on the lot for each
living unit in the building.  For dwellings not consisting of living
units:  two parking spaces on the lot for each 2,000 square feet of floor
area.



      B.   Churches – one parking space within 400 feet of the lot
for each five seats in the main auditorium.



      C.   Public buildings and facilities – one parking space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area or one parking space for each five
seats in the main assembly area.



      D.   Elementary, junior high and equivalent private or
parochial schools – one parking space for each classroom and office plus
one parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area in the
auditorium or gymnasium.



      E.   Senior high schools and equivalent private or parochial
schools – one parking space for each employee and one parking space for
each ten students.



      F.   Colleges, universities, institutions of higher learning,
and equivalent private or parochial schools – one parking space for each
employee and one parking space for each five students.



      G.   Public buildings and facilities – one parking space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area.



      H.   Nursery schools – one parking space per employee.



   6.   Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading
requirements shall apply in the RS District:



      A.   All activities or uses allowed in the RS District shall
be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle
off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.



      B.   Loading shall not be permitted to block public
right-of-way.



   7.   Signs.  The following sign regulations shall apply to the RS
District:



      A.   Off-premises signs, except real estate or political
signs, are not permitted.



      B.   No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the
vision of the driver of any motor vehicle.



      C.   No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad
so as to render dangerous the use of the highway.



      D.   No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic
control sign, signal or device.



      E.   Signs shall not encroach or extend over public
right-of-way.



      F.   No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an
official traffic control sign, signal or device.



      G.   No advertisement or advertising structure shall be
posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or
warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other
governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights
simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs.



      H.   No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks,
fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public
utilities.



      I.   All signs must comply with the provisions of Section
165.37(17) of the Supplementary District Regulations.



165.29    RM – RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT.



This district is intended to provide for a variety of multi-family
residential areas where public utilities and services are available and to
encourage a suitable living environment through the promotion of public
health, safety and welfare.  Medium and high population density
neighborhoods are recognized and provided for.  Criteria such as topography,
soil types, access, traffic load on streets, schools, utilities, recreation
and other public facilities shall be taken into consideration when the lot
area requirement is established for the various multi-family residential
areas of the City.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the RM
District:



      A.   Single-family detached dwellings.



      B.   Two-family dwellings.



      C.   Multi-family homes.



      D.   Home occupations.



      E.   Family homes.



   2.   Accessory Uses.  Uses of land or structure customarily
incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the RM District:



      A.   Private garages.



      B.   Parking lots.



      C.   The keeping or raising of pigs, sheep, goats, cattle or
horses is prohibited.  The raising and keeping of other animals and fowl is
prohibited on a commercial basis.



      D.   Private recreational facilities.  Private swimming pools
shall have a non-climbable fence of at least 6 feet in height and be secured
against public access.



      E.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction
work.  Such buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of
the construction work.



   3.   Special Exceptions.  Certain uses may be permitted in the RM
District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make
them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.



      A.   Nursery schools.



      B.   Public or private utility substations, relay stations,
etc.



      C.   Churches and publicly owned and operated buildings and
facilities.



      D.   Senior high schools, elementary, junior high schools,
colleges, universities, institutions of higher learning and equivalent
private and parochial schools. 



      E.   Lodging houses, dormitories, fraternities and sororities.



      F.   Bed and breakfast houses.



      G.   Health care facilities.



      H.   Home occupations in accessory buildings.



      I.   Satellite dishes.  Satellite dish antennas, either
permanent or temporary, are considered as accessory buildings.  When the
dish is attached to a main building or other structure, the owner must adhere
to the Uniform Building Code.  No satellite dish shall exceed a diameter of
12 feet, except for commercial use.



      J.   Solar Farms



(Ord. 780 – May 18 Supp.)



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide
for light and air around permitted residential uses and buildings in the RM
District.



 


Minimum Lot Area

 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Front Yard
 
Minimum Side Yard
 
Minimum Rear Yard
 
Maximum Height (the lesser of)



6,000 square feet*

 

50 feet

 

20 feet

 

6 feet

 

20 feet

 

3 stories or 45 feet




* Where public sewer facilities are not available, not less than one acre of
lot area is required.










   5.   Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking
requirements shall apply in the RM District.




      A.   Single-Family Dwellings – two parking spaces on the lot.



      B.   Multi-Family Dwellings – one parking space on the lot
for each dwelling unit.



      C.   Churches – one parking space within 400 feet of the lot
for each five seats in the main auditorium.



      D.   Elementary, junior high and equivalent private or
parochial schools – one parking space for each classroom and office plus
one parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area in the
auditorium or gymnasium.



      E.   Senior high schools and equivalent private or parochial
schools – one parking space for each employee and one parking space for
each ten students.



      F.   Colleges, universities, institutions of higher learning,
and equivalent private or parochial schools – one parking space for each
employee and one parking space for each five students.



      G.   Public buildings and facilities – one parking space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area, or one parking space for each 5
seats in the main assembly area.



      H.   Nursery schools – one parking space per employee.



   6.   Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading
requirements shall apply in the RM District.



      A.   All activities or uses allowed in the RM District shall
be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle
off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.



      B.   Loading shall not be permitted to block public
right-of-way.



   7.   Signs.  The following sign regulations shall apply to the RM
District:



      A.   Off-premises signs, except real estate or political
signs, are not permitted.



      B.   No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the
vision of the driver of any motor vehicle.



      C.   No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad
so as to render dangerous the use of the highway.



      D.   No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic
control sign, signal or device.



      E.   Signs shall not encroach or extend over public
right-of-way.



      F.   No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an
official traffic control sign, signal or device.



      G.   No advertisement or advertising structure shall be
posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or
warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other
governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights
simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs.



      H.   No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks,
fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public
utilities.



      I.   All signs must comply with the provisions of Section
165.37(17) of the Supplementary District Regulations.



165.30    RMO – RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY OPTIONAL DISTRICT. 




This district is intended to provide for a variety of multi-family
residential areas as well as certain public and private institutions where
public utilities and services are available and to encourage a suitable
living environment through the promotion of public health, safety and
welfare.  Medium and high population density neighborhoods are recognized
and provided for.  Criteria such as topography, soil types, access, traffic
load on streets, schools, utilities, recreation and other public facilities
shall be taken into consideration when the lot area requirement is
established for the various multi-family residential areas of the City.




   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the RMO
District:



      A.   Single-family detached dwellings.



      B.   Two-family dwellings.



      C.   Multi-family homes.



      D.   Home occupations.



      E.   Family homes.



      F.   Churches.



      G.   Public schools.



      H.   Senior high schools, elementary, junior high schools,
colleges, universities, institutions of higher learning and equivalent
private and parochial schools.



      I.   Lodging houses, dormitories, fraternities and sororities.



      J.   Home occupations in accessory buildings.



   2.   Accessory Uses.  Uses of land or structure customarily
incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the RMO District:



      A.   Private garages.



      B.   Parking lots.  The design and construction of parking
lots in this district shall be in compliance with standards established for
parking lots as adopted by resolution of the Council and available at City
Hall.



      C.   The keeping or raising of pigs, sheep, goats, cattle or
horses is prohibited.  The raising and keeping of other animals and fowl is
prohibited on a commercial basis.



      D.   Private recreational facilities.  Private swimming pools
shall have a non-climbable fence of at least 6 feet in height and be secured
against public access.



      E.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction
work.  Such buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of
the construction work.



   3.   Special Exceptions.  Certain uses may be permitted in the RMO
District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make
them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.



      A.   Nursery schools.



      B.   Public or private utility substations, relay stations,
etc.



      C.   Bed and breakfast houses.



      D.   Health care facilities.



      E.   Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities.



      F.   Satellite dishes.  Satellite dish antennas, either
permanent or temporary, are considered as accessory buildings.  When the
dish is attached to a main building or other structure, the owner must adhere
to the Uniform Building Code.  No satellite dish shall exceed a diameter of
12 feet, except for commercial use.



      G.   Solar Farms



(Ord. 780 – May 18 Supp.)



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide
for light and air around permitted residential uses and buildings in the RMO
District.



 


Minimum Lot Area

 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Front Yard
 
Minimum Side Yard
 
Minimum Rear Yard
 
Maximum Height (the lesser of)



6,000 square feet*

 

50 feet

 

20 feet

 

6 feet**

 

20 feet

 

4 stories or 60 feet




* Where public sewer facilities are not available, not less than one acre of
lot area is required.



** Buildings and parking lots, when constructed as permitted uses, Section
165.30(1)(F), (G), (H), or (I), or as an accessory use to such permitted uses
shall be no closer than 12 feet from a lot line when adjacent to a lot under
separate ownership.









   5.   Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking
requirements shall apply in the RMO District.



      A.   Single-Family Dwellings – two parking spaces on the lot.



      B.   Multi-Family Dwellings – one parking space on the lot
for each dwelling unit.



      C.   Churches – one parking space within 400 feet of the lot
for each five seats in the main auditorium.



      D.   Elementary, junior high and equivalent private or
parochial schools – one parking space for each classroom and office plus
one parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area in the
auditorium or gymnasium.



      E.   Senior high schools and equivalent private or parochial
schools – one parking space for each employee and one parking space for
each ten students.



      F.   Colleges, universities, institutions of higher learning,
and equivalent private or parochial schools – one parking space for each
employee and one parking space for each five students.



      G.   Public buildings and facilities – one parking space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area, or one parking space for each 5
seats in the main assembly area.



      H.   Nursery schools – one parking space per employee.



   6.   Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading
requirements shall apply in the RMO District:



      A.   All activities or uses allowed in the RMO District shall
be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle
off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.



      B.   Loading shall not be permitted to block public
right-of-way.



   7.   Signs.  The following sign regulations shall apply to the RMO
District:



      A.   Off-premises signs, except real estate or political
signs, are not permitted.



      B.   No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the
vision of the driver of any motor vehicle.



      C.   No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad
so as to render dangerous the use of the highway.



      D.   No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic
control sign, signal or device.



      E.   Signs shall not encroach or extend over public
right-of-way.



      F.   No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an
official traffic control sign, signal or device.



      G.   No advertisement or advertising structure shall be
posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or
warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other
governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights
simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs.



      H.   No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks,
fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public
utilities.



      I.   All signs must comply with the provisions of Section
165.37(17) of the Supplementary District Regulations.



165.31    MH – MOBILE HOME DISTRICT.



This district is intended to provide for certain medium density residential
areas in the City now developed as mobile home parks which by reason of their
design and location are compatible with surrounding residential areas and
areas of the City where similar development seems likely to occur.  This
district has useful application as a transition zone between shopping areas
and residential areas and is normally located along thoroughfares where
direct access to the site is available.  “Mobile home park” means any
site, lot, field or tract of land under common ownership upon which two (2)
or more occupied mobile homes, manufactured homes, modular homes (or a
combination of such homes) are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure
used or intended for use as part of the equipment of such mobile home park. 
The term “mobile home park” is not to be construed to include mobile
homes, buildings, tents or other structures temporarily maintained by any
individual, educational institution or company on their own premises and used
exclusively to house their own labor or students.  The mobile home park
shall meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that are in effect.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the MH
District:



      A.   Mobile homes located in an approved mobile home park.



      B.   Home occupations.



   2.   Accessory Uses.



      A.   Private garages.



      B.   The keeping or raising of pigs, sheep, goats, cattle or
horses is prohibited.  The raising and keeping of other animals and fowl is
prohibited on a commercial basis.



      C.   Private recreational facilities.



      D.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction
work.  Such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the
construction work.



   3.   Special Exceptions.



      A.   Public or private utility substation, relay stations, etc.



      B.   Nursery schools.



      C.   Churches or accessory facilities on or off site.



      D.   Home occupations in accessory buildings.



      E.   Satellite dishes.  Satellite dish antennas, either
permanent or temporary, are considered as accessory buildings.  When the
dish is attached to a main building or other structure, the owner must adhere
to the Uniform Building Code.  No satellite dish shall exceed a diameter of
12 feet except for commercial use.



      F.   Solar Farms



(Ord. 780 – May 18 Supp.)



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  A mobile home park permit shall be required
for construction of any mobile home park.  Permits shall be issued by the
Zoning Administrator after plans have been submitted which conform to the
following bulk requirements.  Fees for said permit shall be established by
Council resolution.  Construction shall comply with the following:



      A.   Density is limited to nine (9) mobile homes per acre.



      B.   No mobile home shall be located within 5 feet of any
driveway or parking space, within 75 feet of the right-of-way line of a
public street or less than 35 feet from the side or rear lot lines of the
mobile home park.



      C.   Each mobile home site shall be provided with a stand
consisting of a reinforced 4-inch poured Portland cement concrete apron not
less than 8 feet wide and 45 feet long and a paved outdoor patio of at least
180 square feet located at the main entrance to the mobile home.



      D.   A greenbelt, at least 25 feet in width, shall be located
along all boundaries of each mobile home park, except where it is crossed by
driveways.



      E.   Each mobile home shall be located on a lot having an area
of at least 4,500 square feet provided.



      F.   All minimum street widths in mobile home parks shall be
approved as private streets and further comply with the following:



 

Motor Vehicle Parking
 
Traffic Use
 
Minimum Pavement Width


No Parking on Street
 
1-way road
 
14 feet


No Parking on Street
 
2-way road
 
20 feet


Parallel Parking (1 side only)
 
1-way road
 
20 feet


Parallel Parking (1 side only)
 
2-way road
 
30 feet


Parallel Parking (2 sides)
 
1-way road
 
26 feet


Parallel Parking (2 sides)
 
2-way road
 
36 feet









   5.   Signs.  The following sign regulations shall apply to the MH
District:




      A.   All signs must comply with the provisions of Section
165.37(17) of the Supplementary District Regulations.



165.32    AC – ARTERIAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



This district is intended to provide for certain areas of the City for the
development of service, retail, and other nonresidential uses which because
of certain locational requirements and operational characteristics are
appropriately located in close proximity to arterial and other main
thoroughfares.  Residential type structures are also permitted.  The
district is further characterized by a typical need for larger lot sizes,
off-street parking, adequate setbacks, clear vision, safe ingress and egress,
and access to other adjacent thoroughfares.



   1.   Permitted Uses.



      A.   Sales and display rooms and lots, including yards for the
storage or display of new or used building materials, but not for any scrap
or salvage operation storage or sales.



      B.   Offices and clinics.



      C.   Churches and publicly owned and operated buildings and
facilities.



      D.   Hotels and motels.



      E.   Any other retail or service sales business, including
food preparation for sale off-premises.



      F.   Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities.



      G.   Dwellings, single-family, two-family and multi-family.



      H.   Sales and display rooms for the sale of fireworks
permitted by the State of Iowa, however the location for the sale of
fireworks must be at least 50 feet from the location of any gas station, LP
tanks, or natural gas pumping stations.



(Ord. 769 – July 17 Supp.)



   2.   Accessory Uses.  Uses of land or structures customarily
incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the AC District:



      A.   Private recreational facilities.



      B.   Living quarters of persons employed on the premises and
not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.



      C.   Private garages.



      D.   Parking lots.



      E.   Temporary buildings for the uses incidental to
construction work.  Such buildings shall be removed upon the completion or
abandonment of the construction work.



   3.   Special Exceptions.  Certain uses may be permitted in the AC
District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make
them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.



      A.   Public or private utility substations, relay stations,
etc.



      B.   Satellite dishes.  Satellite dish antennas, either
permanent or temporary, are considered as accessory buildings.  When the
dish is attached to a main building or other structure, the owner must adhere
to the Uniform Building Code.  No satellite dish shall exceed a diameter of
12 feet, except for commercial use.



      C.   Solar Farms



(Ord. 780 – May 18 Supp.)



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide
for light and air around permitted residential uses and buildings in the AC
District.



 


Minimum Lot Area

 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Front Yard
 
Minimum Side Yard
 
Minimum Rear Yard
 
Maximum Height (the lesser of)



6,000 square feet

 

50 feet

 

70 feet from edge of Highways 9 and 69

 

6 feet

 

20 feet

 

4 stories or 60 feet









   5.   Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking
requirements shall apply in the AC District.



      A.   Sales and service buildings – one parking space per 300
square feet of gross floor area.



      B.   Offices/clinics – one parking space per 300 square feet
of gross floor area.



      C.   Churches – one parking space within 400 feet of the lot
for each 5 seats in the main auditorium.



      D.   Public buildings and facilities – one parking space per
300 square feet of gross floor area or one parking space for each 5 seats in
the main assembly area.



      E.   Hotels and motels – one parking space per room plus one
parking space for each employee.



   6.   Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading
requirements shall apply in the AC District:



      A.   All activities or uses allowed in the AC District shall
be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle
off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.



      B.   Loading shall not be permitted to block public
right-of-way.



   7.   Signs.  The following sign regulations shall apply to the AC
District:



      A.   Off-premises signs are permitted.



      B.   Off-premises signs shall comply with the setbacks of the
districts they are located in.  Other bulk regulations so not apply.



      C.   No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the
vision of the driver of any motor vehicle.



      D.   No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad
so as to render dangerous the use of the highway.



      E.   No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic
control sign, signal or device.



      F.   Signs shall not encroach or extend over public
right-of-way.



      G.   No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an
official traffic control sign, signal or device.



      H.   No advertisement or advertising structure shall be
posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or
warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other
governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights
simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs.



      I.   No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks,
fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public
utilities.



      J.   All signs must comply with the provisions of Section
165.37(17) of the Supplementary District Regulations.



165.33    BC – BUSINESS COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



This district is intended to provide for certain areas of the City for the
development of service, retail and other non-residential uses, excluding
industrial and agricultural uses.



   1.   Permitted Uses. 



      A.   Business sales and services conducted entirely within the
building, including those with incidental manufacturing or processing of
goods or products.



      B.   Offices and clinics.



      C.   Publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities.



   2.   Accessory Uses.  Uses of land or structure customarily
incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the BC District:



      A.   Private recreational facilities



      B.   Living quarters of persons employed on the premises and
not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.



      C.   Private garages.



      D.   Parking lots.



      E.   Temporary buildings for the uses incidental to
construction work.  Such buildings shall be removed upon the completion or
abandonment of the construction work.



   3.   Special Exceptions.  The following uses may be permitted in
the BC District subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to
make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.



      A.   Public or private utility substations, relay stations,
etc.



      B.   Satellite dishes.  Satellite dish antennas, either
permanent or temporary, are considered as accessory buildings, except that a
72-hour temporary use is allowed.  No satellite dish shall exceed a diameter
of 12 feet.



      C.   Warehouses.



      D.   Churches or accessory facilities on or off site.



      E.   Hotels and motels.



      F.   Dwellings, second floor and above.



      G.   Multi-family dwellings, on a vacant lot or lots, new
construction only.  Any such construction shall comply with the front, side,
and back yard requirements of the RMO Residential Multi-family Optional
District.



      H.   Solar Farms - only if on roofs hidden from view. 



(Ord. 780 – May 18 Supp.)




   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide
for light and air around permitted uses and buildings in the BC District:




 

Minimum Lot Area
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Front Yard
 
Minimum Side Yard
 
Minimum Rear Yard
 
Maximum Height (the lesser of)



None

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

4 stories or 60 feet



Where this district abuts a lower intensity district, the greater side and
rear yard setbacks apply.



 



   5.   Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking
requirements shall apply in the BC District.



      A.   Sales and service buildings – one parking space per 300
square feet of gross floor area.



      B.   Offices/clinics – one parking space per 300 square feet
of gross floor area.



      C.   Churches – one parking space within 400 feet of the lot
for each five (5) seats in the main auditorium.



      D.   Public buildings and facilities – one parking space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area or one parking space for each five
seats in the main assembly area.



      E.   Hotels and motels – one parking space per room plus one
parking space for each employee.



      F.   Dwellings – 1 space per unit.



(Ord. 703 – Jul. 10 Supp.)



   6.   Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading
requirements shall apply in the BC District:



      A.   All activities or uses allowed in the BC District shall
be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle
off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.



      B.   Loading shall not be permitted to block public
right-of-way.



   7.   Signs.  The following sign regulations shall apply to the BC
District:



      A.   Off-premises signs, except real estate or political
signs, are not permitted.



      B.   Off-premises signs shall comply with the setbacks of the
districts they are located in.  Other bulk regulations do not apply.



      C.   No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the
vision of the driver of any motor vehicle.



      D.   No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad
so as to render dangerous the use of the highway.



      E.   No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic
control sign, signal or device.



      F.   Signs shall not encroach or extend over public
right-of-way except by special exception of the Board of Adjustment.



      G.   No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an
official traffic control sign, signal or device.



      H.   No advertisement or advertising structure shall be
posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or
warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other
governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights
simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs.



      I.   No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks,
fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public
utilities.



      J.   All signs must comply with the provisions of Section
165.37(17) of the Supplementary District Regulations.



   8.   Apartments within the Fire Zone. 



      A.   The following regulation apply to apartments within the
Fire Zone as described in Section 146.01 and also located within the Business
Commercial District.



      B.   Definitions.



         (1)   New Construction Apartment: an empty space that is
not currently a dwelling unit.



         (2)   Dwelling  unit:  A single unit with facilities
which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and
eating of meals.



      C.   Apartments are allowed on the first floor/ground floor,
but must be less than 50% of the available floor space and must be located in
the rear of the building.



      D.   All walls are to be constructed of 5/8" sheet rock from
floor to ceiling on both sides of the studs to act as a fire retardant.



      E.   A firewall is required between a business and a lower
level/ground floor apartment consisting of double 5/8" sheet rock from floor
to ceiling.



      F.   New construction apartments will require a sprinkler
system.



      G.   Existing apartments must have two forms of egress.  If
two forms of egress are not available, a sprinkler system will be allowed.



      H.   A number system must be attached to each building (front
& back) with a three tiered numbering system allowing the fire department to
know the number of apartments on each floor of the building as shown:   4
                                    1
                                    2
Each number shall be white and 4" in height; mounted on a red backing. 
Number must be hung from the roofline of each building in the Fire District
with residential living space.



      I.   Due to the increased fire potential in the Fire District,
all apartments constructed in the Fire District will require a building
permit as well as periodic inspections during and after construction.



(Ord. 783 - Dec. 18 Supp.)



165.34    LI – LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



This district is intended to provide for areas of development by industrial
firms that have high standards of performance and that can locate in close
proximity to residential and business uses.  The district regulations are
designed to permit the development of any manufacturing or industrial
operations which on the basis of actual physical and operational
characteristics, would not be detrimental to the surrounding area or to the
community as a whole by reasons of noise, dust, smoke, odor, traffic,
physical appearance or other similar factors.  All industrial operations
must be in an enclosed building.  No residential uses are permitted in this
district.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the LI
District.



      A.   Any nonresidential building or use which would not be
hazardous, obnoxious, offensive or unsightly by reason of odor, sound,
vibrations, radioactivity, electrical interference, glares, liquid or solid
waste, smoke, or other air pollutants.



      B.   Storage, manufacture, compounding, processing, packing
and/or treatment of products, exclusive of the rendering or refining of fats
and/or oils.



      C.   Manufacture, compounding, assembly and/or treatment of
articles or merchandise derived from previously prepared materials.



      D.   Assembly of appliances and equipment, including
manufacture of small parts.



      E.   Wholesale distribution of all standard types of prepared
or packaged merchandise.



      F.   Sale and storage of building materials.  Outdoor or open
storage shall be allowed.



      G.   Contractors’ offices and storage of equipment.



   2.   Accessory Uses.  Uses of land or structures customarily
incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the LI District.



      A.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a
permitted use.



      B.   Living quarters for watchmen or custodians of industrial
properties.



   3.   Special Exceptions.  The only special exception shall be Solar
Farms.



(Ord. 780 – May 18 Supp.)



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide
for light and air around permitted uses and buildings in the LI District.



 

Minimum Lot Area
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Front Yard
 
Minimum Side Yard
 
Minimum Rear Yard
 
Building Height



6,000 square feet

 

50 feet

 

25 feet

 

None

 

25 feet, unless bordering a railroad right-of-way, in which case 5 feet

 

4 stories or 60 feet




 



   5.   Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking
requirements shall apply in the LI District:



      A.   All commercial uses shall provide one parking space on
the lot for each 300 square feet of floor area.



      B.   All industrial uses shall provide one parking space on
the lot for each two employees of maximum number employed at any one time.



   6.   Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading
requirements shall apply in the LI District:



      A.   All activities or uses allowed in the LI District shall
be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle
off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.



      B.   Loading shall not be permitted to block public
right-of-way.



   7.   Signs.  The following sign regulations shall apply to the LI
District:



      A.   Off-premises signs are permitted.



      B.   Off-premises signs shall comply with the setbacks of the
Districts they are located in.  Other bulk regulations do not apply.



      C.   No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the
vision of the driver of any motor vehicle.



      D.   No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad
so as to render dangerous the use of the highway.



      E.   No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic
control sign, signal or device.



      F.   Signs shall not encroach or extend over public
right-of-way.



      G.   No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an
official traffic control sign, signal or device.



      H.   No advertisement or advertising structure shall be
posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or
warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other
governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights
simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs.



      I.   No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks,
fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public
utilities.



      J.   All signs must comply with the provisions of Section
165.37(17) of the Supplementary District Regulations.



165.35    HI – HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



This district is intended to provide areas for activities and uses of a heavy
industrial character and is the least restrictive of any district.  In the
best interest of the City, certain uses in the HI District shall be subject
to final Board of Adjustment approval, conditional approval, or denial to
insure that proper safeguards are taken.  No residential uses are permitted.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  There may be any use, excluding residential
uses and mobile homes.  The following uses must be given separate City Board
of Adjustment approval before a zoning/building permit is issued.



      A.   Acid manufacture.



      B.   Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of paris manufacture.



      C.   Distillation of bones.



      D.   Explosive manufacture or storage.



      E.   Fat rendering.



      F.   Fertilizer manufacture.



      G.   Gas manufacture.



      H.   Garbage, offal, or dead animals, reduction or dumping.



      I.   Glue manufacture.



      J.   Petroleum, or its products, refining of.



      K.   Smelting of tin, copper, zinc, or iron ores.



      L.   Stockyards or slaughter of animals.



      M.   Junk yards.  Must be surrounded by a solid fence at
least six (6) feet high located within building lines and the junk piled not
higher than the fence.



      N.   Solar Farms



(Ord. 780 – May 18 Supp.)



Before granting such separate approval, the Board of Adjustment shall refer
applications to the Commission for study, investigation and report.  If no
report is received in thirty (30) days, the Board of Adjustment may assume
approval of the application.



   2.   Board of Adjustment.  The Board of Adjustment shall then after
holding a public hearing consider all of the following provisions in its
determination upon the particular use at the location requested:



      A.   The proposed location, design, construction, and
operation of the particular use adequately safeguards the health, safety and
general welfare of persons residing or working in adjoining or surrounding
property.



      B.   Such use shall not impair an adequate supply of light and
air to surrounding property.



      C.   Such use shall not unduly increase congestion in the
streets, or public danger of fire and safety.



      D.   Such use shall not diminish or impair established
property values in adjoining or surrounding property.



      E.   Such use shall be in accord with the intent, purpose and
spirit of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan of the City.



   3.   Required Conditions.



      A.   The best practical means known for the disposal of refuse
matter or water-carried waste, the abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor,
dust, smoke, gas, noise or similar nuisance shall be employed and shall be
subject to all State and Federal regulations.



      B.   All principal buildings and all accessory buildings or
structures, including loading and unloading facilities, shall be located at
least 100 feet from any “R” District boundary, except where adjoining a
railroad right-of-way, and 50 feet from any commercial boundary.



   4.   Accessory Uses.  Uses of land or structures customarily
incidental and subordinate to a permitted use in the HI District.



      A.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a
permitted use.



      B.   Living quarters for watchmen or custodians of industrial
properties.



   5.   Bulk Regulations.  The following requirements shall provide
for light and air around permitted uses and buildings in the HI District.



 

Minimum Lot Area
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Front Yard
 
Minimum Side Yard
 
Minimum Rear Yard
 
Building Height



None

 

None

 

25 feet

 

None, except when adjacent to an “RS” / “RM” District, 100 feet, and
50 feet when adjacent to “C” District

 

30 feet, unless bordering a railroad right-of-way, in which case, 5 feet

 

4 stories or 60 feet









   6.   Off-Street Parking.  The following off-street parking
requirements shall apply in the HI District.



      A.   All commercial uses shall provide one parking space on
the lot for each 300 square feet of floor area.



      B.   All industrial uses shall provide one parking space on
the lot for each two employees of maximum number employed at any one time.



   7.   Off-Street Loading.  The following off-street loading
requirements shall apply in the HI District:



      A.   All activities or uses allowed in the HI District shall
be provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle
off any adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.



      B.   Loading shall not be permitted to block public
right-of-way.



   8.   Signs.  The following sign regulations shall apply to the HI
District:



      A.   Off-premises signs are permitted.



      B.   Off-premises signs shall comply with the setbacks of the
Districts they are located in.  Other bulk regulations do not apply.



      C.   No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the
vision of the driver of any motor vehicle.



      D.   No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad
so as to render dangerous the use of the highway.



      E.   No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic
control sign, signal or device.



      F.   Signs shall not encroach or extend over public
right-of-way.



      G.   No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an
official traffic control sign, signal or device.



      H.   No advertisement or advertising structure shall be
posted, erected or maintained which simulates any official, directional or
warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County, City or other
governmental subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights
simulating or resembling traffic signals or control signs.



      I.   No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks,
fences, trees, or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public
utilities.



      J.   All signs must comply with the provisions of Section
165.37(17) of the Supplementary District Regulations.



SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS



165.36    RESIDENTIAL DWELLING STANDARDS.



All single-family dwelling units shall meet the following minimum standards:



   1.   The minimum dwelling width shall be 22 feet at the exterior
dimension.



   2.   All dwelling units shall provide for a minimum of 600 square
feet of floor space.



165.37    SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   1.   Building Lines on Approved Plats.  Whenever the plat of a land
subdivision approved by the Planning Commission and on record in the office
of the County Recorder shows a building line along any frontage for the
purpose of creating a front yard or side street yard line, the building line
thus shown shall apply along such frontage in place of any other yard line
required in this chapter.



   2.   Structures to Have Access.  Every building hereafter erected
or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or public open space,
and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and
convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street
parking.



   3.   Erection of More Than One Principal Structure on a Lot.  In
any district, more than one structure housing a permitted or permissible
principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other
requirements of this chapter shall be met for each structure as though it
were on an individual lot.



   4.   Accessory Buildings.  No accessory building may be erected in
any required front yard.  No separate accessory building shall be closer
than 6 feet to the rear or side lot line.  Accessory buildings located in
the rear yard may not occupy more than 35 percent of the rear yard and the
aggregate of all accessory buildings shall not exceed 900 square feet.  No
accessory building shall be used without occupancy of the principal building,
and no accessory building shall exceed 18 feet in height.



   5.   Fences.  No fence or hedge more than 30 percent solid or more
than three feet high may be located within 40 feet of a street
intersection.  Fences or hedges less than four feet high may be located on
any remaining part of a lot.  Fences or hedges less than six feet high may
be erected on those parts of a lot that are as far back or further back from
a street than the main building.  Higher fences may be allowed by special
exception only.



   6.   Height Limits.  Chimneys, church steeples, cooling towers,
elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers or scenery
lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, spires, wireless towers, grain
elevators, or necessary mechanical appurtenances are exempt from height
regulations in Sections 165.26 through 165.35.



   7.   Projections into Required Yards.  Sills, belt courses,
cornices, and ornamental features may project only two feet into a required
yard.



   8.   Fire Escapes and Balconies.  Open fire escapes, fireproof
outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers, and the ordinary
projections of chimneys and flues into a rear yard for a distance of not more
than 3½ feet, when so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation, may
be permitted by the Zoning/Building Administrator.



   9.   Porches.  Open, unenclosed porches may extend 10 feet into a
front yard.



   10.   Terraces.  Terraces which do not extend above the level of
the ground (first) floor may project into a required yard, provided these
projections are distant at least two feet from the adjacent side lot line.



   11.   Utility Service Lines.  Nothing in this chapter shall have
the effect of prohibiting utility service lines.



   12.   Yards and Visibility.  On a corner lot in any district,
except the BC District, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed
to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of
three and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in
the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining
points along said street lines forty feet from the point of the
intersection.  (See Diagram on following page).   



   13.   Rear Yards.  The required rear yard may be reduced by up to
20% of the depth of the lot on any lot not exceeding 100 feet in depth by
special exception of the Board of Adjustment.



   14.   Swimming Pools.  Private swimming pools shall be allowed only
in rear yards and shall not be allowed in front or side yards.



   15.   Propane Tanks.  Propane tanks shall be located in compliance
with State of Iowa requirements and regulations.



   16.   Conversion to Real Property.  A mobile home, modular home or
manufactured home which is located outside a mobile home park shall be
converted to real estate by being placed on a permanent foundation and shall
be assessed for real estate taxes except in the following cases:



      A.   Dealer’s Stock.  Mobile, modular or manufactured homes
on private property as part of a dealer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not
used as a place for human habitation.



      B.   Existing Homes.  A taxable mobile home, manufactured
home or modular home which is located outside of a mobile home park as of
July 1, 1994, shall be assessed and taxed as real estate, but is exempt from
the permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until the home is
relocated.



   17.   Prohibited Signs and Nonconforming Signs.



      A.   The following signs are expressly prohibited in all
zoning districts, except as otherwise provided by this chapter:



         (1)   Abandoned Signs.  Such business signs that
advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer conducted or
available on the premises on which the sign is located shall be prohibited,
and such abandoned signs shall be removed within sixty (60) days of the date
of abandonment.  This requirement is not intended to prohibit off-premises
signs erected in compliance with this chapter.



DIAGRAM



Corner Lots – Yards and Visibility







         (2)   Signs in a State of Disrepair.  Any sign which is
otherwise in compliance with this subsection, but has faded, has letters or
numbers missing, is in need of paint, has a portion of the sign missing, or
is otherwise in need of maintenance shall also be in violation of this
subsection and must be removed or repaired within sixty (60) days of the date
of receiving a notice to repair.



         (3)   Signs Near Overhead Line.  All signs must comply
with the National Electric Safety Code, Part 2, Table 234-1, and any
amendments thereto.  Failure to comply with said Code is a violation of this
subsection.  In addition to any sanctions imposed by this Code of
Ordinances, the sign must be removed within sixty (60) days of the date of
receiving a notice to remove.



      B.   Every sign or other advertising structure in existence on
the effective date of the ordinance codified by this subsection which does
not conform to the provisions of this subsection, shall be termed a
nonconforming sign and shall be removed, altered or replaced so as to conform
to the provisions of this subsection in accordance with the following:



         (1)   Signs that are abandoned as described in
subparagraph (1) of paragraph A of this subsection shall be removed, altered
or replaced within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified by
this subsection.



         (2)   Signs that are in a state of disrepair as
described in subparagraph (2) of paragraph A of this subsection shall be
removed, altered or replaced within 60 days of the effective date of this
subsection.



         (3)   Signs which are in violation of the National
Electric Safety Code, Part 2, Table 234-1, as described in subparagraph 3 of
paragraph A of this subsection shall be removed, altered or replaced within
60 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified by this subsection.



         (4)   Any nonconforming off-premises sign, except those
subject to subparagraph (1) of this paragraph B, shall be deemed a
nonconforming structure or nonconforming use of a structure and land in
combination, as applicable, pursuant to Sections 165.12 and 165.13 and shall
comply with said regulations.



   18.   Zero Lot Line Criteria.  Utilization of the zero lot line
regulations requires the approval of the entire subdivision in which a zero
lot line unit is proposed.  Such subdivisions shall be limited to generally
undeveloped areas and shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
Approval of a subdivision for zero lot line regulations shall be designated
by the symbol ZL following the subdivision name on the district map.  A
two-family or multiple family dwelling which utilizes zero lot line
regulations may be built when all of the following conditions have been met:



      A.   Each dwelling unit is attached on one side (in the case
of two-family dwellings or end units of a multiple family dwellings), or two
sides (in the case of interior units of multiple family dwellings), to the
other dwelling unit(s).  The side property line divides each dwelling unit.



      B.   The applicant provides to the Zoning Administrator and
records in the office of the County Recorder, acceptable covenant and deed
restrictions on all properties which are proposed for zero lot line
designation.  The restrictions include the following:



         (1)   Provision for access to the abutting property for
the adjacent property owner and/or the owner’s representative for the
purpose of construction, reconstruction, repair, and maintenance of the side
which will abut the common lot line.



         (2)   Provision for necessary easement encroachments for
footings, eaves, and special structures, and provides for perpetual easements
in the event of an encroachment by the party wall.



         (3)   Provision that the City is a third party to the
approval and subsequent changes to any covenants and deed restrictions, but
is not a third party in enforcement of said covenants and deed restrictions.



         (4)   Provision for restrictions to limit changes of
color, material and design of the dwelling so as to be compatible with the
attached unit.



165.37A    WIND TURBINES.



   1.   Intent.  This section establishes general guidelines for the
siting and use of wind turbine generators and related devices and
structures.  This section is intended to:



      A.   Protect residential areas from any potentially adverse
visual or noise impacts of wind turbine generators or related devices or
structures.



      B.   Provide for a land use that will provide an energy source
with low associated environmental impacts.



      C.   Provide for the removal of abandoned or noncompliant wind
turbine generator towers, anemometer towers, or related devices and
structures.



      D.   Allow restricted use of wind turbine generator towers and
anemometers of limited height.



   2.   Definitions Related to Wind Turbine Generators.



      A.   Anemometer.  An instrument for measuring and recording
the speed of the wind.



      B.   Anemometer Tower.  A structure, including all accessory
facilities, temporarily erected for no more than two (2) years, on which an
anemometer is mounted for the purposes of documenting whether a site has wind
resources sufficient for the operation of a wind turbine generator.



      C.   Wind Turbine Generator.  A tower, pylon, or other
structure, including all accessory facilities, upon which any, all, or some
combination of the following is mounted:



         (1)     A wind vane, blade, or series of wind vanes or
blades, or other devices mounted on a rotor for the purpose of converting
wind kinetic energy into electrical energy.



         (2)     A shaft, gear, belt, or coupling device used to
connect the rotor to a generator, alternator, or other electrical or
mechanical energy-producing device.



         (3)     A generator, alternator, or other device used
to convert mechanical energy transferred by the rotation of the rotor into
electrical energy.



      D.   Wind Turbine Generator Height.  The distance between the
ground and the highest point of the wind turbine generator equipment,
including the blades.



      E.   Shadow Flicker.  The visible flicker effect when
rotating turbine blades cast shadows on the ground and nearby structures
causing the repeating pattern of light and shadows.



   3.   Applicability. 



      A.   Wind turbine generator tower and anemometer tower
setbacks for towers shall be a distance equal to 110% of the total height of
the tower and blades from all inhabited structures, overhead utility lines,
public road right-of-way, and property boundaries.



      B.   All wind turbine generators and anemometer towers shall
only be permitted after a conditional use permit approval in accordance with
Section 165.21 (Board of Adjustment), and shall be subject to all standards
and requirements of Section 165.37A(4).



      C.   The Forest City Airport Board must approve the maximum
height and location of all generator towers (plus blades) or anemometer
towers to insure the safety of airplane traffic.



      D.   The Forest City Electric Utility Department shall approve
any electric generator system before and after installation.



   4.   General Requirements. 



      A.   Minimum Site Area.  The minimum site area for a wind
turbine generator or an anemometer tower shall be as necessary to meet
required setbacks and any other standards of this section.



      B.   Maximum Height.  The maximum wind turbine generator
height (blades included), or the height of an anemometer tower erected prior
to the wind turbine generator, shall be 300 feet.



      C.   Minimum Rotor Wind Vane or Blade Clearance.  The lowest
point of the arc created by rotating wind vanes or blades on a wind turbine
generator shall be no less than 25 feet or ¼ of the tower height, whichever
is greater.



      D.   Maximum Noise Levels.  Any proposed wind turbine
generator shall produce sound levels that are no more than 50 decibels as
measured on the dB(A) scale at the property lines of the site in question. 
A variance is allowed when due to occasional high winds.  A noise report
shall be submitted with any application for an anemometer tower or wind or
wind turbine generator tower.  A noise report shall be prepared by a
qualified professional or equipment vendor and shall include the following,
at a minimum:



         (1)     A description and map of the project’s noise
producing features, including the range of noise levels expected, and the
basis of the expectation.



         (2)     A description of the projects proposed noise
control features and specific measures proposed to mitigate noise impacts for
sensitive land uses.



      E.   Maximum Vibrations.  Any proposed wind turbine generator
shall not produce vibrations humanly perceptible beyond the property on which
it is located.



      F.   Transmission Lines.  Any on-site electrical transmission
lines connecting the wind turbine generator to the public utility electricity
distribution system shall be located underground.



      G.   Interference with Reception.  Any wind turbine
generators shall be constructed and operated so that they do not interfere
with television, microwave, navigational, or radio reception to neighboring
areas.



      H.   State and Federal Requirements.  Any proposed wind
turbine generator or anemometer tower shall meet or exceed any standards and
regulations of the FAA, the Iowa Utilities Board, National Electric Code, and
any other agency of the State or Federal government, with the authority to
regulate wind turbine generators or other tall structures in effect at the
time the conditional use permit is approved.



      I.   Aesthetics and Lighting.  Any proposed wind turbine
generator or anemometer tower shall meet the following requirements:



         (1)     Each wind turbine generator or anemometer
tower, including all accessory structures, shall be galvanized or painted a
non-reflective neutral color to reduce visual obtrusiveness.



         (2)     Each wind turbine generator tower may be
monopole, monotube, or lattice style construction and shall not include guy
wires.  This provision shall not apply to anemometer towers.



      J.   Signs.  A sign no more than four (4) square feet in area
displaying the location of any shut off switch, an address, telephone number
for emergency or information inquiries shall be posted at the wind turbine
generator tower or anemometer tower erected prior to a wind turbine
generator.  No wind turbine generator tower or anemometer tower or site
shall include an advertising sign other than the wind turbine and related
equipment manufacturers.



      K.   Unauthorized Access.  Wind turbine generators and
anemometer shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access.  The tower
shall be designed and installed to not provide step bolts or a ladder readily
accessible to the public for a minimum height of ten (10) feet above the
ground.



      L.   Essential Services.  Wind turbine generators and
anemometers shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this section of the
zoning ordinance and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential
services, public utilities, or private utilities.



      M.   Removal of Abandoned or Unsafe Wind Turbine Generators or
Anemometer Towers.



         (1)     Any wind turbine generator or anemometer that
is not operated for a period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned.



         (2)     A tower found to be unsafe or not in compliance
with the special land use conditions related to noise or shadow flicker
placed upon it by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, shall be found to be in
violation of the conditional use permit. 



         (3)     The owner of any wind turbine generator tower
or anemometer tower that is abandoned or in violation of the conditional use
permit shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the
City of Forest City for such abandonment or violation.



         (4)     Failure to remove an abandoned wind turbine
generator or anemometer tower within the 90-day period provided in this
subsection shall be grounds for the City of Forest City to remove the wind
turbine generator or anemometer tower at the owner’s expense.  The City
shall mail a statement of the total cost to the person failing to abide by
the notice to remove and if the amount shown has not been paid within one (1)
month, the cost shall be certified to the Winnebago County Auditor and it
shall then be collected with, and in the same manner as, general property
taxes.



      N.   Engineer Certification.  Applications for any wind
turbine generator shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind
turbine structure, including the tower, base, and footings.  An engineering
analysis of all components of the wind turbine generator showing compliance
with the applicable regulations and certified by a licensed professional
engineer shall also be submitted.



(165.37A -Ord. 701 – Jul. 10 Supp.)



165.37B    SOLAR FARMS.



   1.   Definitions.  Solar Farm shall be defined as any solar panel
or panels constructed primarily for the commercial sale of solar energy.



   2.   Setbacks.  Solar Farms shall meet the minimum zoning setbacks
for the zoning district in which located.



   3.   Height shall be 20 feet maximum.



   4.   Visibility.



      A.   Solar farms with panels located at least 150 feet from an
adjacent public street right-of-way, residential zoned property, or
residential use shall not require screening.



      B.   Solar farms and Accessory Solar Collection Systems shall
be enclosed by perimeter fencing to restrict unauthorized access at a height
of eight and a half (8.5) feet.



   5.   Application Requirements.



      A.   A site plan denoting the dimensions of the parcel,
proposed solar farm location (arrangement of panels), distance from the
proposed area to all property lines and location of the driveway(s).  No
portion of the system area may encroach into the required setbacks and any
buffer area(s).



      B.   The site plan should also show any street buffer(s) and
any project boundary buffer(s).



      C.   Horizontal and vertical (elevation) to-scale drawing with
dimensions.  The drawings must show the location of the system on the
property.



      D.   State and Local Storm Water permits may be required based
upon ground cover.



   6.   Installation and Design



      A.   Approved Solar Components.  Electric solar energy system
components must have a UL listing and must be designed with anti-reflective
coating(s).



      B.   Compliance with Building and Electrical Code.  All solar
farms shall meet all requirements of the International Building Code with
Iowa Amendments.



   7.   Impervious Surface.  The surface area of Accessory
Free-Standing Solar PV Systems will be exempt from contributing to the
calculation of overall impervious surface coverage.  (Alternatively, only
the footings of Accessory Free-Standing Polar PV Systems will contribute to
the calculation of overall impervious surface coverage.)



   8.   Removal of Facilities.  If the Solar farm has been abandoned
or not operated or producing electricity for more than 18 months the
equipment and faculties shall be removed including the footings and platforms
the solar panels are affixed.



(Sec. 165.37B added by Ord. 780 – May 18 Supp.)



ENFORCEMENT AND AMENDMENTS



165.38    ENFORCEMENT AND INTERPRETATION.



All questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to
the Zoning/Building Administrator, or that person’s assistant, and such
questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from
the decision of the Zoning/Building Administrator, and recourse from the
decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by
law and particularly by Chapter 414, Code of Iowa.



165.39    AMENDMENTS.



   1.   The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries may, from time to
time, be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed, provided that
at least seven (7) days’ notice of the time and place of such hearing shall
be published in a paper of general circulation in the City.  In no case
shall the notice be published more than twenty (20) days prior to the
hearing. 



   2.   Notwithstanding Section 414.2, as a part of an ordinance
changing land from one zoning district to another zoning district or an
ordinance approving a site development plan, the Council may impose
conditions on a property owner which are in addition to existing regulations
if the additional conditions have been agreed to in writing by the property
owner before the public hearing required under this section or any
adjournment of the hearing.  The conditions must be reasonable and imposed
to satisfy public needs which are directly caused by the requested change. 
In case, however, of a written protest against a change or repeal which is
filed with the City Clerk and signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or
more of the area of the lots included in the proposed change or repeal, or by
the owners of 20% or more of the property which is located within 200 feet of
the exterior boundaries of the property for which the change or repeal is
proposed, the change or repeal shall not become effective except by the
favorable vote of at least three-fourths (¾) of all the members of the
Council.  The protest, if filed, must be filed before or at the public
hearing. 



   3.   Proposed amendments not recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall become effective only upon a favorable vote of three-fourths
(¾) of the members of the City Council.  All zoning amendment application
forms shall be approved by resolution of the City Council.



165.40    VIOLATIONS.



Violation of the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute a
misdemeanor.  Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from
taking such legal action as is necessary to prevent any violation.



165.41    SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES.



The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses
and a collection procedure for zoning district changes, zoning permits,
appeals, and other matters pertaining to this chapter.  The schedule of fees
shall be posted in the office of the Zoning/Building Administrator, and the
City Clerk, and may be altered or amended only by the City Council, as
recommended by the Commission. 



165.42    COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.



Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint.  Such complaint, stating fully the
causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the Zoning/Building
Administrator.  The Administrator shall record properly such complaint,
immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this chapter.



165.43    HISTORIC PRESERVATION.



   1.   Purpose.



      A.   The City of Forest City would like to promote the
educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public through the
recognition, enhancement, and perpetuation of sites and districts of
historical and cultural significance;



      B.   The City of Forest City would like to safeguard the
City’s historic, aesthetic, and cultural heritage by preserving sites and
districts of historic and cultural significance;



      C.   The City of Forest City would like to stabilize and
improve property values;



      D.   The City of Forest City would like to foster pride in the
legacy of beauty and achievements of the past;



      E.   The City of Forest City would like to protect and enhance
the City’s attractions to tourists and visitors and the support and
stimulus to business thereby provided;



      F.   The City of Forest City would like to strengthen the
economy of the City;



      G.   The City of Forest City would like to promote the use of
sites and districts of historic and cultural significance as places for the
education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of this City.



   2.   Definitions.



      A.   “Commission” means the Forest City Historic
Preservation Commission, as established by this chapter.



      B.   “Historic district” means an area which contains a
significant portion of archaeological sites, buildings, structures and/or
other improvements which, considered as a whole, possesses integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association,
and:



         (1)   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a
type, period, or method of construction, or that represents the work of a
master or that possesses high artistic values, or that represents a
significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual
distinction; or



         (2)   Is associated with events that have made
significant contributions to the broad patterns of our local, State or
national history; or



         (3)   Possesses a coherent and distinctive visual
character or integrity based upon similarity of scale, design, color,
setting, workmanship, materials, or combinations thereof, which is deemed to
add significantly to the value and attractiveness of properties within such
area.



         (4)   Is associated with the lives of persons
significant in our past; or



         (5)    Has yielded, or may be likely to yield,
information important in prehistory or history.



      C.   “Historic site” means an archaeological site,
structure or building which:



         (1)   Is associated with events that have made a
significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or



         (2)   Is associated with the lives of persons
significant in our past; or



         (3)   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a
type, period, or method of construction, or that represents a work of a
master, or that possesses high artistic values, or that represents a
significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual
distinction; or



         (4)   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield,
information important in prehistory or history.



   3.   Forest City Historic Preservation Commission.



      A.   The Commission shall initially consist of five (5)
members who shall be residents of the City.



      B.   Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council.  Members shall demonstrate
a positive interest in historic preservation, possessing interest or
expertise in architecture, architectural history, historic preservation, City
planning, building rehabilitation, conservation in general or real estate.



      C.   The original appointment of the members of the Commission
shall be three for two years, and two for three years, from January 1,
following the year of such appointment or until their successor is appointed
to service for the term of three years.



      D.   Vacancies occurring in the Commission, other than
expiration of term of office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the
term of the member replaced.



      E.   Members may serve for more than one term and each member
shall serve until the appointment of a successor.



      F.   Vacancies shall be filed by the City according to the
original selection as aforesaid.



      G.   Members shall serve without compensation.



      H.   A simple majority of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business.



      I.   The Commission shall elect a Chairman who shall preside
over all Commission meetings and elect a Secretary who shall be responsible
for maintaining written records of the Commission’s proceedings.



      J.   The Commission shall meet a least three (3) times a year.



   4.   Powers of Commission.



      A.   The Commission may conduct studies for the identification
and designation of historic districts and sites meeting the definitions
established by this section.  The Commission may proceed at its own
initiative or upon a petition from any person, group, or association.  The
Commission shall maintain records of all studies and inventories for public
use.



      B.   The Commission may make a recommendation to the State
Historic Preservation Officer for the listing of a historic district or site
in the National Register of Historic Places and may conduct a public hearing
thereon.



      C.   The Commission may investigate and recommend to the City
Council the adoption of ordinances designating historic sites and historic
districts if they qualify as defined herein.



      D.   Other Powers.  In addition to those duties and powers
specified above, the Commission may, with City Council approval:



         (1)   Accept unconditional gifts and donations of real
and personal property, including money, for the purpose of historic
preservation.



         (2)   Acquire by purchase, bequest, or donation, fee and
lesser interest in historic properties, including properties adjacent to or
associated with historic properties.



         (3)   Preserve, restore, maintain and operate historic
properties, under the ownership or control of the Commission.



         (4)   Lease, sell, and otherwise transfer or dispose of
historic properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants
and in a manner that will preserve the property.



         (5)   Contract, with the approval of the governing body,
with the State or the Federal government or other organizations.



         (6)   Cooperate with the Federal, State and local
governments in the pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation.



         (7)   Provide information for the purpose of historic
preservation to the governing body.



         (8)   Promote and conduct an educational and
interpretive program on historic properties within its jurisdiction.




(Section 165.43 - Ord. 738 – Dec. 13 Supp.)




 


EDITOR’S NOTE



The following ordinances, not codified herein, which amend the Official
Zoning Map as described in Section 165.04, have been adopted and are
specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect.


ORDINANCE
 
ADOPTED
 
ORDINANCE
 
ADOPTED




480 (Official Zoning Map)
 

August 16, 1993

 


 





533

 
September 16, 1996
 
 



577

 
October 4, 1999
 
 



583

 
February 21, 2000
 
 



602

 
June 18, 2001
 
 



624

 
September 15, 2003
 
 


631
 
February 2, 2004
 
 


638
 
August 2, 2004
 
 


647
 
April 26, 2005
 
 


673
 
November 6, 2006
 
 


727
 
September 4, 2012
 
 


735
 
March 18, 2013
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 




 



CHAPTER 170
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



 



170.01  Definitions
 
170.19  Parks and Open Space


170.02  Application
 
170.20  Conservation


170.03  Recording of Plat
 
170.21  Preapplication Conference


170.04  Fees Established
 
170.22  Sketch Plan Required


170.05  Penalties
 
170.23  Presentation to Commission or Council


170.06  Building Permit to be Denied
 
170.24  Subdivision Classified


170.07  Improvements Required
 
170.25  Plats Required


170.08  Inspection
 
170.26  Requirements of Preliminary Plat


170.09  Minimum Improvements
 
170.27  Procedures for Review of Preliminary Plat


170.10  Easements Required
 
170.28  Duration of Approval of Preliminary Plat


170.11  Performance Bond Required
 
170.29  Authorization to Install Improvements


170.12  Alternative Private Systems for Sewer or Water
 
170.30  Completion and Acceptance of Improvements


170.13  Design Standards
 
170.31  Performance Bond Permitted


170.14  Lands Subject To Flooding
 
170.32  Requirements of Final Plat


170.15  Plat to Conform to Comprehensive Plan
 
170.33  Attachments to Final Plat


170.16  Construction Standards for Improvements
 
170.34  Procedures for the Review of Final Plat


170.17  Street Standards
 
170.35  Variances


170.18  Block and Lot Standards
 
170.36  Changes and Amendments




 



170.01    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter, the following terms or words are defined:



   1.   “Alley” means public property dedicated to public use
primarily for vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise
abutting on a street.



   2.   “Block” means an area of land within a subdivision that is
entirely bounded by streets, railroad rights-of-way, rivers, tracts of public
land, or the boundary of the subdivision.



   3.   “City Engineer” means the professional engineer registered
in the State of Iowa designated as City Engineer by the Council or other
hiring authority.



   4.   “Comprehensive Plan” means the general plan for the
development of the community adopted by the Council.  Such Comprehensive
Plan shall include any part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment
to such plan or parts thereof.



   5.   “Cul-de-sac” means a street having one end connecting to
another street and the other end terminated by a vehicular turn-around.



   6.   “Easement” means an authorization by a property owner for
another to use a designated part of the property for a specified purpose.



   7.   “Flood hazard area” and “Floodway” are defined in
Chapter 160 of this Code of Ordinances.



   8.   “Improvements” means changes to land necessary to prepare
it for building sites, including but not limited to grading, filling, street
paving, curb paving, sidewalks, walkways, water mains, sewers, drainageways
and other public works and appurtenances.



   9.   “Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel or
tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of transfer of ownership or for building development.



   10.   “Lot, corner” means a lot situated at the intersection of
two streets.



   11.   “Lot, double frontage” means any lot which is not a corner
lot which abuts two streets.



   12.   “Owner” means the legal entity holding title to the
property being subdivided or such representative or agent as is fully
empowered to act on its behalf.



   13.   “Planning Commission” or “Commission” means the
Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.



   14.   “Plat” means a map, drawing or chart on which a
subdivider’s plan for the subdivision of land is presented, which the
subdivider submits for approval and intends, in final form, to record.



   15.   “Plats officer” means the individual assigned the duty to
administer this chapter by the Council.



   16.   “Resubdivision” means any subdivision of land which has
previously been included in a recorded plat.  In appropriate context, it may
be a verb referring to the act of preparing a plat of previously subdivided
land.



   17.   “Street” means public property, not an alley, intended for
vehicular circulation.  In appropriate context, the term “street” may
refer to the right-of-way bounded by the property lines of such public
property or may refer to the paving installed within such right-of-way.



   18.   “Street, major” means a street which has or for which it
is planned to have continuity to carry traffic from one section of the City
to another or which provides a traffic route out of and into the City.  The
“major street” designation shall include only those City streets
classified by the County Functional Classification Board as arterial
connector, trunk extension or trunk collector and any state and Federal
highways.



   19.   “Street, minor” means a City street other than a major
street.



   20.   “Subdivider” means the owner of property being subdivided
or such other person or entity empowered to act on the owner’s behalf.



   21.   “Subdivision” means the division of land into two or more
parts for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership
or building development.  The term, when appropriate to the context, may
refer to the process of subdividing or to land subdivided.  However, the
sale or exchange of small parcels of land to or between the owners of
adjacent platted lots, where such sale or exchange does not create any
additional lots and where the land sold or exchanged constitutes less than
fifty percent (50%) of the area of the enlarged lot after such transfer,
shall not be considered a subdivision.



   22.   “Utilities” means systems for the distribution or
collection of water, gas, electricity, cablevision, waste water and storm
water.



170.02    APPLICATION.



Every owner of any tract or parcel of land who has subdivided or shall
hereafter subdivide or plat the same into two (2) or more parts for the
purpose of laying out an addition, subdivision, building lot or lots, acreage
or suburban lots within the City or, in accordance with Section 354.9 of the
Code of Iowa, within two (2) miles from the corporate limits of the City
shall cause plats of such area to be made in the form and containing the
information, as hereinafter set forth before selling any lots therein
contained or placing the plat on record.



170.03    RECORDING OF PLAT.



No subdivision plat, resubdivision plat, or street dedication within the City
or within two (2) miles of the corporate limits of the City shall be filed
for record with the County Recorder or recorded by the County Recorder until
a final plat of such subdivision, resubdivision or street dedication has been
reviewed and approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Upon the approval of the final plat by the Council, it shall be the duty of
the subdivider to immediately file such plat with the County Auditor and
County Recorder, as required by law.  Such approval shall be revocable after
ninety (90) days and after due notice to the subdivider, unless such plat has
been recorded and evidence thereof filed with the Clerk within such ninety
(90) days.



170.04    FEES ESTABLISHED.



The Council shall, from time to time, establish by resolution fees for the
review of plats.  No plat for any subdivision or resubdivision shall be
considered filed with the Clerk unless and until said plat is accompanied by
the fee as established by resolution of the Council and as required by this
chapter.



170.05    PENALTIES.



Any person who shall dispose of or offer for sale any lot or lots within the
area of jurisdiction of this chapter, until the plat thereof has been
approved by the Council and recorded as required by law, shall forfeit and
pay fifty dollars ($50.00) for each lot or part of lot sold, disposed of or
offered for sale.  Nothing contained herein shall in any way limit the
City’s right to any other remedies available to the City for the
enforcement of this chapter.



170.06    BUILDING PERMIT TO BE DENIED.



No building permit shall be issued for construction on any lot, parcel or
tract within the City’s corporate limits where a subdivision is required by
this chapter unless and until a final plat of such subdivision has been
approved and recorded in accordance with this chapter and until the
improvements required by this chapter have been accepted by the City.



170.07    IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.



The subdivider shall, at his or her own expense, install and construct all
improvements required by this chapter.  All required improvements shall be
installed and constructed in accordance with the design standards established
for such improvements by the City and as shown on the approved preliminary
plat.



170.08    INSPECTION.



All improvements shall be inspected by the City Engineer to ensure compliance
with the requirements of this chapter.



170.09    MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS.



The improvements set forth below shall be considered the minimum improvements
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.



   1.   Streets.  The subdivider of land being subdivided shall
provide the grading of the entire street right-of-way, alley or public place
and provide appropriate paving, including curb and gutter on all streets. 
All streets or alleys shall be of such width and shall be so constructed as
to meet the standards of the City.  Under some circumstances, the City may
require as a condition for approval of the plat dedication and improvements
of a street having a width greater than necessary to meet the needs of the
platted area, but necessary to complete the City street system as it relates
to both the area being platted and other areas.  In such event, the City
will pay the subdivider the difference in cost of improving the wider street
and the street width reasonable to meet the foreseeable needs of the
subdivision taken alone.  The streets shall, upon final approval and
acceptance by the City, become the property of the City.



   2.   Sanitary Sewer System.  The subdivider of the land being
platted shall make adequate provision for the disposal of sanitary sewage
from the platted area with due regard being given to present or reasonably
foreseeable needs.  There shall be constructed, at the subdivider’s
expense, a sanitary sewer system including all necessary pumping stations,
pumping equipment, manholes and all other necessary or desirable
appurtenances to provide for the discharge of sanitary sewer from all lots or
parcels of land within the platted area to a connection with the City’s
sanitary sewers.  The sanitary sewer system shall be constructed in
accordance with the plans and specifications of the City.  Under some
circumstances, the City may require as a condition for approval of the plat
installation of a sanitary sewer that is larger than necessary to meet the
needs of the platted area, but necessary to complete the City sanitary sewer
system as it relates to both the area being platted and other areas.  In
such event, the City will pay the subdivider the difference in cost of pipe
and installation between the larger sewer and the diameter of sewer
reasonable to meet the foreseeable needs of the area.  The above mentioned
facilities for the collection and disposal of sanitary sewage from the
platted area shall, upon final approval and acceptance by the City, become
the property of the City.



   3.   Storm Sewer System.  The subdivider of land being platted
shall install and construct a storm sewer system adequate to serve the area,
including anticipated extension of use to serve additional areas.  The storm
sewer system shall be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications
of the City.  Under some circumstances, the City may require as a condition
for approval of the plat installation of a storm sewer system that is larger
than necessary to meet the needs of the platted area, but necessary to
complete the City storm sewer system as it relates to both the area being
platted and other areas.  In such event, the City will pay the subdivider
the difference in cost of pipe and installation between the larger sewer and
the diameter of sewer reasonable to meet the foreseeable needs of the area. 
The sewers shall, upon inspection, approval and acceptance by the City,
become the property of the City.  In the storm sewer design phase,
consideration shall be given to alternatives and principles of storm water
management or the provisions of a storm water management plan if such plan
has been adopted by the City.



   4.   Water Main System.  The subdivider of the land being platted
shall install and construct a water main system to adequately serve all lots
or parcels of land within the platted area with due regard to present and
reasonably foreseeable needs of the entire area and shall connect the same to
the City’s existing water mains.  Under some circumstances, the City may
require as a condition for approval of the plat installation of a water main
that is larger than necessary to meet the needs of the platted area, but
necessary to complete the City water distribution system as it relates to
both the area being platted and other areas.  In such event, the City will
pay the subdivider the difference in cost of pipe and installation between
the larger water main and the diameter of water main reasonable to meet the
foreseeable needs of the area.  The water mains shall, upon inspection,
approval and acceptance by the City, become the property of the City.



   5.   Electrical, Telephone and Cable Television Systems.  Any
electrical, telephone and cable television transmission lines shall be
installed underground according to local utility specifications, except for
main transmission lines.



   6.   Other Improvements.  The owner and subdivider of the land
being platted shall be responsible for the installation of sidewalks within
the street area; the installation of walkways as necessary; grading, seeding
or sodding of all lots; the planting of any required trees in the parking;
the installation of street signs; and the provision of street lighting.  All
such improvements shall be under the direction of the City Engineer or
director of the electric utility, as appropriate.



   7.   The top of any basement constructed on or after the passage of
this subsection shall be at least 16 inches above the street curb and if
there is no curb, at least 23 inches above the edge of the traveled surface
of the road.  This provision shall apply to all new construction whether or
not subject to the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 726 – Jul. 12 Supp.)



170.10    EASEMENTS REQUIRED.



   1.   Where alleys are not provided in the plat, easements of not
less than five (5) feet in width shall be granted to the City by the owner on
each side of all rear and side lot lines where necessary for public utility
requirements.  Easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or
across lots when necessary for the extensions of main sewers or other
utilities.



   2.   Necessary easements shall be provided for electrical, telephone
and cable television systems.



   3.   Easements along streams and water courses.  Wherever any
stream or surface watercourse is located in an area that is being subdivided,
the subdivider shall, at his or her own expense, make adequate provisions for
the proper drainage of surface water and shall provide and dedicate to the
City an easement along said stream or watercourse as necessary for the proper
maintenance of the watercourse and as approved by the City.



170.11    PERFORMANCE BOND REQUIRED.



The subdivider shall be required to provide to the City proper performance
bonds, satisfactory to the City, so as to ensure the quality and performance
of any dedicated improvements for a period of two (2) years from the date of
acceptance of said improvements, except the performance bonds on street
paving shall be for four (4) years.



170.12    ALTERNATIVE PRIVATE SYSTEMS FOR SEWER OR WATER.



Where connection to the City sewer or water system cannot reasonably be made,
the City may approve alternate private facilities for the distribution of
water or the collection and disposal of sanitary wastes.  Such alternate
private system shall be designed to fully protect the public health, safety
and welfare and shall meet all requirements of State, County or other
applicable health regulations.  Prior to granting approval of such alternate
private systems, the City shall require that the owner and subdivider provide
to the City a waiver of assessment protest or such other legally binding
documents necessary to protect the City from the expense of the subsequent
installation of sewer or water facilities.



170.13    DESIGN STANDARDS.



The standards set forth in the following Sections 170.14 through 170.20 shall
be considered the standards necessary to protect the public health, safety,
and general welfare, and can only be deviated from by authorized variance.



170.14    LANDS SUBJECT TO FLOODING.



No subdivision containing land located in a floodway or a flood hazard area
shall be approved by the City without the approval of the State Department of
Natural Resources.  No lot shall be located so as to include land located
within a floodway or flood hazard area unless the lot is of such size and
shape that it will contain a buildable area not within the floodway or flood
hazard area suitable for development as allowed by the Zoning Ordinance for
the zone in which the lot is located.  Land located within a flood hazard
area or a floodway may be included within a plat as follows, subject to the
approval of the City.



   1.   Included within individual lots in the subdivision, subject to
the limitations of this section.



   2.   Reserved as open space for recreation use by all owners of lots
in the subdivision, with an appropriate legal instrument, approved by the
City, providing for its care and maintenance by such owners.



   3.   If acceptable to the City, dedicated to the City as public open
space for recreation or flood control purposes.



170.15    PLAT TO CONFORM TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
and the general nature and extent of the lots and uses proposed shall conform
to the comprehensive plan of the City, provided such plan has been adopted by
the City and shall conform to such other plans, including but not limited to
a major street plan, a sanitary sewer system plan, or a parks and open space
plan, provided such plan has been adopted by the City.



170.16    CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR IMPROVEMENTS.



In addition to the standards set forth in this chapter, the City Engineer
shall from time to time prepare, and the Council shall, from time to time,
adopt by resolution, technical standards for public improvements.  Such
technical standards for public improvements shall contain the minimum
acceptable specifications for the construction of public improvements.  Such
technical standards may vary for classes of improvements, giving due regard
to the classification of streets or other improvements, and the extent and
character of the area served by the improvements.  Upon adoption by the
Council by resolution, such technical standards for public improvements shall
have such force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.



170.17    STREET STANDARDS.



The following standards shall apply to all streets to be located within the
subdivision:



   1.   Streets shall provide for the continuation of major streets
from adjoining platted areas and the extension of major streets into
adjoining unplatted areas.  Where a plat encompasses the location for a
major street proposed in the comprehensive plan or major thoroughfare plan,
the plat shall provide for such major street.



   2.   Street grades shall align to existing streets, and all grades
for streets shall be as approved by the City.



   3.   Major streets shall be located so as not to require direct
access from the major street to abutting lots.



   4.   Street right-of-way widths and pavement widths shall be as
specified in the comprehensive plan, major street plan or technical standards
for public improvements.



   5.   Half streets are prohibited, except where an existing platted
half street abuts the subdivision.  A platted half street to complete the
street shall then be required.



   6.   Minor streets should be designed to discourage through traffic
while safely connecting to major streets.



   7.   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet are
prohibited.



   8.   Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles as possible,
and no street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty (60)
degrees.



   9.   At intersections of major streets and otherwise as necessary,
lot corners abutting the intersection shall be rounded with a radius
sufficient to provide necessary space within the right-of-way for sidewalks,
traffic control devices, and necessary improvements without encroachment onto
the corner lots.



   10.   Dead-end streets are prohibited, except where a street is
planned to continue past the subdivider’s property, a temporary dead end
may be allowed.



   11.   Streets which connect with other streets, or loop streets, are
preferable for maintenance, fire protection and circulation, but cul-de-sacs
may be permitted.  Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 500 feet in length.



   12.   Dead-end alleys shall be provided with a turn-around with a
minimum right-of-way diameter of 125 feet.



   13.   When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal lots or
parcels, such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the logical
location and opening of future streets and appropriate resubdivision with
provision for adequate utility connection for such resubdivision.  Easements
for the future openings and extensions for such streets or utilities may, at
the discretion of the Council, be made a requirement of the plat.



   14.   Streets which are, or will become, extensions of existing
streets shall be given the same name as the existing streets.  New street
names shall not be the same or sound similar to existing street names.  All
street names shall be at the approval of the Council.



   15.   The Council may approve a private street provided adequate
covenants or other legal documents ensure that the City will not have or need
to assume any maintenance or other responsibility for such street.



   16.   There shall be a minimum of 6 inches of compacted rock as a
base for any streets constructed.  Two sub drains of at least 4 inches in
diameter shall be provided under any new street constructed within the City
of Forest City.  Any sub drains shall drain into the Storm Sewer System or
some other appropriate storm drainage facility as approved by the
Superintendent of Streets.  All sub drain design shall be approved by the
Superintendent of Streets and said approval shall be included with the plans
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval.



(Ord. 726 – Jul. 12 Supp.)



170.18    BLOCK AND LOT STANDARDS.



The following standards shall apply to the layout of blocks and lots in all
subdivisions and, to the extent possible, in all resubdivisions:



   1.   No residential block shall be longer than 1300 feet measured
from street line to street line.  The width of blocks should be arranged so
as to allow two tiers of lots, with utility easement.



   2.   In blocks over 700 feet in length, the Council may require a
public way or an easement at least ten (10) feet in width, at or near the
center of the block, for use by pedestrians.



   3.   The size and shape of blocks or lots intended for commercial or
industrial use shall be adequate to provide the use intended and to meet the
parking, loading and other requirements for such uses contained in the Zoning
Ordinance.



   4.   Lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will
provide satisfactory building sites, properly related to topography and
surrounding land uses.



   5.   Residential lots shall have a minimum of 6,000 square feet
except as noted in subsection 11 below and the size and shape of all lots
shall comply with all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the zone in
which the lot is located.



   6.   All lots shall abut a public street or an approved private
street with a minimum frontage of 60 feet measured as a straight line between
the two front lot corners except frontage on a radius may have a minimum
frontage of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.



   7.   Unless unavoidable, lots shall not front or have direct access
to major streets.  Where unavoidable, lots shall be so arranged as to
minimize the number of access points.



   8.   All lots lines shall be at right angles to straight street
lines or radial to curved street lines, except where, in the judgment of the
Council, a variation to this provision will provide a better street and lot
layout.



   9.   Corner lots shall have sufficient extra width to permit the
required front yard setback as specified in the Zoning Ordinance, oriented to
either street.



   10.   Double frontage lots shall only be permitted where abutting a
major street and a minor street, and such lots shall front only on the minor
street.



   11.   Any lot to be served by a private sanitary sewage system shall
have sufficient area to allow for a satisfactory drain field.  No
subdivision to be served by septic systems shall be approved by the Council
until percolation tests have been performed and the results of said tests
have been provided to and reported on by the County Health Officer.



   12.   Wherever possible, service and collector streets should be
oriented in an east-west direction and lot frontages should be oriented to
the north and south.



170.19    PARKS AND OPEN SPACE.



All residential subdivisions should be so designed as to meet the
neighborhood park and open space needs of its residents.  Such needs may be
met by dedication and acceptance of public park land and/or by reservation by
covenant of private open space, provided there shall exist sufficient
covenants, running with the land, to insure adequate maintenance by the
property owners benefiting from such open space.



170.20    CONSERVATION.



Efforts shall be made to conserve natural resources and advantageously
utilize all natural features and vegetation on the property to minimize soil
erosion.  Consideration will be given to eliminate any form of underground
or surface water pollution.



170.21    PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE.



Whenever a subdivision located within the platting jurisdiction of the City
is proposed, the owner and subdivider shall schedule a preapplication
conference with the Plats Officer.  The conference should be attended by the
Plats Officer and such other City or Utility representatives as deemed
desirable and by the owner and engineer and/or planner as deemed advisable.



170.22    SKETCH PLAN REQUIRED.



For the preapplication conference, the subdivider shall provide a map or
sketch showing the location of the subdivision, the general location of any
proposed streets and other improvements, and the general layout and
arrangement of intended land uses, in relation to the surrounding area.



170.23    PRESENTATION TO COMMISSION OR COUNCIL.



The subdivider may present the sketch plan to the Commission and Council for
review prior to incurring significant costs preparing the preliminary or
final plat.



170.24    SUBDIVISION CLASSIFIED.



Any proposed subdivision or resubdivision shall be classified as minor
subdivision or major subdivision.



   1.   Minor Subdivision.  Any subdivision which contains not more
than four (4) lots fronting on an existing street and which does not require
construction of any public improvements and which does not adversely affect
the remainder of the parcel shall be classified as a minor plat.



   2.   Major Subdivision.  Any subdivision which in the opinion of
the Council does not, for any reason, meet the definition of a minor plat,
shall be classified as a major subdivision.



170.25    PLATS REQUIRED.



In order to secure approval of any proposed subdivision, the owner and
subdivider shall submit to the City plats and other information as required
by this chapter.  The owner and subdivider of any major subdivision shall
comply with the requirements for a preliminary plat and the requirements for
a final plat.  The owner and subdivider of a minor subdivision may elect to
omit the submission of a preliminary plat.



170.26    REQUIREMENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.



The subdivider shall prepare and file with the Clerk the required fee and ten
(10) copies of the preliminary plat, drawn at a scale of one inch equals one
hundred feet (1² = 100¢) or larger.  Sheet size shall not exceed
twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24² x 36²).  Where more than one
sheet is required, the sheets shall show the number of the sheet and the
total number of sheets in the plat and match lines indicating where other
sheets adjoin.  The preliminary plat shall be clearly marked “preliminary
plat” and shall show or have attached thereto the following:



   1.   Title, scale, north point and date.



   2.   Proposed name of the subdivision which shall not duplicate or
resemble existing subdivision names in the County.



   3.   The name and address of the owner and the name, address and
profession of the person preparing the plat.



   4.   A key map showing the general location of the proposed
subdivision in relation to surrounding development.



   5.   The names and locations of adjacent subdivision and the names
of record owners and location of adjoining parcels of unplatted land.



   6.   The location of property lines, streets and alleys, easements,
buildings, utilities, watercourses, tree masses and other existing features
affecting the plat.



   7.   Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision and
existing zoning or adjoining property.



   8.   Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet if the
general slope of the site is less than ten percent (10%) and at vertical
intervals of not more than five (5) feet if the general slope is 10% or
greater.



   9.   The legal description of the area being platted.



   10.   The boundary of the area being platted, shown as a dark line,
with the approximate length of boundary lines and the approximate location of
the property in reference to known section lines.



   11.   The layout, number and approximate dimensions of proposed
lots.  A strip of land shall not be reserved by the subdivider unless the
land is of sufficient size and shape to be of some practical use or service
as determined by the Council.



   12.   The location, width, and dimensions of all streets and alleys
proposed to be dedicated for public use.



   13.   The proposed names for all streets in the area being platted.



   14.   Present and proposed utility systems, including sanitary and
storm sewers, other drainage facilities, water lines, gas mains, electric
utilities and other facilities.



   15.   Proposed easements showing locations, widths, purposes and
limitations.



   16.   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for
schools, parks, playgrounds or other public, semi-public or community
purposes, or shown for such purpose in the comprehensive plan or other
adopted plans.



   17.   A general summary description of any protective covenants or
private restrictions to be incorporated in the final plat.



   18.   Any other pertinent information, as necessary.



170.27    PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   1.   The Clerk, upon receipt of ten (10) copies of the preliminary
plat, shall file one copy in the records of the City, shall retain one copy
for public inspection and shall forward the remaining copies of the plat to
the Plats Officer.



   2.   The Plats Officer shall provide copies of the plat to the City
Engineer and such other persons as necessary to review the plat and shall
schedule the plat for consideration by the Commission.



   3.   The Commission shall examine the plat and the report of the
City Engineer and such other information as it deems necessary or desirable
to ascertain whether the plat conforms to the ordinances of the City and to
the comprehensive plan and other duly adopted plans of the City.  The
Commission shall, within sixty (60) days of the filing of the plat with the
Clerk, forward a report and recommendation regarding the plat to the
Council.  If such recommendation is to disapprove or modify the plat, the
reasons therefor shall be set forth in writing in the report, and a copy of
the report and recommendation shall be provided to the applicant.



   4.   The Council shall examine the plat, the report of the City
Engineer, the report of the Commission, and such other information as it
deems necessary or desirable.  Upon such examination, the Council shall
ascertain whether the plat conforms to the ordinances and standards of the
City, the comprehensive plan, and other duly adopted plans of the City, and
will be conducive to the orderly growth and development of the City in order
to protect the public health, safety and welfare.  Following such
examination, the Council may approve, approve subject to conditions, or
disapprove the plat.  If the decision of the Council is to disapprove the
plat or to approve the plat subject to conditions, the reasons therefor shall
be set forth in writing in the official records of the Council, and such
decisions shall be provided to the applicant.  Action on the preliminary
plat by the Council shall be taken within thirty (30) days of receiving
recommendations of the Commission.



170.28    DURATION OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.



The approval of a preliminary plat by the Council shall be valid for a period
of one year from the date of such approval, after which such approval shall
be void and the subdivider shall take no action requiring the precedent
approval of a preliminary plat except upon application for and approval of an
extension of such period of validity by the Council.



170.29    AUTHORIZATION TO INSTALL IMPROVEMENTS.



The approval of the preliminary plat shall constitute authorization by the
Council for the installation of improvements as required by this chapter and
as shown on the preliminary plat, provided no such improvement shall be
constructed or installed until and unless the plans, profiles, cross sections
and specifications for the construction of such improvement has been
submitted to and approved in writing by the City Engineer.



170.30    COMPLETION AND ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.



Before the Council will approve the final plat, all of the foregoing
improvements shall be constructed and accepted by formal resolution of the
Council.  Before passage of said resolution of acceptance, the City Engineer
shall report that said improvements meet all City specifications and
ordinances or other City requirements and the agreements between the
subdivider and the City.



170.31    PERFORMANCE BOND PERMITTED.



In lieu of the requirement that improvements be completed prior to the
approval of a final plat, the subdivider may post a performance bond with the
City guaranteeing that improvements not completed shall be completed within a
period of two (2) years from the date of approval of such final plat, but
such approval of the plat shall not constitute final acceptance of any
improvements to be constructed.  Improvements will be accepted only after
their construction has been completed.



170.32    REQUIREMENTS OF FINAL PLAT.



The subdivider shall, within one year from the date of approval of the
preliminary plat, unless such time period has been extended, prepare and file
with the Clerk ten (10) copies of the final plat (said copies shall be marked
final plat) and required attachments as set forth in this chapter.  Except
for a final plat for a minor subdivision as set forth herein, no final plat
shall be considered by the Council until and unless a preliminary plat for
the area included in the proposed final plat has been approved and has not
expired and become void as set forth above.  The final plat shall be drawn
at a scale on one inch equals one hundred feet (1² = 100¢) or larger. 
Sheet size shall be no greater than eighteen inches by twenty-four inches
(18² x 24²) or smaller than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches
(8½² x 11²) and shall be of a size acceptable to the County Auditor.  If
more than one sheet is used, each sheet shall clearly show the number of the
sheet, the total number of sheets included in the plat, and match lines
indicating where other sheets adjoin.  The final plat shall comply with
Chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa and shall show the following:



   1.   The name of the subdivision.



   2.   Name and address of the owner and subdivider.



   3.   Scale, graphic bar scale, north arrow and date on each sheet.



   4.   All monuments to be of record.



   5.   Sufficient survey data to positively describe the bounds of
every lot, block, street, easement or other areas shown on the plat, as well
as the outer boundaries of the subdivided lands.



   6.   All distance, bearing, curve and other survey data.



   7.   All adjoining properties shall be identified, and where such
adjoining properties are a part of a recorded subdivision, the name of that
subdivision shall be shown.  If the subdivision platted is a resubdivision
of a part of the whole of a previously recorded subdivision, sufficient ties
shall be shown to controlling lines appearing on the earlier plat to permit
an overlay to be made.  Resubdivision shall be labeled as such in a subtitle
following the name of the subdivision wherever the name appears on the plat.



   8.   Street names and clear designation of public alleys.



   9.   Block and lot numbers.



   10.   Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or
reserved for public use and the purpose for which such property is dedicated
or reserved for public use.



   11.   The purpose of any easement shown on the plat shall be
confined to only those easements pertaining to public utilities, including
gas, power, telephone, cable television, water, sewer, easements for ingress
and egress; and such drainage easements as are deemed necessary for the
orderly development of the land encompassed within the plat and said
easements shall also be defined on the plat or dedication document.



   12.   All interior excepted parcels, clearly indicated and labeled
“not a part of this plat.”



   13.   The minimum unadjusted acceptable error of closure for all
subdivision boundaries shall be 1:10,000 and shall be 1:5,000 for any
individual lot.



   14.   A statement by a registered land surveyor that the plat was
prepared by the surveyor or under the surveyor’s direct personal
supervision, signed and dated by the surveyor and bearing the surveyor’s
Iowa registration number or seal, and a sealed certification of the accuracy
of the plat by the registered land surveyor who drew the plat.



170.33    ATTACHMENTS TO FINAL PLAT.



The following shall be attached to and accompany any final plat:



   1.   A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that
the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their
desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the
acknowledgments of deeds.  The statement by the proprietors may also include
a dedication to the public of all lands within the plat that are designated
for streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school property, or other public use,
if the dedication is approved by the Council.



   2.   A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any,
that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with
their desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
the acknowledgment of deeds.  An affidavit and bond as provided for in
Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa may be recorded in lieu of the consent of
the mortgage or lienholder.  When a mortgage or lienholder consents to the
subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien shall be recorded for any areas
conveyed to the City or dedicated to the public.



   3.   An opinion by an attorney-at-law who has examined the abstract
of title of the land being platted.  The opinion shall state the names of
the proprietors and holders of mortgages, liens or other encumbrances on the
land being platted and shall note the encumbrances, along with any bonds
securing the encumbrances.  Utility easements shall not be construed to be
encumbrances for the purpose of this section.



   4.   A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is free
from certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is
free from certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are
secured by bond in compliance with Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa.



   5.   A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and
for signatures of the Mayor and Clerk.



   6.   A certificate by the City Engineer that all required
improvements have been acceptably completed or that a performance bond
guaranteeing completion has been approved by the City Attorney and filed with
the Clerk, or that the Council has agreed that the City will provide the
necessary improvements and assess the costs against the benefited properties.



   7.   If private improvements or areas have been approved, an
agreement in the form of covenant running with the land, in a form approved
by the City Attorney, providing for the construction or reconstruction of
such improvements to meet City standards, and assurance that the City will
not have any maintenance or other responsibility regarding the private
improvements or areas.



   8.   Certification of dedication of streets and other public
property, along with the required performance bond.



   9.   The applicable fee, if any.



170.34    PROCEDURES FOR THE REVIEW OF FINAL PLAT.



   1.   The Clerk, upon receipt of ten (10) copies of the final plat,
shall file one copy in the records of the City, shall retain one copy for the
public inspection, and shall forward the remaining copies to the Plats
Officer.



   2.   The Plats Officer shall provide copies of the plat to the City
Engineer and such other persons as are necessary to review the plat and shall
schedule the plat for review by the Council.



   3.   The Plats Officer and the City Engineer shall examine the plat
as to its compliance with the ordinances and standards of the City and its
conformance with the preliminary plat and shall set forth their findings in
writing.  A copy of the findings shall be provided to the subdivider.



   4.   If the plat is found to substantially conform to the
preliminary plat as approved, the final plat shall be forwarded to the
Council for review.  If the plat is found not to conform to the preliminary
plat, it shall be referred to the Commission for review, prior to review by
the Council.  The Commission shall then review the plat and shall forward a
written recommendation thereon to the Council within sixty (60) days of the
filing of the plat with the Clerk.  If the recommendation is to disapprove
the plat or to require modification of the plat, the reasons therefor shall
be set forth in writing and a copy of the recommendation shall be provided to
the subdivider.



   5.   Upon receipt of the plat and written reports thereon, the
Council shall review the plat and attachments thereto.  If the plat is found
to conform to the ordinances and standards of the City and the comprehensive
plan and other duly adopted plans, all as of the date of approval of the
preliminary plat, and is found to substantially conform to the preliminary
plat, the Council shall approve the plat and shall cause its approval to be
entered on the plat as required by law.



   6.   Action on the final plat by the Council shall be taken within
thirty (30) days of the date of receiving recommendations of the Commission,
unless such time period is extended by agreement between the subdivider and
the City.  If the action is to disapprove the plat, the reasons therefor
shall be set forth in the official records of the City and such decision
shall be provided to the subdivider.



170.35    VARIANCES.



Where, in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that
strict compliance with the requirements would be unrealistic in terms of
benefit to the City, the Council may vary, modify or waive the requirements
so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured;
provided, however, such variance modification or waiver will not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.  In so granting
a variance, the Council may impose such additional conditions as are
necessary to secure substantially the objectives of the requirements so
varied, modified or waived.



170.36    CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.



This chapter or any provision of this chapter may be changed or amended from
time to time by the Council; provided, however, such changes or amendments
shall not become effective until after a public hearing has been held, public
notice of which shall have been published at least once, not less than four
(4) or more than twenty (20) days before the date of the hearing.



CHAPTER 175
AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS



 



175.01  Definitions
 
175.09  Board of Adjustment


175.02  Airport Zones and Airspace Height Limitations
 
175.10  Board of Adjustment Procedures


175.03  Lighting
 
175.11  Powers of Board of Adjustment


175.04  Variances
 
175.12  Vote on Variations or Orders


175.05  Nonconforming Uses
 
175.13  Administrative Agency


175.06  Amendments and Changes
 
175.14  Conflicting Regulations


175.07  Judicial Review
 
175.15  Penalties


175.08  Board of Adjustment Established
 




 



175.01    DEFINITIONS.



As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:



   1.   “Airport” means the Forest City Municipal Airport. 



   2.   “Airport elevation” means the highest point of an
airport’s usable landing area measured in feet above mean sea level, which
elevation is established to be 1,209 feet.



   3.   “Airport hazard” means any structure or tree or use of land
which would exceed the Federal obstruction standards as contained in fourteen
(14) Code of Federal Regulations Sections 77.21, 77.23 and 77.25 and which
obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft and landing or
takeoff at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off
of aircraft.



   4.   “Airport primary surface” means a surface longitudinally
centered on a runway.  When the runway has a specially prepared hard
surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end
of that runway.  The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that
width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the
most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. 
The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the
elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.



   5.   “Airspace height” means for the purpose of determining the
height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning
map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.



   6.   “Control zone” means airspace extending upward from the
surface of the earth which may include one or more airports and is normally a
circular area of five (5) statute miles in radius, with extensions where
necessary to include instrument approach and departure paths. 



   7.   “Instrument runway” means a runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities or area
type navigation equipment, for which an instrument approach procedure has
been approved or planned. 



   8.   “Minimum descent altitude” means the lowest altitude
expressed in feet above mean sea level, to which descent is authorized on
final approach or during circle-to-land maneuvering in execution of a
standard instrument approach procedure, where no electronic glide slope is
provided. 



   9.   “Minimum en route altitude” means the altitude in effect
between radio fixes which assures acceptable navigational signal coverage and
meets obstruction clearance requirements between those fixes. 



   10.   “Minimum obstruction clearance altitude” means the
specified altitude in effect between radio fixes on VOR airways, off-airways
routes, or route segments which meets obstruction clearance requirements for
the entire route segment and which assures acceptable navigational signal
coverage only within twenty-two (22) miles of a VOR.



   11.   “Runway” means a defined area on an airport prepared for
landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.



   12.   “Visual runway” means a runway intended solely for the
operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures with no straight-in
instrument approach procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an
FAA approved airport layout plan, military services approved military airport
layout plan, or by any planning document submitted to the FAA by competent
authority. 



175.02    AIRPORT ZONES AND AIRSPACE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.



In order to carry out the provisions of this section, there are hereby
created and established certain zones which are depicted on the Municipal
Airport Height Zoning Map.  A structure located in more than one zone of the
following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more
restrictive height limitations.  The various zones are hereby established
and defined as follows:



   1.   Horizontal Zone.  The land lying under a horizontal plane 150
feet above the established elevations, the perimeter of which is constructed
by:



      A.   Swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii from the center of each
end of the primary surface of runways 9 and 27 and connecting the adjacent
arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 



      B.   Swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of
each end of the primary surface of runways 15 and 33, and connecting the
adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.



No structure shall exceed 150 feet above the established airport elevation in
the horizontal zone, as depicted on the Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.



   2.   Conical Zone.  The land lying under a surface extending
outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of
20 feet to one for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.  No structure shall
penetrate the conical surface in the conical zone, as depicted on the
Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.



   3.   Approach Zone.  The land lying under the surface
longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending
outward and upward from each end of the primary surface. 



      A.   Visual Other Than Utility Runway and Non-precision
Instrument Runway.  The inner edge of the approach surface is:



         (1)   250 feet wide for runways 9 and 27. 



         (2)   500 feet wide for runways 15 and 33. 



      B.   Visual Other Than Utility Runways.  The outer edge of
the approach zone is: 



         (1)   1,250 feet for runways 9 and 27.



         (2)   3,500 feet for runways 15 and 33.



      C.   The approach zone extends for a horizontal distance of:



         (1)   5,000 feet at a slope of 20 to one for runways 9
and 27;



         (2)   10,000 feet at a slope of 34 to one for runways 15
and 33. 



No structure shall exceed the approach surface to any runway, as depicted on
the Municipal Airport Height Zoning Map.



   4.   Transitional Zone.  The land lying under those surfaces
extending outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and the
runway centerline extended at a slope of seven to one from the sides of the
primary surface.



175.03    LIGHTING.



The owner of any structure over 200 feet above ground level must install on
the structure lighting in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA), Advisory Circular 70-7460-1D and amendments.  Additionally, any
structure constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter and exceeding 949 feet above ground level, must install on that
structure high intensity white obstruction lights in accordance with Chapter
6 of FAA Advisory Circular 7460-1D and amendments.  Any permit or variance
granted may be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or
growth in question to permit the City or County at its own expense to
install, operate and maintain thereto such markers or lights as may be
necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airspace hazard.



175.04    VARIANCES.



Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or to
permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use property in violation of any
section of this chapter, may apply to the Board of Adjustment for variance
from such regulations.  No application for variance to the requirements of
this chapter may be considered by the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of
the application has been submitted to Municipal Airport Commission for an
opinion as to the aeronautical effects of such a variance.  If the Municipal
Airport Commission does not respond to the Board of Adjustment within 15 days
from receipt of the copy of the application, the Board may make its decision
to grant or deny the variance.



175.05    NONCONFORMING USES.



   1.   The lawful use of land, buildings or other improvements
existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may
be continued even though such use does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter.  A nonconforming use of land or building shall not be enlarged in
any manner or form.  The foregoing provisions shall also apply to the
nonconforming uses in zones hereafter changed.  Whenever a nonconforming use
has been changed to a restricted use, such use shall not thereafter be
changed to a less restricted use.



   2.   Whenever a nonconforming use of any land or building is
voluntarily discontinued for a period of two years, its use shall thereafter
conform to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located.



   3.   No building whose use does not conform to the provisions of
this chapter, except when required to do so by law or ordinance, shall be
enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered unless changing
the use to a use permitted in the district in which said building or premises
is located.



   4.   The casual, intermittent, temporary or illegal use of land or
buildings shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a
nonconforming use on the part of a lot or tract shall not be construed to
establish a nonconforming use on the entire lot or tract.



175.06    AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES.



   1.   The Council and County Boards of Supervisors may, from time to
time, on their own motions or on petition, amend, supplement, change, modify
or repeal, by ordinance the boundaries of districts or regulations or
restrictions established in this chapter.  Any proposed amendment,
supplement, change, modification or repeal shall first be submitted to the
Forest City Municipal Airport Commission for its recommendations and
report.  If the Airport Commission makes no report within thirty (30) days,
it shall be considered to have made a report approving the proposed
amendment, supplement, modification, or change.  After the recommendations
have been filed, the Council and the Boards of Supervisors shall, before
enacting any proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal,
hold a public hearing in relation thereto, giving at least fifteen (15)
days’ notice of the time and place of hearing, which notice shall first be
published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the City.



   2.   If the Airport Commission recommends against, or if a protest
against such proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal
is presented in writing to the Clerk or County Auditors, duly signed and
acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more, either of the
area included in such proposed change, or area immediately adjacent thereto,
extending the depth of not to exceed one mile therefrom, such amendment,
supplement, change, modification or repeal shall not become effective except
by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the members of the Council and
Boards of Supervisors of the Counties.



   3.   Before any action shall be taken as provided in this chapter,
any private party or parties proposing a change in the zoning regulations
shall deposit with the City Treasurer or County Auditors the sum of fifteen
dollars ($15.00) to cover the approximate cost of this procedure, and under
no condition shall the sum or any part thereof be refunded for failure of the
change to be adopted.



175.07    JUDICIAL REVIEW.



Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the Board of
Adjustment may appeal to the court of record as provided in the Code of Iowa,
Section 414.15.



175.08    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ESTABLISHED.



There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment to have and exercise the
following powers:



   1.   Appeals.  To hear and decide appeals from any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Airport Commission in the
enforcement of this chapter.



   2.   Special Exemptions.  To hear and decide special exemptions to
the terms of this chapter upon which such Board of Adjustment under such
regulations may be required to pass.



   3.   Variances.  To hear and decide specific variances.



175.09    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



The Board of Adjustment shall consist of three (3) members appointed by the
Council, and two (2) members appointed by the Winnebago County Board of
Supervisors, and two (2) members appointed by the Hancock County Board of
Supervisors.  The members shall serve for staggered terms of five (5) years
and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified.  Members are
removable for cause by the appointing authority, upon written charges, after
a public hearing. 



175.10    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURES.



The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and in harmony
with the provisions of this chapter.  Meetings of the Board shall be held at
the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board of
Adjustment may determine.  The Chairperson, or in his or her absence the
acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.  All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the
public.  The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing
to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations,
and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the
offices of the Clerk and County Auditor, and on due cause shown.



175.11    POWERS OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



The Board of Adjustment shall have the powers established in the Code of
Iowa, Section 414.12.



175.12    VOTE ON VARIATIONS OR ORDERS.



The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of Adjustment
shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of any administrative official or to decide in favor of the
applicant, on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter, or to effect variations of this chapter.



175.13    ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY.



It is the duty of the Airport Commission to administer the regulations
prescribed herein.  Applications for permits and variances shall be made to
the Airport Commission upon a form furnished by the Commission. 
Applications required by this chapter to be submitted to the Airport
Commission shall be promptly considered and granted or denied.  Application
for action by the Board of Adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the
Airport Zoning Board or the County Zoning Board or officer.



175.14    CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.



Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict is with respect to height of structures, the use
of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement
shall govern and prevail.



175.15    PENALTIES.



Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order, or ruling
promulgated hereunder shall constitute a simple misdemeanor, and each day a
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



