CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 1 -
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
1.01 Title
1.07 Amendments
1.02 Definitions
1.08 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers
1.09 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity
1.10 Standard Penalty
1.05 Personal Injuries
1.11 Severability
1.06 Rules of Construction
1.01 TITLE. This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of Ordinances of the City of Glenwood, Iowa.
1.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined by State law, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances and are adopted by reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this Code of Ordinances:
1. “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording secondary means of access to abutting property.
2. “City” means the City of Glenwood, Iowa.
3. “Clerk” means the city clerk of Glenwood, Iowa.
4. “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
5. “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Glenwood, Iowa.
6. “Council” means the city council of Glenwood, Iowa.
7. “County” means Mills County, Iowa.
8. “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 2 -
9. “Month” means a calendar month.
10. “Oath” means an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “affirm” and “affirmed” are equivalent to the words “swear” and “sworn.”
11. “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
12. “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Glenwood, Iowa, as embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
13. “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
14. “Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
15. “Property” includes real property, and tangible and intangible personal property unless clearly indicated otherwise.
16. “Property owner” means a person owning private property in the City as shown by the County Auditor’s plats of the City.
17. “Public place” includes in its meaning, but is not restricted to, any City-owned open place, such as parks and squares.
18. “Public property” means any and all property owned by the City or held in the name of the City by any of the departments, commissions or agencies within the City government.
19. “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 3 -
20. “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
21. “State” means the State of Iowa.
22. “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
23. “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
24. “Writing” and “written” include printing, typing, lithographing, or other mode of representing words and letters.
25. “Year” means a calendar year.
1.03 CITY POWERS. The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City and of its residents, and preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents and each and every provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04 INDEMNITY. The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or death of any person or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or damage to property whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the issuance of the permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing. The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 4 -
permit or license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.05 PERSONAL INJURIES. When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. In the construction of the Code of Ordinances the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the context of the provisions.
1. Verb Tense and Plurals. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular.
2. May. The word “may” confers a power.
3. Must. The word “must” states a requirement.
4. Shall. The word “shall” imposes a duty.
5. Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
6. Interpretation. All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in the Code of Ordinances shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Council may be fully carried out.
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 5 -
7. Extension of Authority. Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a provision of the Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.07 AMENDMENTS. All ordinances which amend, repeal or in any manner affect this Code of Ordinances shall include proper reference to title, division, chapter, section and subsection to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.08 CATCHLINES AND NOTES. The catchlines of the several sections of the Code of Ordinances, titles, headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself, contained in the Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or clarify the contents of a section.
1.09 ALTERING CODE. It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of Ordinances, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code of Ordinances in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.5)
1.10 STANDARD PENALTY. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Code of Ordinances for any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing to perform a duty, or obtain a license required by, or violating any provision of the Code of Ordinances, or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2])
(Ord. 661 – Sep. 00 Supp.)
1.11 SEVERABILITY. If any section, provision or part of the Code of Ordinances is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of the Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 6 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 9 -
CHAPTER 3
BOUNDARIES
3.01 Corporate Limits
3.02 Division into Wards
3.01 CORPORATE LIMITS. The corporate limits of the City are described as follows:
(RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE)
3.02 DIVISION INTO WARDS. The City is divided into three (3) election wards, the boundaries and ward numbers thereof to be as follows:
1. First Ward.
The first ward and first precinct include all territory and land within the municipality lying south of the following described line: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Green Street and the west corporate limits; thence easterly along the centerline of Green Street to the centerline of Grove Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Grove Street to the centerline of Coolidge Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Coolidge Street to the centerline of Walnut Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Walnut Street to the centerline of Third Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Third Street to the centerline of Linn Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Linn Street to the centerline of Fourth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Fourth Street to the east corporate limits.
2. Second Ward.
The second ward and second precinct include all territory and land within the municipality lying north and west of the following described line: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Green Street and the west corporate limits; thence easterly along the centerline of Green Street to the centerline of Grove Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Grove Street to the centerline of Coolidge Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Coolidge Street to the centerline of Walnut Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Walnut Street to the centerline of Fourth Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Fourth Street to the centerline of Locust Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Locust Street to the north corporate limits.
3. Third Ward.
The third ward and third precinct include all territory and within the municipality lying east and north of the following described line: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Locust Street and the north corporate limits; thence southerly along the centerline of Locust
CHAPTER 3 BOUNDARIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 10 -
Street to the centerline of Fourth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Fourth Street to the centerline of Walnut Street; thence southerly along the centerline of Walnut Street to the centerline of Third Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Third Street to the centerline of Linn Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Linn Street to the centerline of Fourth Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Fourth Street to the east corporate limits.
(Ord. 846 – Dec. 11 Supp.)
[The next page is 15]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 15 -
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
4.01 Municipal Infraction
4.04 Civil Citations
4.02 Environmental Violation
4.05 Alternative Relief
4.03 Penalties
4.06 Criminal Penalties
4.01 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
4.02 ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION. A municipal infraction which is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental violation. However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable until the City has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1])
1. A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
2. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial production or manufacturing of grain products or by a person engaged in such industrial production or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
4.03 PENALTIES. A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1])
1. Standard Civil Penalties.
A. First Offense - Not to exceed $750.00
B. Each Repeat Offense - Not to exceed $1,000.00
CHAPTER 4 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 16 -
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat offense.
(Ord. 731 - Aug. 03 Supp.)
2. Special Civil Penalties.
A. A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day a violation exists or continues.
B. A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each occurrence. However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.
(2) The City is notified of the violation within twenty-four (24) hours from the time that the violation begins.
(3) The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight (8) hours.
4.04 CIVIL CITATIONS. Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy of the citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
1. The name and address of the defendant.
2. The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the citation.
CHAPTER 4 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 17 -
3. The location and time of the infraction.
4. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought, or both.
5. The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
6. The time and place of court appearance.
7. The penalty for failure to appear in court.
8. The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the condition of the property, including a building code violation, a local housing regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health or safety violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District Court, the City shall also file the citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
(Ord. 834 – Oct. 10 Supp.)
4.05 ALTERNATIVE RELIEF. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [8])
4.06 CRIMINAL PENALTIES. This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal penalties are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])
CHAPTER 4 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 18 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 19 -
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
5.01 Oaths
5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds
5.08 Resignations
5.03 Duties: General
5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records
5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor
5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings
5.01 OATHS. The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the following:
1. Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after being certified as elected but not later than noon of the first day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
2. Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in ____________ as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
3. Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the business of their respective offices:
A. Mayor
B. City Clerk
C. Members of all boards, commissions or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02 BONDS. Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
1. Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and advisable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 20 -
2. Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
3. Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])
4. Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])
5.03 DUTIES: GENERAL. Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04 BOOKS AND RECORDS. All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential. Access to public records which are combined with data processing software shall be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A)
5.05 TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR. Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06 OPEN MEETINGS. All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered body formally and directly
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 21 -
created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held in open session unless closed sessions are expressly permitted by law. Notice of any such meeting shall be provided pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3 & 21.4)
5.07 CONFLICT OF INTEREST. A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
1. Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
2. Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
3. City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
4. Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind described in subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are made by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened, or if the remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement or preparation of any part of the contract. The competitive bid qualification of this subsection does not apply to a contract for professional services not customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Ord. 728 – Aug. 03 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[5])
5. Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
6. Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 22 -
7. Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer fire fighters or civil defense volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
8. Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
9. Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
10. Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this section, for the purchase of goods or services which benefit a City officer or employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a cumulative total purchase price of fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
11. Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential City utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[12])
12. Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may not be the original underwriter, purchaser or obligee of the contract.
(Ord. 728 – Aug. 03 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[13])
5.08 RESIGNATIONS. An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was elected, if during that time the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09 REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 23 -
give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date the request is filed, unless the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10 VACANCIES. A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled, at the Council’s option, by one of the two following procedures:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2])
1. Appointment. By appointment following public notice by the remaining members of the Council within forty (40) days after the vacancy occurs, except that if the remaining members do not constitute a quorum of the full membership, or if a petition is filed requesting an election, the Council shall call a special election as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2a])
2. Election. By a special election held to fill the office for the remaining balance of the unexpired term as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2b])
5.11 UNLAWFUL USE OF CITY PROPERTY. No person shall use or permit any other person to use the property owned by the City for any private purpose and for personal gain, to the detriment of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 721.2[5])
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 24 -
[The next page is 29]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 29 -
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
6.01 Nominating Method to be Used
6.04 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
6.02 Nominations by Petition
6.05 Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals, Objections
6.03 Adding Name by Petition
6.06 Persons Elected
6.01 NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED. All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
6.02 NOMINATIONS BY PETITION. Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by nomination paper or papers signed by not less than twenty-five (25) eligible electors, residents of the City.
6.03 ADDING NAME BY PETITION. The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than by petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.
6.04 PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT. Nomination papers shall include a petition and affidavit of candidacy. The petition and affidavit shall be substantially in the form prescribed by the State Commissioner of Elections, shall include information required by the Code of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code of Iowa.
6.05 FILING, PRESUMPTION, WITHDRAWALS, OBJECTIONS. The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of validity thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency of such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate shall be governed by the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.
6.06 PERSONS ELECTED. The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.
(Ch. 6 – Ord. 870 – Sep. 16 Supp.)
CHAPTER 6 CITY ELECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 30 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 45 -
CHAPTER 9
URBAN RENEWAL
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted and provide for Urban Renewal Areas in the City and remain in full force and effect, for division of tax levied on taxable property.
ORDINANCE NO.
ADOPTED
NAME OF AREA
506
4-11-89
Glenwood Urban Renewal District No. 1/Industrial
507
4-11-89
Glenwood Urban Renewal District No. 2/Residential
508
4-11-89
Glenwood Urban Renewal District No. 3/Residential
514
11-14-89
Glenwood Urban Renewal District No. 4/Industrial/Commercial
520
6-12-90
Glenwood Urban Renewal District No. 5/Industrial/Commercial
533
6-25-91
1991 Addition to Glenwood Urban Renewal District No. 3/Residential
560
8-23-94
1994 Addition to Glenwood Urban Renewal District No. 3/Residential
561
8-23-94
1994 Addition to Glenwood Urban Renewal District No. 2/Residential
564
10-11-94
1994 Addition to Glenwood Urban Renewal District No. 4/Industrial/ Commercial
782
9-26-06
Glenwood Urban Renewal Area No. 6
CHAPTER 9 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 46 -
[The next page is 81]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 81 -
CHAPTER 10
URBAN REVITALIZATION AREAS
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO.
ADOPTED
NAME OF AREA
727
8-12-03
Glen Haven Revitalization Area
862
7-8-14
Glenwood Urban Revitalization Area
880
8-8-17
Glenwood Urban Revitalization Area
887
11-20-18
Glenwood Urban Revitalization Area
CHAPTER 10 URBAN REVITALIZATION AREAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 82 -
[The next page is 105]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 105 -
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
15.01 Term of Office
15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties
15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
15.01 TERM OF OFFICE. The Mayor is elected for a term of two (2) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
1. Chief Executive Officer. Supervise all departments of the City, give direction to department heads concerning the functions of the departments, and have the power to examine all functions of the municipal departments, their records and to call for special reports from department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
2. Presiding Officer. Act as presiding officer at all regular and special Council meetings. The Mayor Pro Tem shall serve in this capacity in the Mayor’s absence.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1 & 3])
3. Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
4. Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto or take no action on an ordinance, amendment or resolution passed by the Council. If the Mayor exercises such veto power, the Mayor shall explain the reason for such veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the veto. The Council may override the Mayor’s veto by a two-thirds majority of the Council members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2])
5. Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
CHAPTER 15 MAYOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 106 -
6. Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered into in accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent the City where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law, ordinance, or Council direction.
7. Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf of the City.
8. Professional Services. Upon order of the Council, secure for the City such specialized and professional services not already available to the City. In executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in accordance with the Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State.
9. Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits which have been granted by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be issued by another municipal officer.
10. Nuisances. Issue written order for removal, at public expense, any nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.
11. Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any absentee officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03 APPOINTMENTS. The Mayor shall appoint the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1. Mayor Pro Tem
2. Police Chief
3. Peace Officers, with approval of the Council
4. Library Board of Trustees
5. Water Utility Board of Trustees
6. Cemetery Board
15.04 COMPENSATION. The salary of the Mayor is six thousand five hundred dollars ($6,500.00) per year, payable annually. Effective January 1, 2008, the salary of the Mayor shall be eight thousand one hundred and twenty-five dollars ($8,125.00) per year, payable annually. (Ord. 792 – Oct. 07 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
15.05 VOTING. The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member of the Council. (Ord. 677 – Sep. 01 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
[The next page is 109]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 109 -
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
16.01 Vice President of Council
16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties
16.04 Compensation
16.01 VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL. The Mayor Pro Tem is vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the Mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to employ, or discharge from employment, officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ or discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03 VOTING RIGHTS. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04 COMPENSATION. If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days or more, the Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 16 MAYOR PRO TEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 110 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 111 -
CHAPTER 17
COUNCIL
17.01 Number and Term of Council
17.04 Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties
17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power
17.06 Compensation
17.01 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of two (2) Council Members elected at large and one (1) Council Member from each of three (3) wards as established by this Code of Ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four (4) years.
17.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the following:
1. General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
2. Wards. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards based upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards or create new wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])
3. Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement or repairs which may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38 [1])
4. Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the doing of work, or the making or construction of any improvements, bridges or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
5. Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts, and no contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless either made by ordinance or resolution adopted by the Council, or reduced to writing and approved by the Council, or expressly authorized by ordinance or resolution adopted by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1] & 384.95 through 384.102)
CHAPTER 17 COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 112 -
6. Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties and compensation of employees not otherwise provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
7. Records. The Council shall require the Clerk to maintain records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
8. Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of a regular City election. A change in the compensation of Council members becomes effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the Council members elected at the election next following the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03 EXERCISE OF POWER. The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a resolution, an amendment or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
1. Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment of resolution requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must be passed to spend public funds in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) on a public improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure which fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated. (Ord. 802 – Dec. 07 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
2. Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within thirty (30) days after the Mayor’s veto, the Council may repass the ordinance or resolution by a vote of not less than two-thirds of the Council members, and the ordinance or resolution becomes effective upon repassage and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
CHAPTER 17 COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 113 -
3. Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council, other than motions, become effective in one of the following ways:
A. If the Mayor signs the measure, a resolution becomes effective immediately upon signing and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the measure.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1])
B. If the Mayor vetoes a measure and the Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the measure.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
C. If the Mayor takes no action on the measure a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the date of passage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when published, but not sooner than fourteen (14) days after the date of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the measure.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
17.04 MEETINGS. Meetings of the Council shall be as follows:
1. Regular Meetings. The regular meetings of the Council shall be on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month at seven o’clock (7:00) p.m. in the Council Chambers at City Hall. If such day shall fall on a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next succeeding day at the same time unless a different day or time is determined by the Council.
(Ord. 652 – Dec. 99 Supp.)
2. Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor or upon the written request of a majority of the members of the Council submitted to the Clerk. Notice of a special meeting shall specify the date, time, place and subject of the meeting and such notice shall be given personally or left at the usual place of residence of each member of the Council. A record of the service of notice shall be maintained by the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
CHAPTER 17 COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 114 -
3. Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
4. Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine the rules of its own proceedings by resolution and the Clerk shall keep such rules on file for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
5. Compelling Attendance. Any three (3) members of the Council can compel the attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned or duly called meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
6. Notice of Meetings. The Council shall give reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the time, date and place of each meeting, and its tentative agenda.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
7. Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
8. Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present shall be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
9. Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of either two-thirds of the Council or all of the members present at the meeting and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
10. Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices at any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
11. Electronic Meetings. A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or impractical and then only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
CHAPTER 17 COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 115 -
17.05 APPOINTMENTS. The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers, duties, compensation and term of office:
1. City Administrator/Financial Manager
2. City Clerk
3. City Attorney
4. Planning and Zoning Commission
5. Fire Chief
6. Public Works Director
7. Zoning Board of Adjustment
(Ord. 792 – Oct. 07 Supp.)
17.06 COMPENSATION. The salary of each Council member shall be forty dollars ($40.00) for each meeting of the Council attended, payable annually. Effective January 1, 2008, the salary of each Council member shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting attended, payable annually.
(Ord. 792 – Oct. 07 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 17 COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 116 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 117 -
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
18.01 Appointment and Compensation
18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General
18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Recording and Publication of Meeting Minutes
18.10 Issue Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures Considered
18.11 Notify Appointees
18.05 Publication
18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication
18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certify Measures
18.14 Other Duties of City Clerk
18.15 Job Duties of Office Assistant
18.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. At its first meeting in January following the regular city election the Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk, hereinafter referred to as Clerk, to serve for a term of two (2) years. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02 POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL. The Clerk, or in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk, has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of Ordinances and the law.
18.03 RECORDING AND PUBLICATION OF MEETING MINUTES. The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and within fifteen (15) days following a regular or special meeting shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published. Such publication shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall show the gross amount of the claim.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])
18.04 RECORDING MEASURES CONSIDERED. The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council, with a statement where applicable, indicating whether the Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1])
18.05 PUBLICATION. The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows:
1. Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at least once, not less than four (4) nor more than twenty (20) days
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 118 -
before the date of the election, hearing or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])
2. Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general circulation in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])
18.06 AUTHENTICATION. The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
18.07 CERTIFY MEASURES. The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08 RECORDS. The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:
1. Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances and codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
2. Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3. Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents, or accurate reproductions, for at least five (5) years except that ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption or replacement of public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least eleven (11) years following the final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])
4. Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of any record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be necessary to such officer in the discharge of such
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 119 -
officer’s duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments which by ordinance and Code of Ordinances are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7[5])
5. Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS. At the direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees, boards and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10 ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS. The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit and purpose for which issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.11 NOTIFY APPOINTEES. The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to offices in the City government of their position and the time at which they shall assume the duties of their office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12 ELECTIONS. The Clerk shall perform the following duties relating to elections and nominations:
1. Certify to the County Commissioner of Elections the type of nomination process to be used by the City no later than ninety (90) days before the date of the regular City election. (Ord. 712 – Nov. 02 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.6)
2. Accept the nomination petition of a candidate for a City office for filing if on its face it appears to have the requisite number of signatures and is timely filed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 120 -
3. Designate other employees or officials of the City who are ordinarily available to accept nomination papers if the Clerk is not readily available during normal working hours.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
4. Note upon each petition and affidavit accepted for filing the date and time that the petition was filed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
5. Deliver all nomination petitions, together with the text of any public measure being submitted by the Council to the electorate, to the County Commissioner of Elections not later than five o’clock (5:00) p.m. on the day following the last day on which nomination petitions can be filed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
18.13 CITY SEAL. The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the Clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which it may be necessary or proper to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of which are the words “SEAL” and around the margin of which are the words “CITY SEAL OF GLENWOOD, MILLS COUNTY, IOWA.”
18.14 OTHER DUTIES OF CITY CLERK. In addition to the foregoing, the Clerk shall satisfactorily perform other duties as may be directed by the Council and as required by law, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Prepares correspondence to and from Mayor and Council.
2. Assists with preparation and distribution of agenda for each meeting. Sees that all notices of public meetings are posted as required.
3. Sets up for and attends all Council meetings and responsible for publication of such minutes and distribution to appropriate parties.
4. Records in the minutes each measure considered by the Council.
5. Sees to the publication of all ordinances, enactments, proceedings and official notices requiring publication.
6. Authenticates all such measures except motions with the Clerk’s signature.
7. Certifies all measures establishing any zoning district, building lines or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines or limits to the Recorder of the County.
8. Maintains all required records of the City.
9. Issues licenses and permits authorized by the Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 18 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 121 -
10. Notifies all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to offices of the City.
11. Maintains cemetery records. Types deeds, records burials.
12. Maintains Accounts Receivable records. Types, mails and records statements for A/R billings.
13. Designee to distribute open records requests.
14. Prepares claims/enters/writes Accounts Payable checks on computer. Maintains all accounts payable records.
15. Cross trains with Administrator to do payroll.
16. Performs, assists and relieves City Administrator with general clerical duties.
17. Receptionist-greets customers and sales people and answers two-line telephone for the City. Provides general information to the public on the telephone and in person. Takes telephone messages for Council, Mayor, City Administrator or other Department Heads.
18. Records revenue accounts received in receipt book. Writes up and makes bank deposits (if revenue comes in) once per day by 3:00 p.m. Balances cash drawer.
19. Co-signs on the Accounts Payable and Payroll checks.
20. Keeps office lists updated (Board Members, Committees, permits, agreements, etc.)
21. Runs errands for office: bank deposits, deliveries to Courthouse, City Attorney, insurance company, and others, picks up orders for meetings, and other errands assigned. Delivers outgoing local checks, materials, correspondence. Takes outgoing mail to post office.
22. Assists with copies and mailing when needed or requested by Department Heads.
23. Maintains necessary office supplies.
24. Posts the office closings and notices on front door or bulletin board.
25. Cleans up at the end of each day and after meetings. Empties trash cans in City offices and meeting rooms.
26. Performs other duties as assigned.
(Ord. 795 – Oct. 07 Supp.)
18.15 JOB DUTIES OF OFFICE ASSISTANT. (Repealed by Ordinance 795 – Oct. 07 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 122 -
CHAPTER 19
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
19.01 Appointment
19.05 Required Knowledge, Skills and Abilities
19.02 Compensation
19.06 Acceptable Minimum Experience and Training
19.03 Job Duties of Director of Finance
19.07 Prepare and Monitor Budget
19.04 Immediate Supervisor
19.01 APPOINTMENT. The Director of Finance is to be appointed by a majority vote of the Council, shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council and shall be subject to removal by majority vote of the Council.
19.02 COMPENSATION. The Director of Finance shall receive such annual salary as the Council shall from time to time determine by resolution, and payment shall be made biweekly from the treasury of the City in the manner provided for paying other officers and employees.
19.03 JOB DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF FINANCE. In addition to the foregoing, the Director of Finance shall satisfactorily perform the duties as directed by the Council and as required by law, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Will act on behalf of City as Director of Finance and Treasurer.
2. Prepares and submits the annual operating budget, including any necessary tax levies, to the State in a timely manner and in the proper format.
3. Develops financial management plans and strategies for consideration and approval of the Council.
4. Prepares/files Road Use Report, Annual Financial Report, TIF Report and Debt Obligation Report.
5. Implements the approved budget.
6. Regularly apprises the Council of the City’s financial condition, and of future funding needs.
7. Oversees payroll, maintains personnel records and files payroll reports and tax records.
8. Develops and oversees the City ordinances and resolutions.
9. Attends required training sessions applicable to job requirements.
CHAPTER 19 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 123 -
10. Attends various seminars and conferences to maintain awareness and keep abreast of changes in municipal/public administration functions, responsibilities and trends.
11. Administers the City’s personnel program in compliance with all local, State and Federal employment policies, laws and regulations, including personnel policies and civil service requirements.
12. Initiates policy recommendations for consideration by the Council and responds to requests from the Council and the public for research or recommendations on City policy issues.
13. Responds to complaints, questions and other concerns from the public.
14. Participates in the collective bargaining process and administers any resulting collective bargaining agreements.
15. Makes recommendations regarding financing of all City projects.
16. Researches and applies for grants that could benefit financing of projects for the City.
17. Invests City funds.
18. Prepares monthly financial reports to the City Council.
19. Executes and supervises contracts on behalf of the City.
20. Codes cash receipts and enters on computer.
21. Oversees the City Hall computer system.
22. Cross-trains City Clerk on City financial procedures.
23. Prepares a manual on financial procedures required for the City.
24. Signatory on Accounts Payable and Payroll checks.
25. Attends City Council meetings to apprise Council on financial matters of agenda.
19.04 IMMEDIATE SUPERVISOR. The immediate supervisor of the Director of Finance is the Mayor, through the City Council.
19.05 REQUIRED KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS AND ABILITIES. The Director of Finance shall be required to have knowledge of accounting, budgeting, public relations and an ability to assume authority and to perform fiscal planning and form fiscal policy. The Director of Finance shall also have the ability to do original research and make sound financial analysis relating to City policy and the Code of Iowa and to prepare and submit written and oral reports and recommendations; and to establish and maintain effective and
CHAPTER 19 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 124 -
trustworthy working relationships with public officials, City employees and the general public.
19.06 ACCEPTABLE MINIMUM EXPERIENCE AND TRAINING. The Director of Finance shall be a graduate of a college with a four year business management degree including general accounting courses, or five years municipal finance administration experience, of which three years supervisory experience is required.
19.07 PREPARE AND MONITOR BUDGET. The Director of Finance shall prepare the City Budget and Annual Report with the cooperation of and under the direction of the Mayor and the City Council, after analyzing the needs of each department against the resources of the City. The Director of Finance shall also monitor and administer the budget and its accounting system after conferring with the various department heads concerning the solution of financial management and other policy problems.
(Ch. 19 – Ord. 841 – Apr. 11 Supp.)
CHAPTER 19 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 125 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °

CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 129 -
CHAPTER 21
CEMETERY AND CEMETERY BOARD
21.01 Establishment
21.07 Fees
21.02 Cemetery Board
21.08 Clerk’s Duties
21.03 Employment
21.09 General Regulations
21.04 Titles and Conveyances
21.10 Perpetual Care Fund
21.05 Care of Lots
21.11 Liability
21.06 Interments
21.01 ESTABLISHMENT. The cemetery ground located on the following described property:
The South 430 feet of the West 338.6 feet of the SW¼ SW¼ of Section 1; and the North 208.5 feet of the West 338.6 feet of the NW¼ NW¼ of Section 12; and all that part of the South 430 feet of the East 996.7 feet of the SE¼ SE¼ of Section 2 lying East of U.S. Hwy. 275; Lot 2 and all that part of the North 839 feet of Lot 1 of the NE¼ NE¼ of Section 11 lying East of said U.S. Hwy. 275, all located in Township 72 North, Range 43 West of the 5th Principal meridian, Mills County, Iowa.
is hereby established as the Glenwood Municipal Cemetery under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and which shall be operated under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and this chapter. Pursuant to Section 523I.502 of the Code of Iowa, the City Council hereby states its willingness and intention to act as the trustee for the perpetual maintenance of the cemetery property. (Ord. 769 – Sep. 05 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.501 and Sec. 523I.502)
21.02 CEMETERY BOARD.
1. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to Council approval, three (3) persons to serve as members of the Cemetery Board for a period of three (3) years.
2. No public officer or salaried employee of the City may serve as a Board Member.
3. Any vacancy on the Board will be filled in the same manner as an original appointment except that such appointment shall be for the balance of the unexpired term.
4. It will be the duty of the Cemetery Board to coordinate the administration, maintenance and policies of the Glenwood Municipal Cemetery.
5. The Cemetery Board will meet once a month on a regularly scheduled basis.
CHAPTER 21 CEMETERY AND CEMETERY BOARD
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 130 -
21.03 EMPLOYMENT.
1. The Sexton of the Glenwood Municipal Cemetery will be hired and dismissed from such position only with approval of the Mayor and City Council.
2. The salary of the Sexton will be set and approved by the Mayor and City Council.
3. Any part-time employment may be secured by the Sexton with approval of the City Administrator.
4. Any duties other than the Sexton’s job description will be assigned by the City Administrator.
21.04 TITLES AND CONVEYANCES.
1. No person shall have title to any cemetery grave until the same has been paid for, and when the amount has been paid in full, a deed shall be issued.
2. Conveyances shall be by Cemetery Deed, a record of which shall be kept by the City Clerk.
3. No interment shall be made on any burial grave unless the same is paid for.
4. After a grave is fully paid for, the City Clerk shall deliver the Cemetery Deed to the County Recorder forthwith for recording and shall return the deed to the purchaser after such recording.
5. All deeds shall be executed by the Mayor and City Clerk as provided by law.
6. The sale price of graves within the Glenwood Municipal Cemetery will be determined annually by the Glenwood City Council.
7. The entire sales price of each lot shall be transferred to the City Treasurer.
8. Twenty percent of the sale price of each grave shall be deposited by the City Treasurer in the City’s perpetual care fund as established pursuant to Section 21.10. An additional five percent of the sale price of each grave shall be deposited by the City Treasurer and delineated as repayment by the City to the perpetual care fund. The balance shall be deposited into the general cemetery fund.
(Ord. 738 – Jan-04 Supp.)
9. On graves owned by churches or benevolent societies any person may be buried with the consent of the trustees of the church or benevolent society.
CHAPTER 21 CEMETERY AND CEMETERY BOARD
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 131 -
10. No discrimination shall be made between grave owners or prospective purchasers of graves but privileges of the cemetery shall at all times be open to all persons upon equal terms, subject to rules and regulations herein.
21.05 CARE OF LOTS.
1. The City shall have full care of all graves within the Glenwood Municipal Cemetery.
2. There will be no planting of flowers, shrubs or trees. No concrete, ceramic or plastic pots, no iron hangers for hanging baskets will be allowed. No permanent articles will be allowed without prior approval. No one may dig holes for containers. Memorial Day decorations may be placed on the graves the Friday prior and may remain for one week after. Christmas decorations and winter blankets must be removed by April 1. Any other decorations will be removed on mowing day.
3. No litter of any kind shall be placed upon the cemetery grounds or driveways.
21.06 INTERMENTS.
1. All interments shall comply with the laws of the State and the rules and regulations of the Iowa State Board of Health.
2. If any grave owner is or becomes a nonresident of the City, or in the event of such person’s death should all of said person’s heirs be or become nonresidents, the Council may recognize any relative or family friend in controlling interments and shall be responsible only for good faith in making such recognition.
3. The City Council gives authority to the Sexton of the cemetery to determine who shall be qualified as a gravedigger in the cemetery. No grave shall be opened without first obtaining permission from the Cemetery Sexton.
4. Burials are prohibited on Sundays and the City observed holidays of New Years Day, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and the day after, Christmas Day and the day after. (Ord. 815 – Oct. 08 Supp.)
5. Requests for opening of graves shall be made to the City Clerk’s office twenty-four (24) hours before the funeral.
6. Prior to burial, the receptacle containing the body shall be placed in an outside container consisting of a minimum construction of a concrete box. In the event of cremation, prior to the cremation burial,
CHAPTER 21 CEMETERY AND CEMETERY BOARD
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 132 -
the receptacle containing the cremains shall be placed in an outside container consisting of a minimum construction of a concrete vault or a high impact polymer plastic vault. (Ord. 653 – Mar. 00 Supp.)
7. Arrangements for interments shall be made by the owner of the burial space, by a member or members of the family acting and authorized by law to act for the owner, or by an authorized undertaker, or other authorized agent of the owner.
8. The City shall in no manner be liable for any delay in the interment of a body where a protest to the interment has been made or where the rules and regulations of the cemetery have not been complied with. The City shall be under no duty to recognize any protest of interment unless it be in writing and filed with the City Clerk. The City shall not be responsible for errors resulting from orders or instructions given by telephone and the Clerk and Cemetery Sexton may require such orders to be in writing before finalizing any action.
21.07 FEES. The City Council shall, from time to time, as deemed necessary by the Council, fix a schedule of fees which shall be collected for work performed in the cemetery under the jurisdiction of the City. The schedule of fees, so fixed, from time to time as deemed necessary by the Council, shall be placed on file in the office of the Clerk, and shall be available for inspection by the general public.
21.08 CLERK’S DUTIES.
1. It is the duty of the Clerk to collect all moneys from the sale of graves, from the care of lots and from all other purposes mentioned herein.
2. The Clerk shall deposit all moneys collected monthly to the credit of cemetery funds and shall from time to time, as the Council may direct, account for all such moneys to the Council.
3. It is the duty of the Clerk to make and keep complete records identifying the owners of all interment rights sold by the cemetery and historical information regarding any transfers of ownership. The records shall include all of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.311)
CHAPTER 21 CEMETERY AND CEMETERY BOARD
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 133 -
A. Sales or Transfers of Interment Rights.
(1) The name and last known address of each owner or previous owner of interment rights.
(2) The date of each purchase or transfer of interment rights.
(3) A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that identifies the location of each interment space sold by the cemetery.
B. Interments.
(1) The date the remains are interred.
(2) The name, date of birth and date of death of the decedent interred, if those facts can be conveniently obtained.
(3) A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that identifies the location of each interment space where the remains are interred.
(Ord. 769 – Sep. 05 Supp.)
21.09 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
1. To insure a proper landscape effect, and to protect the mutual rights of all grave owners, family monuments will be permitted on only lots of four spaces or more.
2. Family monuments shall be placed as directed by the Cemetery Sexton.
3. The foundations for monuments, markers and headstones shall be constructed in such a manner as to comply with the cemetery rules and regulations set forth by the City Council and shall be constructed under the supervision of the Sexton.
4. Foundations for family monuments shall extend in depth three feet from the top of the ground, and foundations for markers and headstones shall extend two feet from the top of the ground, and there shall be a four-inch wash.
5. No monument shall exceed four feet six inches in height above lawn grade, unless the design for the same shall have been first submitted to and approved by the Cemetery Sexton.
6. Grave markers shall be placed on the grave line and the inscription shall face the head of the lot.
CHAPTER 21 CEMETERY AND CEMETERY BOARD
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 134 -
7. Mausoleums are prohibited.
8. No monument shall be placed until the grave is fully paid for.
9. Veterans stickers shall be placed in concrete for permanent mounting.
10. No person shall drive any vehicle faster than 15 miles an hour or in a careless manner upon the cemetery roads or drive anywhere except upon such roads unless authorized by the Sexton.
11. Persons shall walk only on roads and walkways or footpaths except when absolutely necessary for maintenance of grave sites, inspection of plats, installation of markers or decorations of graves, or funeral services.
12. No homemade markers shall be placed on any grave.
(Ord. 687 – Apr. 02 Supp.)
21.10 PERPETUAL CARE FUND. The Council, by resolution, shall accept, receive and expend all moneys and property donated or left to them by bequest for perpetual care, and that portion of interment space sales or permanent charges made against interment spaces which has been set aside in a perpetual care fund. The assets of the perpetual care fund shall be invested in accordance with State law. The Council, by resolution, shall provide for the payment of interest annually to the appropriate fund to be used in caring for or maintaining the individual property of the donor in the cemetery, or interment spaces which have been sold with provisions for perpetual care, all in accordance with the terms of the donation or bequest, or the terms of the sale or purchase of an interment space and Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.503, 523I.507 & 523I.508)
(Ord. 769 – Sep. 05 Supp.)
21.11 LIABILITY. The City shall take reasonable precautions to protect lot owners and the property rights of lot owners within the cemetery from loss or damage, but it expressly shall not be liable for loss or damage beyond its control, and particularly, from damage caused by the elements, acts of God, common enemy, thieves, strikers, malicious mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable civil disorder, whether the damage be direct or consequential.
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 141 -
CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
23.01 Planning and Zoning Commission
23.04 Compensation
23.02 Term of Office
23.05 Powers and Duties
23.03 Vacancies
23.01 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, consists of seven (7) members, five (5) of whom are residents of the City. The resident members shall be appointed by the Council and shall not hold any elective office in the City government. The additional two members of the Commission are one member of the County Board of Supervisors and one resident of the area outside the City over which the zoning jurisdiction of the City has been extended, both appointed by the County Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 885 – Mar. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6, 414.23 & 392.1)
23.02 TERM OF OFFICE. The term of office of the members of the Commission is five (5) years. The terms of not more than one-half of the members will expire in any one year. (Ord. 885 – Mar. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.03 VACANCIES. If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.04 COMPENSATION. All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their actual expenses, which are subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission has and exercises the following powers and duties:
1. Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during the Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 23 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 142 -
2. Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
3. Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts, disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
4. Appointment of Assistants. Subject to the limitations contained in this chapter as to the expenditure of funds, the Commission may appoint such assistants as it may deem necessary and prescribe and define their respective duties and fix and regulate the compensation to be paid to the several persons employed by it.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
5. Comprehensive Plan. The Commission shall have full power and authority to make or cause to be made such surveys, studies, maps, plans, or charts of the whole or any portion of the City or of any land outside thereof which, in the opinion of the Commission, bear relation to the comprehensive plan and shall bring its studies and recommendations to the attention of the Council and may also publish such studies and recommendations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.3)
6. Comprehensive Plan: Preparation. For the purpose of making a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the City, the Commission shall make careful and comprehensive studies of present conditions and future growth of the City and with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the City and its environs which will, in accordance with the present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.3 & 392.1)
7. Comprehensive Plan: Public Hearing. Before adopting a comprehensive plan as referred to in the preceding paragraph, or any part of it, or any substantial amendment thereof, the Commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time of which shall be given by one publication
CHAPTER 23 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 143 -
CHAPTER 23 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 144 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 145 -
CHAPTER 24
PARK COMMISSION
24.01 Park Board
24.06 Budget Certified
24.02 Term
24.07 Jurisdiction and Authority
24.03 Organization
24.08 Rules and Regulations
24.04 Treasurer
24.09 Procedures for Donated Projects
24.05 Compensation
24.01 PARK BOARD. There shall be a Board of Park Commissioners (hereinafter “Park Board”) for the City consisting of five (5) persons of legal age. Not more than one (1) said member may reside outside the corporate limits of the City of Glenwood, and no such members shall reside outside the Glenwood postal address area. All said members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The appointments by the Mayor shall be made effective on January 1 of each year. (Ord. 784 – Nov. 06 Supp.)
24.02 TERM. Initially, two (2) Park Board members shall serve a term of three (3) consecutive years, two (2) Park Board members shall serve a term of two (2) consecutive years, and one (1) Park Board member shall serve a term of one (1) year. Thereafter, all other Park Board members appointed shall serve three (3) consecutive years. If, for any reason, a Park Board member is unable to serve his or her full term, the Mayor, with the Council’s approval, shall appoint a person to fill the vacated spot for the remainder of the existing term. In the event any Park Board member fails to attend four (4) or more consecutive meetings of the Park Board, said member shall appear before the Council and show good cause why he or she should not be removed as a member.
24.03 ORGANIZATION. Annually at the February meeting, the Park Board shall elect one of its members as Chairperson and one of its members as Secretary of the Park Board. The Secretary shall write the minutes of each Park Board meeting and submit such minutes to City Hall within fifteen (15) days after each such meeting. (Ord. 790 – Feb. 07 Supp.)
24.04 TREASURER. The City Clerk shall be the Treasurer of the Board and pay out all moneys under the control of the Park Board on orders signed by the Chairperson and Secretary, but shall receive no compensation for such services as Treasurer.
24.05 COMPENSATION. All services performed by the Park Board members shall be rendered without compensation.
CHAPTER 24 PARK COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 146 -
24.06 BUDGET CERTIFIED. The Park Board, on or before the date specified in Section 7.05(2) of this Code of Ordinances, shall submit to the City Administrator a proposed budget for general park purposes for the ensuing fiscal year. (Ord. 806 – Mar. 08 Supp.)
24.07 JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY. The Park Board shall govern, subject to the authority of the City Council, all parks and pleasure grounds acquired by it or by the City and set aside as a park or pleasure ground. This includes, but is not necessarily limited to, Lake Park, 11th Street Park, Hiley Park (Kiwanis), the skate park, the neighborhood park at Vine Street and Railroad Avenue (Troutman Lot) and any other neighborhood park. Pleasure grounds shall include all greenways and mini-parks as defined in Chapter 4 of the City’s Comprehensive Plan dated August 21, 2001. The City’s sports complex, recreation facility and swimming pool are specifically excluded from the jurisdiction of the Park Board. All ordinances of the City shall be in full force and effect in and over the territory occupied by such parks. No person, organization, or entity shall make or cause any alteration, improvement, or modification to any park or pleasure ground in which the aggregate cost of said alteration, improvement, or modification is in excess of $1,000.00 without prior approval of the City Council; said approval shall be sought prior to the commencement of the project, the letting of bids, or the seeking of grant applications, if applicable. (Ord. 806 – Mar. 08 Supp.)
24.08 RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Board shall have the power to make rules and regulations for the use of park or other facilities under its control, such rules shall be posted on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide adequate notice to the public.
(Ch. 24 – Ord. 707 – Nov. 02 Supp.)
24.09 PROCEDURES FOR DONATED PROJECTS. Should any person, entity, or organization provide funding for any alteration, improvement, modification, or other project for and on behalf of the park or pleasure ground, and in excess of a cost of $1,000.00 or more, the following procedure shall be utilized:
1. The Board shall assess any request to determine if the project is, in its sole discretion, viable;
2. After such assessment, the Board shall make a formal recommendation to the City Council;
3. The City Council shall either approve or disapprove of the requested planning;
CHAPTER 24 PARK COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 147 -
4. If approved by the City Council, the Board shall proceed with project planning;
5. Except as hereafter provided, any donated funds or grant proceeds from any person, organization, or entity shall be made directly to the Board and shall be received and distributed through the Board budget. Any revenues created by or as a result of any project shall inure to the Board as part of the Board’s budget. Any projects funded by an Internal Revenue Code tax exempt 501©(3) organization or other similar Internal Revenue Code tax exempt organization shall control all financial receipts and distributions for such project; however, any revenues created by or as a result of the project shall inure to the Board as part of the Board’s budget.
(Ord. 806 – Mar. 08 Supp.)
(Former Sections 24.07 and 24.09 repealed by Ord. 806 and Remaining Sections Renumbered)
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °

CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 149 -
CHAPTER 25
UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF GLENWOOD MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
25.01 Purpose
25.06 Power and Duties of the Board
25.02 Board Established
25.07 Control of Funds
25.03 Appointment of Trustees
25.08 Accounting
25.04 Compensation
25.09 Discriminatory Rates Illegal
25.05 Vacancies
25.10 Discontinuance of Board
25.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation of the municipally owned water utility and sanitary sewer system by a board of trustees. (Ord. 718 – Feb. 03 Supp.)
25.02 BOARD ESTABLISHED. Pursuant to an election held on November 10, 1952, the management and control of the municipally owned waterworks were placed in the hands of a Board of Trustees. Pursuant to an election held on November 5, 2002, the management and control of the municipally owned sanitary sewer system were placed in the hands of a Board of Trustees effective January 1, 2003. (Ord. 718 – Feb. 03 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)
25.03 APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEES. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Council, three (3) persons to serve as trustees for staggered six (6) year terms. Effective April 1, 2006, the Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Council, five (5) persons to serve as trustees for staggered six (6) year terms. No public officer or salaried employee of the City may serve on the utility board. (Ord. 773 – Mar. 06 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
25.04 COMPENSATION. The Council shall by resolution set the compensation of Board members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
25.05 VACANCIES. An appointment to fill a vacancy on the Board of Trustees shall be made in the same manner as an original appointment except that such appointment shall be for the balance of the unexpired term.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
25.06 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD. The Board of Trustees may exercise all powers of the City in relation to the City utility, City utilities,
CHAPTER 25 UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF
GLENWOOD MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 150 -
or combined utility system it administers, with the following exceptions:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4)
1. Taxes, Ordinances and Bonds. A Board may not certify taxes to be levied, pass ordinances or amendments, or issue general obligation or special assessment bonds.
Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[1])
2. Property. Title to all property must be in the name of the City but the Board has full control of such property subject to limitations imposed by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[2])
3. Reports to Council. The Board shall make a detailed annual report to the Council including a complete financial statement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[3])
4. Proceedings Published. Immediately following a regular or special meeting, the Board Secretary shall prepare and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City a condensed statement of proceedings including a list of all claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[4])
25.07 CONTROL OF FUNDS. The Board shall control tax revenues allocated to it as well as all moneys derived from operations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)
25.08 ACCOUNTING. Utility moneys are held in a separate utility fund, with a separate account or accounts for each utility or combined utility system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)
25.09 DISCRIMINATORY RATES ILLEGAL. A utility may not provide use or service at a discriminatory rate, except to the City or its agencies, as provided in Section 384.91, Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.6)
25.10 DISCONTINUANCE OF BOARD. A proposal, on motion of the Council or upon receipt of a valid petition, to discontinue a utility board is subject to the approval of the voters of the City, except that a Board may be discontinued by resolution of the Council when the City utility, City utilities, or combined utility system it administers is disposed of or leased for a period of over five (5) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 151 -
CHAPTER 26
RECREATION BOARD
26.01 Establishment
26.04 Duties of the Board
26.02 Purpose
26.05 Authority
26.03 Board Organization
26.06 Termination of Board
26.01 ESTABLISHMIENT. A Board of Recreation Directors is created to advise the Glenwood City Council on design, operation and fiscal management and programming aspects of the Community Recreation Center (hereinafter “facility”).
26.02 PURPOSE. The Board’s general purpose is to provide expertise and make recommendation to the City Council concerning the general operation of the facility.
26.03 BOARD ORGANIZATION. The Board will consist of seven (7) members. All members to be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Glenwood City Council for overlapping three (3) year terms, with not more than three (3) Board members residing outside the City limits within Mills County. Appointments will be made at the first regular Council meeting in January of each year. Members will serve without compensation. Vacancies will be filled in the same manner as original appointments. The Board will select its chairperson as soon as practical after new appointments are made. Initial appointments to the Board may be made for less than three (3) year periods in order to facilitate the timely overlapping of subsequent appointments for terms of three (3) years. The Board will meet on a monthly basis and all announcements of Board meetings will occur at least 1 week prior to meeting date.
26.04 DUTIES OF THE BOARD. The duties of the Recreation Board of Directors shall be as follows:
1. The Board will develop a programming and membership plan for the center and will distribute and market membership and programming information throughout Glenwood and the surrounding Mills County area.
2. The Board will provide assistance and advise the City Recreation Director with programs, policy and special events at the center.
3. The Board shall advise on community center policy including hours of operation, job descriptions of full time and part time employees, subject to the limitations on expenditures for salaries and supplies,
CHAPTER 26 RECREATION BOARD
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 152 -
contracts and capital outlays set forth in the annual budget provided by the Council for community center operations.
4. The Board shall cooperate with the Mayor in the allotment of time of City employees for recreation purposes.
5. The Board shall make recommendations and specify fitness and recreation equipment and supplies used at the center.
6. To communicate, advise, and consult with any third party organizations seeking to become involved with, operate, or maintain the facility or its programming.
7. The Board will keep a record of its proceedings and provide written reports to the City Council from time to time as it deems advisable or upon the request of the City Council.
8. To perform all other arts or duties as the City Council may from time to time direct.
26.05 AUTHORITY. The Board shall not have the authority to enter into contracts on behalf of the City or to otherwise obligate the City to perform any duties or services or pay compensation to third parties, or to otherwise act on the City’s behalf except in an advisory or consulting manner.
26.07 TERMINATION OF BOARD. The Board of Recreation Directors may be terminated at any time upon majority vote of the members of the City Council.
(Ch. 26 – Ord. 704 - Sep. 02 Supp.)
[The next page is 165]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 165 -
CHAPTER 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT
30.01 Department Established
30.08 Police Chief: Duties
30.02 Organization
30.09 Departmental Rules
30.03 Peace Officer Qualifications
30.10 Summoning Aid
30.04 Required Training
30.11 Taking Weapons
30.05 Oath
30.12 Uniform Allowance
30.06 Compensation
30.13 Contract Law Enforcement
30.07 Peace Officers Appointed
30.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED. The police department of the City is established to provide for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the corporate limits of the City.
30.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the Council.
30.03 PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS. In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
30.04 REQUIRED TRAINING. All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment. Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11 [2])
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
30.05 OATH. Every peace officer, before entering upon the duties of the office, shall qualify for office by taking the oath prescribed by Section 5.01 of this Code of Ordinances.
30.06 COMPENSATION. Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
CHAPTER 30 POLICE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 166 -
30.07 PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED. The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Police Chief, subject to the consent of a majority of the Council, and the Mayor, subject to Council approval, shall also appoint the other members of the department. (Ord. 677 – Sep. 01 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
30.08 POLICE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
1. General. Perform all duties required of the police chief by law or ordinance.
2. Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and bring all persons committing any offense before the proper court.
3. Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the Police Chief.
4. Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the State Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
5. Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
6. Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers, boards and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
7. Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
8. Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the charge.
9. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
10. Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles, equipment and materials of the department.
CHAPTER 30 POLICE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 167 -
30.09 DEPARTMENTAL RULES. The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code of Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary for the operation of the department.
30.09 SUMMONING AID. Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
30.10 TAKING WEAPONS. Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have within such person’s control to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
30.11 CONTRACT LAW ENFORCEMENT. In lieu of the appointment of a police chief by the Mayor as provided by Section 30.06, the Council may contract with the County Sheriff or any other qualified lawful entity to provide law enforcement services within the City and in such event the Sheriff or such other entity shall have and exercise the powers and duties of the Police Chief as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 28E.30)
CHAPTER 30 POLICE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 168 -
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 168.1 -
CHAPTER 31
RESERVE POLICE UNIT
31.01 Establishment of Force
31.08 Supervision of Officers
31.02 Membership
31.09 No Reduction of Regular Force
31.03 Oath of Office
31.10 Compensation
31.04 Training
31.11 Benefits When Injured
31.05 Status of Reserve Officers
31.12 Insurance
31.06 Carrying Weapons
31.13 Pension Fund or Retirement System
31.07 Supplementary Capacity
31.14 Civil Defense Auxiliary Police Exempt
31.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF FORCE. The Mayor, acting through the Police Chief, is hereby authorized to organize a Reserve Police Unit of not to exceed twenty-five (25) members for the purpose of assisting the Police Chief and other members of the Police Department.
31.02 MEMBERSHIP. Each member recruited for said unit shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) years of age; a high school graduate; physically fit; in good health and of good moral character. If the Director of the Law Enforcement Academy for the State establishes minimum standards for members, those standards shall also be adopted. All members shall be approved and appointed by the Mayor and Police Chief. (Ord. 882 – Mar. 18 Supp.)
31.03 OATH OF OFFICE. Members shall take an oath of office, administered by the Mayor, as reserve peace officers in the same manner as regular police officers.
31.04 TRAINING. Training for individuals appointed as reserve peace officers shall be provided by instructors in a community college or other facility, including a law enforcement agency, selected by the individual and approved by the law enforcement agency and the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy. All standards and training required under Chapter 80D of the Code of Iowa constitute the minimum standards for reserve peace officers. Upon satisfactory completion of training, the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy shall certify the individual as a reserve peace officer. There shall be no exemptions from the personal and training standards provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 803 – Dec. 07 Supp.)
31.05 STATUS OF RESERVE OFFICERS. Reserve peace officers shall serve as peace officers on the orders and at the discretion of the Police Chief. While in the actual performance of official duties, reserve peace officers shall be vested with the same rights, privileges, obligations and duties as any other peace officers.
CHAPTER 31 RESERVE POLICE UNIT
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 168.2 -
31.06 CARRYING WEAPONS. A member of the reserve force shall not carry a weapon in the line of duty until the member has been approved by the Council and certified by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy Council. After approval and certification, a reserve peace officer may carry a weapon in the line of duty only when authorized by the Police Chief.
31.07 SUPPLEMENTARY CAPACITY. Reserve peace officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular force and shall not assume full time duties of regular peace officers without first complying with all the requirements of regular peace officers.
31.08 SUPERVISION OF OFFICERS. Reserve peace officers shall be subordinate to regular peace officers, shall not serve as peace officers unless under the direction of regular peace officers, and shall wear a uniform prescribed by the Police Chief, unless the Police Chief designates alternate apparel for use when engaged in assignments involving special investigations, civil process, court duties, jail duties and the handling of mental patients. The reserve peace officer shall not wear an insignia of rank. The Police Chief shall appoint a regular force peace officer as the reserve force coordinating and supervising officer. That regular peace officer shall report directly to the Police Chief.
31.09 NO REDUCTION OF REGULAR FORCE. The Council shall not reduce the authorized size of the regular police department because of the establishment or utilization of reserve peace officers.
31.10 COMPENSATION. While performing official duties, each reserve peace officer shall be considered an employee of the City and shall be paid at a minimum of $1.00 per year. The Council may provide additional monetary assistance for the purchase and maintenance of uniforms and equipment used by reserve peace officers. The uniforms and accessories purchased by the City shall remain the property of the City.
31.11 BENEFITS WHEN INJURED. Hospital and medical assistance and benefits, as provided in Chapter 85 of the Code of Iowa, shall be provided to members of the reserve force who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties.
31.12 INSURANCE. Liability and false arrest insurance shall be provided to members of the reserve force while performing official duties in the same manner as for regular peace officers.
CHAPTER 31 RESERVE POLICE UNIT
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 168.3 -
31.13 PENSION FUND OR RETIREMENT SYSTEM. Members are not eligible for participation in a pension fund or retirement system created by the laws of the State of which regular peace officers may become members.
31.14 CIVIL DEFENSE AUXILIARY POLICE EXEMPT. This chapter does not apply to local civil defense auxiliary police forces organized by local Civil Defense officials and trained according to standards established by the United States Office of Civil Defense and contained in the Code of Federal Regulations.
(Ch. 31 – Ord. 579)
CHAPTER 31 RESERVE POLICE UNIT
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 168.4 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 169 -
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
35.01 Establishment and Purpose
35.10 Obedience to Fire Chief
35.02 Organization
35.11 Constitution
35.03 Qualifications
35.12 Accidental Injury Insurance
35.04 Approved by Council
35.13 Liability Insurance
35.05 Training
35.14 Calls Outside City
35.06 Compensation
35.15 Mutual Aid
35.07 Election of Officers
35.16 Authority to Cite Violations
35.08 Oath
35.17 Billing for Fire Services
35.09 Fire Chief: Duties
35.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE. A volunteer fire department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there is no other established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
35.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and personnel as may be authorized by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.03 QUALIFICATIONS. In no case shall any person be recruited, selected or appointed as a member of the department unless such person:
1. Resident Citizen. Is a citizen of the United States and is a resident of the City or resides not more than five (5) miles from the corporate boundaries of the City. (Ord. 859a – June 15 Supp.)
2. Age. Is at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of appointment.
3. Driver’s License. Has a current active Iowa driver’s license.
4. The individual shall pass a physical exam or test routinely administered by or on behalf of the department for its applicants.
5. Character. Be of good moral character. Should the department be made aware of any criminal convictions, any addictions, or any behavior which may negatively effect upon applicant’s moral character or upon the department, the department reserves the right to discharge such person.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 170 -
6. Education. Is a high school graduate with a diploma, or possesses an equivalency certificate acceptable by the State Department of Education.
7. Health. Prior to appointment, has been examined by a physician to assist in determining applicant is free from physical, emotional or mental condition which might adversely affect the performance of duties.
8. Application. Has made proper written department application.
(Ord. 859 – Jan. 14 Supp.)
35.04 APPROVED BY COUNCIL. No person having otherwise qualified shall be appointed to the department until such appointment is submitted to and approved by a majority of the Council members.
35.05 TRAINING. All members of the department shall attend and actively participate in regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.06 COMPENSATION. Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.07 ELECTION OF OFFICERS. The Glenwood City Council shall appoint a Chief of the fire department to serve at the discretion of the Council. The members of the department shall elect other officers of the department not less than every two (2) years. In case of absence of the Chief, the officer next in rank shall be in charge and have and exercise all the powers of Chief.
(Ord. 859 – Jan. 14 Supp.)
35.08 OATH. The Fire Chief, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall qualify for office by taking the oath prescribed by Section 5.01 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 171 -
35.09 FIRE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Fire Chief has the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. General. Perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or ordinance.
2. Enforce Laws. Enforce all ordinances and, where enabled, State laws regulating the following:
A. Fire prevention.
B. Maintenance and use of fire escapes.
C. The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
D. The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from halls, theatres, churches, hospitals, asylums, lodging houses, schools, factories and all other buildings in which the public congregates for any purpose.
E. The installation and maintenance of private fire alarms systems and fire extinguishing equipment.
3. Authority at Fires. Direct an operation as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation, investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
4. Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the fire department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
5. Authority to Barricade. Place or erect ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent accidents or interference with the fire fighting efforts of the fire department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
6. Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency, discipline and control of the fire department. The members of the fire department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 172 -
7. Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all fire apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or belonging to the fire department.
8. Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage in excess of $200,000 has occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For all fires causing an estimated damage of $50.00 or more or emergency responses by the Fire Department, file a report with the Fire Marshal’s Division within ten (10) days following the end of the month. The report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of the property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)
9. Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours and upon the consent of the occupant, to enter any building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of making such investigation or inspection which under law or ordinance may be necessary to be made and is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
10. Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants, caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
11. Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal, and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.4)
12. Records. Cause to be kept records of the fire department personnel, fire fighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number of responses to alarms, their cause and location, and an analysis of losses by value, type and location of buildings.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 173 -
13. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report of the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
14. Prior Approval. Obtain prior approval from the City Council of Glenwood of any express or implied agreement to provide fire, rescue, ambulance or other emergency services to any person, entity, organization or jurisdiction. Any such agreement, including any agreements entered into in the name of a division, subsidiary or other branch of the Glenwood Volunteer Fire Department, shall be deemed invalid and void unless such prior approval of the City Council is obtained. (Ord. 698 – Sep. 02 Supp.)
35.10 OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Chief.
35.11 CONSTITUTION. The department shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they deem calculated to accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution and bylaws and any change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws before being effective, must be approved by the Council.
35.12 ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for worker’s compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention for volunteer fire fighters injured in the performance of their duties as fire fighters whether within or outside the corporate limits of the City. All volunteer fire fighters shall be covered by the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)
35.13 LIABILITY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure against liability of the City or members of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of and resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the corporate limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)
35.14 CALLS OUTSIDE CITY. The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the City limits if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists and that such action will not endanger persons and property within the City limits.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 174 -
35.15 MUTUAL AID. Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department may enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments. Copies of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
35.16 AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS. Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for violations of state and/or local fire safety regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
35.17 BILLING FOR FIRE SERVICES. After every service call, the Fire Chief, or his designee, shall prepare and deliver a statement for any fire, hazmat cleanup, or similar service rendered by the Glenwood Volunteer Fire Department as provided herein. The person, business, or entity responsible for payment is the person, business, or entity whose conduct precipitated the service call or the person, business, or entity who owned the property benefited by the service call. Payment of such fee shall be made to the City of Glenwood and deposited by the City Clerk in the general fund for the benefit of the Glenwood Volunteer Fire Department.
1. Billing. The statement for services rendered shall be sent to the person, business, or entity responsible for payment.
2. Charges for Billing Purposes. Charges for services rendered by the Glenwood Volunteer Fire Department shall take into account the following:
A. Emergency response apparatus actually used in the response;
B. Stand by status of support vehicles;
C. Manpower actually used in the response;
D. The uninsured portion of equipment damaged, contaminated, or destroyed, at replacement cost;
E. The replacement cost of disposable supplies, including but not limited to fuel, water, foam, absorbent materials, or any other cost, incurred by the fire department in the response to the incident.
3. Rates charged by the Glenwood Volunteer Fire Department shall be established by the Glenwood City Council upon recommendation of the Glenwood Volunteer Fire Department Chief and may be amended from time to time by resolution of the Glenwood City Council.
(Ord. 858 – Aug. 13 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 175 -
CHAPTER 36
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
36.01 Purpose
36.05 Limits
36.02 Adoption of Code
36.06 Modifications
36.03 Copy on File
36.07 Appeals
36.04 Enforcement
36.08 Penalties
36.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion.
36.02 ADOPTION OF CODE. Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, there is hereby adopted that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code, 1976, with 1982 amendment, Abbreviated Edition, as published by the American Insurance Association, 85 John Street, New York City, New York, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by this chapter, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the effective date of this chapter, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City.
36.03 COPY ON FILE. An official copy of the Fire Prevention Code as adopted, and a certified copy of the ordinance codified by this chapter are on file in the office of the Clerk. A copy of the Fire Prevention Code as adopted, and a copy of said ordinance have been furnished the State Law Library, the Municipal Library, all newspapers of general circulation published in the City, and all commercial radio stations situated in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] and 380.10)
36.04 ENFORCEMENT. The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Chief of the Fire Department.
36.05 LIMITS. Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside above ground tanks and bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted. The limits referred to in Section 804A of the Fire Prevention code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited, and the limits referred to in Section 1104 of the Fire Prevention Code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as follows:
Commencing at the Northwest corner of Lot 4 in Block 5 and running thence East to the Northeast corner of Lot 9 in Block 61, thence South to the Southeast corner of Lot 6 in Block 32, thence West to the Southwest corner of Lot 3 in Block 20 and thence North to the place of beginning.
CHAPTER 36 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 176 -
36.06 MODIFICATIONS. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code, provided that the spirit of the Code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the Department. One signed copy of the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department shall be furnished the applicant, and one signed copy shall be filed in the office of the Clerk.
36.07 APPEALS. Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a license or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the City Council with thirty (30) days from the date of the decision of the appeal.
(Constitution of Iowa, Article 1, Sec. 9)
36.08 PENALTIES. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the City Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of this penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 647 – Nov. 99 Supp.)
[The next page is 179]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 179 -
CHAPTER 37
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
37.01 Purpose
37.05 Notifications
37.02 Definitions
37.06 Police Authority
37.03 Cleanup Required
37.07 City Liability
37.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs
37.08 Penalty
37.01 PURPOSE. In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety, and welfare from the spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated to establish responsibility for the removal and cleanup of spills within the City limits.
37.02 DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this chapter, these words have the following meanings:
1. “Cleanup” means action necessary to contain, collect, control, identify, analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove, or dispose of a hazardous substance or hazardous waste.
2. “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual, imminent, or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance which, because of the quantity, strength and toxicity of the hazardous substance, its mobility in the environment and its persistence, creates an immediate potential danger to the public health or safety of persons or property. The term “hazardous condition” includes any accident involving hazardous materials required to be reported under Section 321.266(4) of the Code of Iowa.
3. “Hazardous substance” means and includes any, each and all substances or materials regulated pursuant to any Environmental Laws, including, but not limited to, any such substance, emission or material now defined as or deemed to be a regulated substance, hazardous substance, toxic substance, pesticide, explosives, radioactive materials, hazardous waste or any similar or like classification or categorization there under. “Hazardous substance” also means any substance or mixture of substances that presents a danger to the public health or safety or environment and includes, but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an irritant or that in confinement generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other means. The following are examples of substances which, in sufficient quantity, may be hazardous: acids; alkalis; explosives; fertilizers; heavy metals such as chromium, arsenic, mercury, lead and cadmium; industrial chemicals, paint thinners; paints; pesticides; petroleum products; poisons;
CHAPTER 37 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 180 -
radioactive materials; sludge; and organic solvents. “Hazardous substance” may include any hazardous waste identified or listed by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act.
4. “Hazardous waste” means a waste or combination of wastes that, because of its quantity, concentration, biological degradation, leaching from precipitation, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, has either of the following effects:
A. Causes or significantly contributes to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or
B. Poses a substantial danger to human health or the environment. “Hazardous waste” may include, but is not limited to, wastes that are toxic, corrosive, or flammable or irritants, strong sensitizers or explosives.
5. “Hazardous waste” does not include:
A. Agricultural wastes, including manures and crop residues that are returned to the soil as fertilizers or soil conditioners;
B. Source, special nuclear or by-product material as defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
6. “Person” means individual, corporation, firm, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other legal entity.
7. “Responsible person” means the person, whether the owner, agent, lessor, tenant, or operator, in charge of the hazardous substance being stored, processed or handled, or the owner or bailee transporting hazardous wastes or substances whether on public ways or ground or on private property, where the existence or spill of such substance would cause danger to the public or to any person, or damage to the environment.
CHAPTER 37 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 181 -
37.03 CLEANUP REQUIRED.
1. Whenever a hazardous condition is created so that a hazardous substance may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an acceptable, safe condition, and restore the affected area to its state prior to the hazardous condition as far as practicable. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the responsible person.
2. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident, the City may, by authorization of the Mayor or designee, give reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition, setting a deadline for commencing and accomplishing the cleanup, or the City may proceed to procure cleanup services. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the City to finance, the Mayor or designee may report to the City Council and immediately seek any State or Federal funds available for said cleanup.
37.04 LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS. The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City for all of the following:
1. The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City in containing and/or controlling a hazardous condition.
2. The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City as a result of the failure of the person to clean up a hazardous substance or waste involved in a hazardous condition caused by that person.
3. The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City to evacuate people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the person.
4. The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of, or loss of City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous condition caused by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury, destruction or loss.
5. The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or the agents of the City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous condition caused by that person.
6. The costs referenced above shall be as determined by the Fire Chief for: manpower, apparatus, ambulance/rescue squad, command vehicle or utility truck, supplies and outside services, mileage, and decontamination, repairs, replacement, maintenance of equipment, apparatus or supplies, plus a reasonable administrative fee. It is unlawful for any responsible person to fail to pay a billing for such services within thirty (30) days of the receipt therefor.
(Ord. 825 – Jan. 10 Supp.)
CHAPTER 37 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 182 -
37.05 NOTIFICATIONS.
1. A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing of a hazardous substance or waste shall notify the Chief of the Fire Department of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as possible but no later than one hour after the onset of the hazardous condition or discovery of the hazardous condition. The Fire Chief shall notify the proper State office in the manner established by the State.
2. Any City employee who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the fire department, which shall then notify the proper State office in the manner established by the State.
37.06 POLICE AUTHORITY. If the circumstances reasonably require, the Chief of the Fire Department or Chief of Police, or their representative(s) may:
1. Evacuate persons, even from their homes, to areas away from the site of a hazardous condition, and
2. Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a hazardous condition and limit access to only cleanup personnel.
No person shall disobey an order of the Fire Chief or any other deputy or peace officer/law enforcement officer issued under this section.
37.07 CITY LIABILITY. The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries, or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, except if the City is the responsible person as defined in Section 37.02(7).
37.08 PENALTY. Any person who fails to perform an act required by this chapter or who commits an act prohibited by this chapter shall be guilty of a County infraction punishable by a civil penalty as provided by in this Code of Ordinances. The responsible person or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties provided herein. Each day the responsible person or other person allows a violation to continue shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ch. 37 – Ord. 811 – May 08 Supp.)
[The next page is 191]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 191 -
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
40.01 Assault
40.05 Failure to Disperse
40.02 Harassment
40.06 Stalking
40.03 Disorderly Conduct
40.07 Standing, Loitering and Obstructing Persons
40.04 Unlawful Assembly
40.08 Standing, Loitering and Obstructing Persons
On Public Property
40.01 ASSAULT. No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
1. Pain or Injury. Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury to, or which is intended to result in physical contact which will be insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1 [1])
2. Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act which is intended to place another in fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting, or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1 [2])
However, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts, and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk or serious injury or breach of the peace, the act is not an assault.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02 HARASSMENT. No person shall, with intent to intimidate, annoy or alarm another person, do any of the following:
1. Communications. Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing or via electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to cause the other person annoyance or harm. (Ord. 662 – Sep. 00 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
2. Simulated Explosive. Place any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 192 -
3. Merchandise or Services. Order merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
4. False Reports. Report or cause to be reported false information to a law enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal act, knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
40.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT. No person shall do any of the following:
1. Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in athletic contests may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [1])
2. Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or public building which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [2])
3. Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [3])
4. Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [4])
5. False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such report to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [5])
6. Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[6])
A. “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 193 -
B. “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
C. “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be flown from a pole or mast.
D. “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make imperfect.
E. “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate or trample.
F. “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a machine, vehicle or animal to tread upon.
(Ord. 801 – Dec. 07 Supp.)
7. Obstruct Use of Street. Without authority or justification, obstruct any street, sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent to prevent or hinder its lawful use by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [7])
8. Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 500 feet of the building or other location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within 500 feet of a funeral procession or burial:
A. Make loud and raucous noise which causes unreasonable distress to the persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the funeral procession.
B. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another.
C. Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession or burial.
This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during and within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession or burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
(Ord. 786 – Nov. 06 Supp.)
40.04 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY. It is unlawful for three (3) or more persons to assemble together, with them or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any of them will commit a public offense. No person shall willingly join in or remain part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe it is such.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2)
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 194 -
40.05 FAILURE TO DISPERSE. A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse. No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
40.06 STALKING. No person shall, on more than one occasion, willfully follow, pursue or harass another person and, while dong so and without legitimate purpose, make a credible threat against the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.11)
40.07 STANDING, LOITERING AND OBSTRUCTING PERSONS. No person shall congregate, stand, loaf or loiter in or on any privately owned property, whether in or on or in front of any hall, lobby, doorway, passage, entrance, street, sidewalk or parking lot, so as to interfere with the property rights of the owner(s) or with any person’s ability to use the services afforded by such property when there exists on such property or at the entrance of such property a posted sign which expressly prohibits loitering. (Ord. 601)
40.08 STANDING, LOITERING AND OBSTRUCTING PERSONS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. No person shall collect, assemble or group together and after being so collected, assembled or grouped together, stand or loiter on any sidewalk, parking area or any street corner, or at any other place in the City to the hindrance or obstruction to free passage of any person or persons passing on or along any sidewalk in said City. (Ord. 600)
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 195 -
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances
41.09 Discharging Weapons
41.02 False Reports to Law Enforcement Authorities
41.10 Throwing and Shooting
41.03 Interference with Official Acts
41.11 Urinating and Defecating
41.04 Refusing to Assist Officer
41.12 Fireworks Permit
41.05 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees
41.13 Tobacco Use
41.06 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators
41.14 Providing False Identification Information
41.07 Antenna and Radio Wires
41.15 Hunting, Trapping in City Limits
41.08 Barbed Wire and Electric Fences
41.01 DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES. No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or animals from the place where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02 FALSE REPORTS TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITIES. No person shall report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department or a law enforcement authority, knowing that the information is false, or shall report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
41.03 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS. No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to be a peace officer or fire fighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer or fire fighter, or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court. The terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this section do not include verbal harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.04 REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER. Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render assistance as required. No person
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 196 -
shall unreasonably and without lawful cause, refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
41.05 HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.06 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS. No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.07 ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES. It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio wires or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground or public building without written consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
41.08 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES. It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless such land consists of ten (10) acres or more and is used as agricultural land.
41.09 DISCHARGING WEAPONS. It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers, pistols, guns, BB guns, or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by written consent of the Council.
41.10 THROWING AND SHOOTING. It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks or missiles of any kind or to shoot arrows, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground or public building, without written consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
41.11 URINATING AND DEFECATING. It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building, including but not limited to the wall, floor,
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 197 -
hallway, steps, stairway, doorway or window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
41.12 FIREWORKS PERMIT. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 879 – Mar. 18 Supp.)
41.13 TOBACCO USE. All provisions of Chapter 142D of the Iowa Code, as may from time to time be amended, are hereby adopted. Additionally, there shall be no smoking in any City owned parks, shelters, recreation fields, or any other City grounds owned or controlled by the City. There shall be no smoking in any private vehicles located on any City owned or controlled grounds, parks or recreation fields, except recreational vehicles located in designated campgrounds on City owned parks. There shall be no smoking in or on any City owned vehicles, equipment, or machinery. Any violation thereof shall be deemed a municipal infraction punishable in accord with the schedules set forth in Chapter 142D of the Iowa Code. There shall be no tobacco use in or on any City owned parks. A violation of this provision shall be deemed a municipal infraction and punishable in accord with the Glenwood City Code of Ordinances. “Tobacco use” shall include smoking, chewing, snuffing or dipping tobacco or tobacco products. (Ord. 855 – Jul. 13 Supp.)
41.14 PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION. No person shall knowingly provide false identification information to anyone known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
(Ord. 835 – Oct. 10 Supp.)
41.15 HUNTING, TRAPPING IN CITY LIMITS.
1. Definition. Hunting is defined as pursuing, killing, trapping, snaring, netting, searching for or shooting at, stalking or lying in wait for any game, animal or bird protected by the State laws or rules adopted by the Department of Natural Resources, whether or not such animal is then subsequently captured, killed or injured.
2. Prohibition. It is unlawful for a person to hunt or trap within the City limits or to use any weapons, including snares, traps, pits or other devices capable of killing or injuring an animal. Live trapping of animals that does not cause injury to animals is allowed. Hunting with firearms within City limits is prohibited. Written consent of the Police Chief is required to discharge a firearm manufactured for the control of
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 198 -
geese or waterfowl even if the firearm is non-lethal and cannot cause death or injury upon any human being or animal.
3. Special Permits. Special permits by order of the Council may be issued from time to time to allow a special hunting season in the City limits to kill an overpopulated deer herd or goose population and only if the hunting is done with a bow and arrow.
(Ord. 854 – Mar. 13 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 199 -
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
42.01 Trespassing
42.05 Fraud
42.02 Criminal Mischief
42.06 Theft
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices
42.07 Unauthorized Computer Access
42.04 Unauthorized Entry
42.01 TRESPASSING. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the property of another. As used in this section, the term “property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle or other temporary or permanent structure whether publicly or privately owned. The term “trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa Sec. 716.7 and 716.8)
1. Entering Property Without Permission. Entering upon or in property without the express permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2a])
2. Entering or Remaining on Property. Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance of the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2b])
3. Interfering with Lawful Use of Property. Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2c])
4. Using Property Without Permission. Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2d])
None of the above shall be construed to prohibit entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of retrieving personal property which has
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 200 -
accidentally or inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7(3))
42.02 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF. It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally damage, deface, alter or destroy tangible property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03 DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES. It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement or notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY. No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building, premises or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an unauthorized entry.
42.05 FRAUD. It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06 THEFT. It is unlawful for any person to commit theft. A person commits theft when the person does any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
1. Takes possession or control of the property of another, or property in the possession of another, with the intent to deprive the other thereof.
2. Misappropriates property which the person has in trust, or property of another which the person has in the person’s possession or control, whether such possession or control is lawful or unlawful, by using or disposing of it in a manner which is inconsistent with or a denial of the trust or of the owner’s rights in such property, or conceals found property, or appropriates such property to the person’s own use, when the owner of such property is known to the person.
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 201 -
3. Obtains the labor or services of another, or a transfer of possession, control, or ownership of the property of another, or the beneficial use of property of another, by deception.
4. Exercises control over stolen property, knowing such property to have been stolen, or having reasonable cause to believe that such property has been stolen, unless the person’s purpose is to promptly restore it to the owner or to deliver it to an appropriate public officer.
5. Takes, destroys, conceals or disposes of property in which someone else has a security interest, with intent to defraud the secured party.
6. Makes, utters, draws, delivers, or gives any check, share draft, draft, or written order on any bank, credit union, person or corporation, and obtains property or service in exchange therefor, if the person knows that such check, share draft, draft or written order will not be paid when presented.
7. Obtains gas, electricity or water from a public utility or obtains cable television or telephone service from an unauthorized connection to the supply or service line or by intentionally altering, adjusting, removing or tampering with the metering or service device so as to cause inaccurate readings.
8. Any act that is declared to be theft by any provision of the Code of Iowa.
42.07 UNAUTHORIZED COMPUTER ACCESS. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly and without authorization access a computer, computer system or computer network. (Ord. 660 – Sep. 00 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.6B)
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 202 -
[The next page is 215]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 215 -
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age
45.03 Public Consumption or Intoxication
45.02 (Repealed by Ordinance No. 625)
45.04 Open Container on Streets and Highways
45.01 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. As used in this section, “legal age” means twenty-one (21) years of age or more.
1. A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in their possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine or beer given or dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the knowledge, presence and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages, wine, and beer during the regular course of the person’s employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])
2. A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer from any licensee or permittee. (Ord. 625)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02 PERSONS AGE EIGHTEEN, NINETEEN AND TWENTY. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 625)
45.03 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
1. As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of Iowa.
B. “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
C. “Peace Officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 45 ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND
INTOXICATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 216 -
D. “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a public or private school which provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten through grade twelve.
2. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon the public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor control license. A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine or beer on public school property or while attending any public or private school-related function. A person shall not be intoxicated or simulate intoxication in a public place. A person violating this subsection is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
3. When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense. If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.04 OPEN CONTAINER ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 648 - See Section 62.12 of this Code of Ordinances.)
[The next page is 219]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 219 -
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
46.01 Curfew
46.04 Cigarettes and Tobacco
46.02 Minors in Taverns
46.05 Contributing to Delinquency
46.03 Minors in Billiard Rooms
46.01 CURFEW. A curfew applicable to minors is established and shall be enforced as follows:
1. Definition. The term “minor” means in this section, any unmarried person below the age of eighteen (18) years.
2. Time Limits. It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon any of the alleys, streets or public places or places of business and amusement in the City between the hours of twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight and five o’clock (5:00) a.m. of any day of the week.
(Ord. 814 – Oct. 08 Supp.)
3. Exceptions. The restriction provided by subsection 46.01(2) shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by a guardian, parent or other person charged with the care and custody of such minor, nor shall the restriction apply to any minor who is traveling between his/her home or place of residence and the place where any approved employment, church, municipal or school function is being held.
4. Responsibility of Adults. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of any minor to allow or permit such minor to be in or upon any of the streets, alleys, places of business, or amusement or other public places within the curfew hours set by subsection 46.01(2), except as otherwise provided in subsection 46.01(3).
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 613.16)
5. Responsibility of Business Establishments. It is unlawful for any persons operating a place of business or amusement to allow or permit any minor to be in or upon any place of business or amusement operated by them within the curfew hours set by subsection 46.01(2) except as otherwise provided in subsection 46.01(3).
6. Enforcement. Any peace officer of the City while on duty is hereby empowered to arrest any minor who violates any of the provisions of Subsections 46.01(2) and (3). Upon arrest, the minor shall be returned to the custody of the parent, guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of the minor.
CHAPTER 46 MINORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 220 -
46.02 MINORS IN TAVERNS. It is unlawful for any person under legal age to enter, remain in or frequent a business establishment holding a retail liquor or beer permit after the hour of nine o’clock (9:00) p.m. on any day unless over fifty percent (50%) of the dollar volume of the business establishment comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods.
46.03 MINORS IN BILLIARD ROOMS. It is unlawful for any person who keeps a billiard hall where beer, liquor or wine is sold, or the agent, clerk or employee of any such person, or any person having charge or control of any such hall, to permit any minor to remain in such hall or to take part in any of the games known as billiards or pool.
46.04 CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO. It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to smoke, use, possess, purchase or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products or cigarettes. Possession of cigarettes or tobacco products by a person under eighteen years of age shall not constitute a violation of this section if said person possesses the cigarettes or tobacco products as part of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa and lawfully offers for sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
(Ord. 663 – Sep. 00 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.05 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY. It is unlawful for any per-son to encourage any child under eighteen (18) years of age to commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 221 -
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
47.01 Purpose
47.07 Camping Refused
47.02 Parking
47.08 Glenwood Lake Park Regulations
47.03 Use of Drives Required
47.09 Obedience to Signs
47.04 Fires
47.10 Hunting
47.05 Littering
47.11 Violation of Rules
47.06 Camping Areas
47.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park facilities by the general public by establishing rules and regulations governing the use of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
47.02 PARKING. All vehicles shall be parked in designated parking areas.
47.03 USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED. No person shall drive any car, cycle or other vehicle, or ride or lead any horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or roadways therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the Park Commission.
47.04 FIRES. No fires shall be built, except in a place provided therefor, and such fire shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be immediately used by some other party.
47.05 LITTERING. No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter or foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that purpose.
47.06 CAMPGING AREAS. No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in portions prescribed or designated by the Park Commission.
47.07 CAMPING REFUSED. The Park Commission may refuse camping privileges or rescind any and all camping privileges for cause.
47.08 GLENWOOD LAKE PARK REGULATIONS. The following rules and regulations apply in Glenwood Lake Park:
1. Swimming. No person shall swim in the lake.
2. Debris. No person shall throw any dirt, sticks or other debris into the lake.
CHAPTER 47 PARK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 222 -
3. Ice Skating. No person shall ice skate on the lake during the winter months.
4. Boating. No person shall place or use in such lake any privately owned motor boat.
5. Violate Rules. No person shall violate any of the rules and regulations adopted by the Iowa State Department of Natural Resources for the conduct of such park and the fishing therein, such rules and regulations being posted in conspicuous places in such park.
6. Stocking. It is unlawful for any person to place any fish in the water of said lake, except the Iowa State Department of Natural Resources, its agents or employees, and the agents or employees of the park commissioners of the City.
7. Curfew. It is unlawful for any person to enter said park, or to be upon any of the grounds enclosed within the limits of the park, between the hours of 12:01 A.M. and 5:00 A.M. of each day of the year; and except that when the said park is closed, and notices thereof have been posted in at least two (2) conspicuous places in said park, no person or persons shall enter said park or be upon any of the grounds enclosed within the limits of such park from any time from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset until one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise, except upon special permission of the park commissioners of the City.
47.09 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNS. It is unlawful for any person to disobey the order or orders on any signs placed in any park by the park commissioners of the City.
47.10 HUNTING. It is unlawful for any person to do any hunting of any kind in any park, or to shoot or in any manner injure any birds or animals therein.
47.11 VIOLATION OF RULES. It is unlawful for any person to violate any rules or regulations hereafter adopted by the park commissioners and approved by the Council, when such rules or regulations have been posted in at least two (2) conspicuous places in said park.
[The next page is 225]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 225 -
CHAPTER 48
FIREWORKS REGULATION
48.01 Definitions
48.06 First-Class Consumer Fireworks and Second-Class
48.02 Scope of Regulations
Consumer Fireworks Use Restrictions
48.03 Display Fireworks Regulations
48.07 Prohibition of Fireworks or Novelties Use
48.04 Consumer Fireworks Regulations
48.08 General Requirements
48.05 Novelties Use Regulations
48.09 Sale of Fireworks
48.10 Penalty
48.01 DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this chapter:
1. “APA 87-1” means the American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1 as published in December, 2001, and as may be amended from time to time and re-published.
2. “City” means the City of Glenwood, Iowa.
3. “Consumer fireworks” means first-class consumer fireworks and second-class consumer fireworks as those terms are defined in Section 100.19, Code of Iowa.
4. “Display fireworks” means the fireworks defined in Section 727.2, Code of Iowa, as amended from time to time.
5. “Explosive” means any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion with substantially instantaneous release of gas and heat, unless such compound, mixture or device is otherwise specifically classified by the United States Department of Transportation. The term includes all materials which are classified as a Class 1, Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, or 1.4 explosive by the United States Department of Transportation under 49 C.F.R. Section 173.50, and all materials classified as explosive materials under 18 U.S.C. Section 841, and includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps, safety fuse, fuse lighters, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonative fuse, instantaneous fuse, igniter cord, igniters, smokeless propellant, cartridges for propellant-actuated power devices, cartridges for industrial guns, and overpressure devices, but does not include “consumer fireworks,” “display fireworks,” or “novelties” as those terms are defined in this chapter, or ammunition or small arms primers manufactured for use in shotguns, rifles, and pistols.
6. “Fireworks” means any explosive composition or combination of explosive substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
CHAPTER 48 FIREWORKS REGULATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 226 -
visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation.
7. “First-class consumer fireworks” means those fireworks defined as first-class consumer fireworks in Section 100.19(c), Code of Iowa, as amended from time to time, and includes, but is not limited to, the following consumer fireworks:
A. Aerial shell kits and reloadable tubes.
B. Chasers.
C. Helicopter and aerial spinners.
D. Firecrackers.
E. Mine and shell devices.
F. Missile-type rockets.
G. Roman candles.
H. Sky rockets and bottle rockets.
I. Multiple tube devices under this paragraph manufactured in accordance with APA 87-1, Section 3.5.
8. “Novelties” means those items enumerated as novelties as defined in Section 727.2, Code of Iowa, as amended from time to time, and includes those items classified as novelties in Chapter 3 of APA 87-1, and that comply with the labeling regulations issued by the U.S. Consumer Products Safety Commission.
9. “Permanent Building” means a structure as defined by the State Fire Marshal by administrative regulation or rule, which shall comply with the National Fire Protection Association, Standard 1124, published in the National Fire Protection Code relating to the manufacture, transportation, storage and retail sale of fireworks and pyrotechnic articles, 2006 Edition, as it may be amended from time to time.
10. “Retailer” means as defined in Section 423.1, Code of Iowa.
11. “Sale” or “sell” means transfer of ownership or possession in exchange for valuable consideration furnished by the person receiving ownership or possession.
12. “Second-class consumer fireworks” means those fireworks defined as second-class consumer fireworks in Section 100.19(e), Code of Iowa, as amended from time to time, and includes, but is not limited to the following consumer fireworks:
A. Cone fountains.
CHAPTER 48 FIREWORKS REGULATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 227 -
B. Cylindrical foundations.
C. Flitter sparklers.
D. Ground and hand-held sparkling devices, including multiple tube ground and hand-held sparkling devices that are manufactured in accordance with APA 87-1, Section 3.5.
E. Ground spinners.
F. Illuminating torches.
G. Toy smoke devices that are not classified as novelties pursuant to APA 87-1, Section 3.2.
H. Wheels.
I. Wire or dipped sparkers that are not classified as novelties pursuant to APA 87-1, Section 3.2.
13. “Stand-alone structure” means either a permanent building or a temporary structure attached to no other building or structure, and which is located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any adjacent structure.
14. “Structure” means a place constructed by putting together materials which satisfies all conditions for a structure as set out in regulations or rules of the State Fire Marshal.
15. “Temporary structure” means that structure as defined by the State Fire Marshal by administrative regulation or rule, which shall comply with the National Fire Protection Association, Standard 1124, published in the National Fire Protection Code relating to the manufacture, transportation, storage and retail sale of fireworks and pyrotechnic articles, 2006 Edition, and amendments thereto.
16. “Use” means to apply the device or substance involved to the purpose for which it was designed. In the case of fireworks, this includes the discharge or exploding of the device or substance.
17. “Wholesaler” means a person who engages in the business of selling or distributing consumer fireworks for the purpose of re-sale in the State of Iowa.
48.02 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS. The City of Glenwood deems the use of display fireworks and consumer fireworks both a threat to public safety and a possible nuisance, and therefore prohibits the use of display fireworks, consumer fireworks, and novelties except as provided in this chapter.
48.03 DISPLAY FIREWORKS REGULATIONS. It is unlawful for any person to use display fireworks, unless upon application and permit therefore
CHAPTER 48 FIREWORKS REGULATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 228 -
issued by the City in accordance with conditions established by the City Council. In addition to or incorporated into the conditions established, shall be conditions requiring that the operator or sponsoring organization has satisfied the City that the display fireworks will be managed by a competent operator and that the operator or sponsoring organization has filed with the City Clerk evidence of liability insurance protecting the City with limits established by the City, but not less than $1,000,000 per person and $2,000,000 aggregate.
48.04 CONSUMER FIREWORKS REGULATIONS. Consumer fireworks may be used without advance notice as long as in compliance with all other regulations and restrictions concerning consumer fireworks use in the City.
48.05 NOVELTIES USE REGULATIONS. Novelties may be used without advance notice as long as in compliance with all other regulations and restrictions concerning novelties use in the City.
48.06 FIRST-CLASS CONSUMER FIREWORKS AND SECOND-CLASS CONSUMER FIREWORKS USE RESTRICTIONS. In addition to any restrictions stated in other sections of this chapter, the following use restrictions are adopted for use both of first-class consumer fireworks and second-class consumer fireworks:
1. Date(s) of use – first-class consumer fireworks and second-class consumer fireworks may be used only on the following dates and times. All times are local times:
A. July 1, July 2 and July 3 of each year beginning at 9:00 A.M. and ending at 10:00 P.M. each day;
B. July 4 of each year beginning at 9:00 A.M. and ending at 11:00 P.M.;
C. July 5 of each year beginning at 9:00 A.M. and ending at 10:00 P.M.;
D. December 30 of each year beginning at 9:00 A.M. and ending at 10:00 P.M. each day;
E. December 31 of each year beginning at 9:00 A.M. and ending at 12:30 A.M. of the day following;
F. January 1 and January 2 of each year beginning at 9:00 A.M. and ending at 10:00 P.M.
2. Proximity to structures. Fireworks shall be discharged a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any structure at the location where discharged.
CHAPTER 48 FIREWORKS REGULATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 229 -
3. Supervision. Use of first-class consumer fireworks shall be under supervision of the responsible person indicated on the notice filed with the City Clerk. Use of second-class consumer fireworks shall be under supervision of an adult. The responsible person or adult shall be physically present at the location and in a position to enable the responsible person or adult to render assistance on an immediate basis.
4. Fire extinguisher. It shall be the responsibility of the responsible person or adult to have present at the location a fire extinguisher sufficient to suppress or extinguish fires started by use of the fireworks.
5. Reserved power in City. The City Fire Chief or Chief of Police may refuse or end the use of fireworks at any location in the event the Fire Chief or Chief of Police determines use at that location to be unsafe or in violation of this chapter.
48.07 PROHIBITATION OF FIREWORKS OR NOVELTIES USE. The City may prohibit use of fireworks or novelties when an increased fire danger is present, or for any other good cause posing hazard to the City or property of its residents.
48.08 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
1. Adults only. No person under the age of 18 years shall discharge a first-class consumer fireworks or second-class consumer fireworks without supervision as specified in this chapter.
2. Intoxication. No fireworks shall be discharged by a person under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or drugs.
3. Responsibility for safe use. The responsible person or adult at each location where consumer fireworks are used is responsible for both proper and safe use of the fireworks and use in compliance with this chapter.
4. Unsafe or reckless use. No person shall discharge fireworks in an unsafe or reckless manner or with the intent to cause injury, death, fire or property damage either to the person’s property or that of a third party.
5. Alteration of components. It is a violation of this chapter for any person to alter components of fireworks. The responsible person or any adult at the location of the violation may be charged accordingly.
6. Open flame devices. Open flame devices shall not be released into the air, unless the device after release remains connected to a person able to retrieve the device during or after use.
7. Public property use restrictions. It is unlawful for any person to use fireworks upon public property within the City, unless upon
CHAPTER 48 FIREWORKS REGULATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 230 -
application and permit therefore issued by the City in accordance with the requirements of Section 48.03 of this chapter. This use restriction includes, but is not limited to, use of fireworks upon City parks, street rights-of-way, sidewalks, recreational trail areas and the adjoining easement area thereto, and upon other easement areas granted to the City.
48.09 SALE OF FIREWORKS. The following regulations apply to sales or selling of fireworks within the City:
1. State Fire Marshall. The sale of consumer fireworks shall be regulated by the State Fire Marshal. Dates of permitted sales, minimum requirements for a consumer fireworks seller license and issuance of licenses shall be controlled by the State Fire Marshal, and those rules and regulations are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into this chapter in addition to those provisions herein stated. In the event of a conflict between the rules and regulations of the State Fire Marshal and the provisions of this ordinance, the stricter provision shall be deemed controlling, in the absence of a state law providing otherwise.
2. Place of sales. The sale of fireworks shall be limited to either a permanent building or temporary structure meeting the requirements of the State Fire Marshal, which building or structure is a stand-alone structure under this chapter.
3. NFP standards. Any seller of consumer fireworks as described in APA 87-1, Chapter 3, shall do so in accordance with the National Fire Protection Standard 1124, published in the National Fire Protection Code relating to the manufacture, transportation, storage and retail sales of fireworks and pyrotechnic articles, 2006 Edition, and amendments thereto.
4. Permit and insurance required. A seller must provide to the City Clerk proof satisfactory to the City of the seller’s possession of a valid license issued by the State Fire Marshal and a policy of commercial general liability insurance with minimum limits per occurrence of $1,000,000 and minimum aggregate limits of $2,000,000 with both the City of Glenwood and the property owner where the permanent building or temporary structure is located shown as additional insureds, effective during the entire duration of sale dates provided for under law.
5. Sale dates and times. Sales of fireworks from the following structures are permitted each year during the dates and times shown. All times are local time.
A. Permanent building. June 1 through July 8, and December 10, to the following January 3, all dates inclusive.
CHAPTER 48 FIREWORKS REGULATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 231 -
B. Temporary structure. June 13 through July 8, inclusive.
C. Hours: Sales shall begin at 8:00 A.M. and shall end at 8:00 P.M.
6. Age restrictions. No consumer fireworks shall be sold to any person under the age of 18 years on the date of sale.
7. Where allowed. Fireworks sales shall be permitted only in areas not zoned as residential under the City of Glenwood Zoning Ordinance.
48.10 PENALTY. Any person found guilty of a violation of an of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be subject to a minimum fine of $250.00, plus court costs. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter may be prosecuted as a municipal infraction under this Code of Ordinances, either in addition to or in lieu of, the criminal prosecution.
(Ch. 48 – Ord. 879 – Mar. 18 Supp.)
CHAPTER 48 FIREWORKS REGULATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 232 -
[The next page is 235]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 235 -
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
50.01 Definition of Nuisance
50.09 Abatement in Emergency
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated
50.10 Abatement by City
50.03 Other Conditions
50.11 Collection of Costs
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited
50.12 Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement
50.05 Nuisance Abatement
50.13 Failure to Abate
50.06 Notice to Abate: Contents
50.14 Fine for Failure to Abate
50.07 Method of Service
50.15 Subsequent Violation Within 365 Days
50.08 Request for Hearing
50.01 DEFINITION OF NUISANCE. Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a nuisance. (Ord. 581)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02 NUISANCES ENUMERATED. The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions which are deemed to be nuisances in the City:
1. Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing or using any building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or property of individuals or the public. (Ord. 581)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[1])
2. Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[2])
3. Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor or collection of water.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[3])
4. Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[4])
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 236 -
5. Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places or burying grounds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[5])
6. Billboards. Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether erected and constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use thereof. (See also Section 62.09)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[7])
7. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 604)
8. Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk, such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof construction. (See also Chapter 51)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[10])
9. Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly ash.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[11])
10. Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush or other vegetation in the City so as to constitute a health, safety or fire hazard.
(Code of Iowa, 657.2[12])
11. Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch Elm Disease. (See also Chapter 151)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[13])
12. Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within one thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[9])
13. Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 237 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2[6])
14. Accumulation of Litter. Accumulation of litter, as defined in Chapter 105 of this Code of Ordinances, on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public place.
50.03 OTHER CONDITIONS. The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations prohibiting or restricting other conditions which are deemed to be nuisances:
1. Inoperable Vehicles and Junk (See Chapter 51)
2. Dangerous Buildings (See Chapter 145)
3. Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)
4. Trees (See Chapter 151)
5. Drug Paraphernalia (See Chapter 52)
50.04 NUISANCES PROHIBITED. The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05 NUISANCE ABATEMENT. Whenever the Mayor or other authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such officer may cause to be served upon the property owner, or any person in possession thereof, a written notice to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time after notice.
(Ord. 696 – Jun. 02 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06 NOTICE TO ABATE: CONTENTS. The notice to abate shall contain:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1. Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the nuisance.
2. Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
3. Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance.
4. Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement.
5. Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 238 -
within the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against such person.
6. Notice of Subsequent Violation. A statement that in the event such nuisance is abated by the City, a subsequent like nuisance which occurs on the same property within 365 days of the date of the notice may be abated by the City without prior notice to such person and with the costs assessed to such person. (Ord. 732 – Oct. 03 Supp.)
50.07 METHOD OF SERVICE. The notice may be served upon the property owner or person in possession thereof by personal service, certified mail, regular mail or publication in the Glenwood Opinion Tribune. If the owner of the property or the person in possession thereof is unknown or their whereabouts are unknown, notice may be provided by posting a dated and signed placard in a conspicuous place on the property in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 748 – Nov. 04 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.08 REQUEST FOR HEARING. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered. The hearing will be before the Council at a time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
50.09 ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY. If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may perform any action which may be required under this chapter without prior notice. The City shall assess the costs as provided in Section 50.11 after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of Sections 50.05, 50.06 and 50.07 and hearing as provided in Section 50.08.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.10 ABATEMENT BY CITY. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.11 COLLECTION OF COSTS. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 239 -
abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one (1) month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner, as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.12 INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT. If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), the City may permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten (10) annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
50.13 FAILURE TO ABATE. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of Ordinances.
50.14 FINE FOR FAILURE TO ABATE. Any person who fails to abate either a public or private nuisance, after (1) being served with a notice to abate and not requesting a hearing within the time prescribed in the notice as provided in Section 50.08, or (2) after being ordered to abate a nuisance by the Council after hearing and within the time so provided in the order of the Council, shall be subject to the fine as established in Section 1.10 of this Code of Ordinances. Every day that the nuisance continues after the date of (1) or (2) above, shall be considered a separate violation of this section. The issuance of a complaint or citation under this section shall not be considered the sole remedy of the City and shall not be deemed to restrict the City’s ability to seek additional relief under this statute or the Code of Iowa. (Ord. 647 – Nov. 99 Supp.)
50.15 SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION WITHIN 365 DAYS. If a person allows a subsequent nuisance to exist within 365 days of being served with a previous nuisance abatement notice involving the same subject matter and property as the previous nuisance and for which the City abated the previous nuisance pursuant to Section 50.10, the City shall have the right to abate the subsequent nuisance without prior notice to such person and to immediately certify the costs thereof to the County Treasurer. (Ord. 813 – Aug. 08 Supp.)
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 240 -
EDITOR’S NOTE
A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is included in the appendix of this Code of Ordinances.
Caution is urged in the use of this administrative abatement procedure, particularly where cost of abatement is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to whether or not a nuisance does in fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings, we recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with abatement and assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in court under Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 241 -
CHAPTER 51
INOPERABLE VEHICLES AND JUNK
51.01 Definitions
51.04 Auction Sale
51.02 Parking and Storage of Inoperable Vehicles
51.05 Lot Parking
or Junk
51.06 Lot Parking Duration
51.03 Inoperable Vehicles and Junk a Nuisance
51.07 Lot Defined
51.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Inoperable” means incapable of being put into use or operation.
2. “Inoperable vehicle” means any motor vehicle that is required to be licensed by law, recreational vehicle, boat, trailer or semi-trailer which lacks (a) current registration or (b) one or more wheels (exclusive of the spare) or an engine transmission, differential, drive shaft, axle or any other component part thereof, the absences or removal of which renders the vehicle inoperable by its own power. (Ord. 585)
3. “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled or inoperable vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered to be junk.
4. “Vehicle” means any motor vehicle required to be licensed by law, recreational vehicle, boat, trailer or semi-trailer.
(Ord. 749 – Nov. 04 Supp.)
51.02 PARKING AND STORAGE OF INOPERABLE VEHICLES OR JUNK. No person shall park, place, keep or store or permit the parking, placing, keeping or storage of an inoperable vehicle, vehicular component parts or miscellaneous junk and debris on any public or private property within corporate limits of the City unless it is within a completely enclosed building. This section does not apply to short term emergency repairs on licensed vehicles. The definition of “short term” shall be determined by the Police Chief and the Public Works Director at their discretion. This section does not apply to auto salvage yards lawfully operated within the City and enclosed by a fence or wall at least eight (8) feet in height and so constructed as to prevent unauthorized entrance and access. If a violation of this section occurs upon
CHAPTER 51 INOPERABLE VEHICLES AND JUNK
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 242 -
private property, the owner or person in control of said property shall be prima facie liable for said violation. (Ord. 749 - Nov. 04 Supp)
51.03 INOPERABLE VEHICLES AND JUNK A NUISANCE. It is hereby declared that any inoperable vehicle or junk located upon private property, unless excepted by Section 51.02, constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa. Upon discovery of any inoperable vehicle or junk located upon private property in violation of this chapter, the City shall initiate abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04 AUCTION SALE. All inoperable vehicles removed and impounded shall be sold to the highest bidder at a public auction, the time and place of which shall be duly published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City not less than seven (7) days before said auction. All revenues derived from such sale shall accrue to the City for the purpose of recovering its costs of removal and sale. Any excess revenue from such sale shall be paid to the owner of the vehicle. Any unrecovered costs shall be the responsibility of the owner of the vehicle.
51.05 LOT PARKING. No property owner or person in possession thereof shall allow more than two (2) vehicles, whether operable or inoperable, to be parked upon any lot exclusive of vehicles parked entirely on driveways or in garages or carports. (Ord. 749 – Nov. 04 Supp.)
51.06 LOT PARKING DURATION. No property owner or person in possession thereof shall knowingly or unknowingly allow the parking or placement of any vehicles upon any lots, exclusive of driveways, garages or carports for more than seven (7) days. (Ord. 749 – Nov. 04 Supp.)
51.07 LOT DEFINED. The term “lot” as used in this chapter shall mean a lot as defined in Section 166.15(4) of the City Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 749 – Nov. 04 Supp.)
[The next page is 245]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 245 -
CHAPTER 52
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
52.01 Purpose
52.05 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
52.02 Controlled Substance Defined
52.06 Manufacture, Delivery or Offering For Sale
52.03 Drug Paraphernalia Defined
52.07 Nuisance
52.04 Determining Factors
52.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with intent to use, manufacture and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.
52.02 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED. The term “controlled substance” as used in this chapter is defined as the term “controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
52.03 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED. The term “drug paraphernalia” as used in this chapter means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, containing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. It includes, but is not limited to:
1. Growing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
2. Processing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances.
3. Isomerization Devices. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
4. Testing Equipment. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances.
CHAPTER 52 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 246 -
5. Scales. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
6. Diluents. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances.
7. Separators - Sifters. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana.
8. Mixing Devices. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
9. Containers. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances.
10. Storage Containers. Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
11. Injecting Devices. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body.
12. Ingesting-Inhaling Device. Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin, marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
A. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
B. Water pipes;
C. Carburetion tubes and devices;
D. Smoking and carburetion masks;
E. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;
F. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
G. Chamber pipes;
H. Carburetor pipes;
I. Electric pipes;
CHAPTER 52 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 247 -
J. Air driven pipes;
K. Chillums;
L. Bongs;
M. Ice pipes or chillers.
52.04 DETERMINING FACTORS. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be considered in addition to all other logically relevant factors:
1. Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use.
2. Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object under any State or federal law relating to any controlled substance.
3. Proximity To Violation. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
4. Proximity To Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
5. Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
6. Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons who, he or she knows or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
7. Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
8. Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use.
9. Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use.
10. Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use.
11. Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
CHAPTER 52 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 248 -
12. Licensed Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
13. Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
14. Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
15. Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use.
52.05 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
52.06 MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY OR OFFERING FOR SALE. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or knowing that it is designed
CHAPTER 52 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 249 -
for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
52.07 PENALTIES. Any person violating any provision, section or paragraph of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 647 – Nov. 99 Supp.)
52.08 NUISANCE. Violation of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance which may be abated in the manner provided in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances, or in the alternative may be abated by injunction in the Iowa District Court.
CHAPTER 52 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 250 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 251 -
CHAPTER 53
NOISE CONTROL
CHAPTER 53 NOISE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 252 -
CHAPTER 53 NOISE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 253 -
CHAPTER 53 NOISE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 254 -
CHAPTER 53 NOISE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 255 -
5. Powered model vehicles. The sound made by the operation of a powered model vehicle which is received between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) p.m. and eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. the following morning at the real property boundary of residential property.
6. Musical instruments. The sound made by a drum, horn, reed instrument, string instrument or other musical instrument or device which is received between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. at the property boundary of residential property.
7. Off-road motorcycle and recreational vehicle noise. The sound made on private property or on City-owned property other than public right-of-way by a motorcycle or recreational vehicle and received between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) p.m. and eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. the following morning at the real property boundary of residential property; provided, however, the sound made by a motorcycle when traveling from private property to a public right-of-way, or vice versa, in pursuance of normal ingress or egress for purposeful transportation is not a “noise disturbance” unless made so by some provision of this section other than this Subsection 7.
8. Construction noise. The sound made by tools or equipment in erection, demolition, excavation drilling or other such construction work which is received between the hours of nine o’clock (9:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. the following morning at the real property boundary of residential property.
9. Sound equipment. The sound made by sound equipment operated upon the public right-of-way or in any building or upon any premises, public or private, if plainly audible from any public right-of-way within the City unless the person using, operating or causing to be used or operated the sound equipment possesses a current sound equipment permit and the actual use or operation of such sound equipment is not inconsistent with the statements made in the application, the conditions imposed in the sound equipment permit or the limitations specified in Subsection 4 of Section 53.08 of this chapter.
10. Racing. The sound made by a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle on private property or public right-of-way during any racing event or time trial, whether organized or unorganized.
CHAPTER 53 NOISE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 256 -
11. Screeching tires. The sound made by the intentional screeching or squealing of the tires of a motor vehicle in areas of the City zoned residential or commercial.
12. Noisy exhaust system. The sound made by a motor vehicle or a recreational vehicle whose exhaust system has been modified by the installation of a muffler cut-out or by-pass.
13. Animal or bird noises. The frequent or habitual sound made by a domesticated animal or bird, other than livestock owned or possessed for agricultural purposes, which is received between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. the following morning at the real property boundary of residential property.
53.07 EXLUDED SOUNDS. Any other provision of Section 53.06 or other sections of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the term “noise disturbance,” as used in this chapter, does not mean or include the following sounds:
1. Lawn and garden equipment. The sound emitted by motor-powered, muffler-equipped lawn and garden equipment operated between the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. and ten o’clock (10:00) p.m.
2. Chain saws. The sound emitted by motor-powered tree trimming equipment operated between the hours of six o’clock (6:00 a.m.) and eight o’clock (8:00 p.m.). (Ord. 881 – Mar. 18 Supp.)
3. Snow removal equipment. The sound emitted by motor-powered, muffler-equipped snow removal equipment operated between the hours of six o’clock (6:00) a.m. and ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and the sound emitted by City-owned or hired snow removal equipment.
4. Emergencies. The sound emitted in the performance of emergency work or to alert persons to the existence of an emergency.
5. Alarms. The sound emitted by the intentional sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationery emergency signaling device for emergency purposes or for the essential testing of such device when conducted between the hours of nine o’clock (9:00) a.m. and four o’clock (4:00) p.m.
6. Church bells. The sound emitted by church carillons, bells or chimes.
CHAPTER 53 NOISE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 257 -
7. Automobile radios. The sound emitted by an automobile or truck radio
CHAPTER 53 NOISE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 258 -
CHAPTER 53 NOISE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 259 -
5. Conditions. The City Building Official, or the Council, as the case may be, may impose reasonable conditions and requirements to be met or fulfilled by the sound equipment permit holder preliminary to or at the time of the use or operation of the sound equipment. Such conditions and requirements shall be those conditions and requirements necessary or advisable to protect the health, welfare and quality of life of the residents of the City and may include, without limitation, restrictions on the time of day the sound equipment can be used or operated, restrictions on the level of the sound to be produced and restrictions on the number of minutes or consecutive minutes (or other unit of time) that the sound equipment may be used or operated during any one hour or day (or other unit of time).
53.09 CONSTRUCTION. No provisions of this chapter should be construed to legalize or permit sounds, devices or activities made unlawful by other ordinances of the City or State or Federal Statutes.
CHAPTER 53 NOISE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 260 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 261 -
CHAPTER 54
DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
54.01 Definitions
54.04 Seizure, Impoundment and Disposition
54.02 Keeping of Dangerous Animals Prohibited
54.05 Mayor Designee
54.03 Keeping of Vicious Animals Prohibited
54.06 Pit Bulls Prohibited
54.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Dangerous animal” means:
A. Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunk and mink;
B. Raccoons;
C. Bats;
D. Scorpions.
(Ord. 804 – Dec. 07 Supp.)
2. “Vicious animal” means any animal, except for a dangerous animal per se, as listed above, that has bitten or clawed a person or persons while running at large and the attack was unprovoked, or any animal that has exhibited vicious propensities in present or past conduct, including such that said animal (a) has bitten or clawed a person or persons on two separate occasions within a twelve-month period; or (b) did bite or claw once causing injuries above the shoulders of a person; or (c) could not be controlled or restrained by the owner at the time of the attack to prevent the occurrence; or (d) has attacked any domestic animal or fowl on three separate occasions within a twelve-month period.
3. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 746 – Nov. 04 Supp.)
54.02 KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED. No person shall keep, shelter or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet, or act as a temporary custodian for such animal, or keep, shelter or harbor such animal for any purpose or in any capacity within the City. (Ord. 804 – Dec. 07 Supp.)
54.03 KEEPING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED. No person shall keep, shelter or harbor for any reason within the City a vicious animal except in the following circumstances:
1. Animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency.
CHAPTER 54 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 262 -
2. The keeping of guard dogs; however, guard dogs must be kept within a structure or fixed enclosure at all times, and any guard dog found at large may be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Any premises guarded by a guard dog shall be prominently posted with a sign containing the wording “Guard Dog,” “Vicious Dog” or words of similar import, and the owner of such premises shall inform the local law enforcement officers that a guard dog is on duty at said premises.
54.04 SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION.
1. In the event that a dangerous or vicious animal is found at large and unattended upon public property, park property, public right-of-way or the property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to persons or property, such animal may, in the discretion of the Mayor or peace officer, be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The City shall be under no duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous or vicious animal found at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its destruction.
2. Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous or vicious animal on premises in the City, the Mayor shall cause the matter to be investigated and if after investigation, the facts indicate that the person named in the complaint is keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous or vicious animal in the City, the Mayor shall order the person named in the complaint to safely remove such animal from the City or destroy the animal, within three (3) days of the receipt of such order. Such order shall be contained in a notice to remove the dangerous or vicious animal, which notice shall be given in writing to the person keeping, sheltering or harboring the dangerous or vicious animal, and shall be served personally or by certified mail. Such order and notice to remove the dangerous or vicious animal shall not be required where such dangerous or vicious animal has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any person, in which case the Mayor shall cause the animal to be immediately seized and impounded or killed if seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk of serious physical harm or death to any person.
3. The order to remove a dangerous or vicious animal issued by the Mayor may be appealed to the Council. In order to appeal such order, written notice of appeal must be filed with the Clerk within three (3) days after receipt of the order contained in the notice to remove the dangerous or vicious animal. Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of right to appeal the order of the Mayor.
CHAPTER 54 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 263 -
4. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail to the Clerk. The hearing of such appeal shall be scheduled within seven (7) days of the receipt of notice of appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. After such hearing, the Council may affirm or reverse the order of the Mayor. Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed with the Clerk within three (3) days after the hearing or any continued session thereof.
5. If the Council affirms the action of the Mayor, the Council shall order in its written decision that the person owning, sheltering, harboring or keeping such dangerous or vicious animal remove such animal from the City or destroy it. The decision and order shall immediately be served upon the person against whom rendered in the same manner as the notice of removal. If the original order of the Mayor is not appealed and is not complied with within three (3) days or the order of the Council after appeal is not complied with within three (3) days of its issuance, the Mayor is authorized to seize, impound or destroy such dangerous or vicious animal. Failure to comply with an order of the Mayor issued pursuant to this chapter and not appealed, or the Council after appeal, constitutes a simple misdemeanor.
(Ord. 804 – Dec. 07 Supp.)
(Ch. 54 - Ord. 630 - Jan. 98 Supp.)
54.05 MAYOR DESIGNEE. The duties imposed upon the Mayor by this chapter may be performed by a designee of the Mayor. (Ord. 746 – Nov. 04 Supp.)
54.06 PIT BULLS PROHIBITED. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep, exercise control over, maintain, harbor, transport, or sell any pit bull within the City of Glenwood, Iowa.
1. Pit Bull and Owner Defined.
A. A “pit bull” is defined as any dog that is an American Pit Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, or any dog displaying the majority of physical traits of any one or more of the above breeds (more so than any other breed), or any dog exhibiting those distinguishing characteristics which substantially conform to the standards established by the American Kennel Club or United Kennel Club for any of the aforementioned breeds, as from time to time may be modified. The final determination of the classification of any dog lies with the City Council of the City of Glenwood.
CHAPTER 54 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 264 -
B. An “owner” is defined as any person or entity who owns, possesses, keeps, exercises control over, maintains, harbors, transports or sells a pit bull.
2. Exception to Prohibition. The owner of a pit bull currently licensed as of the date of publication of the ordinance codified in this section and who maintains the pit bull at all times in compliance with the requirements of this section and all other applicable requirements of Chapter 54 and Chapter 55 of the Glenwood Code of Ordinances, may keep a pit bull within the City limits of Glenwood, Iowa. Such requirements of this section are as follows:
A. The owner of the pit bull shall keep the license current by annual renewal, and such license shall not be transferable and shall be renewable only by the holder of the license or by a member of the immediate family, such licensee who is at least 18 years of age. The owner of the pit bull must be at least 18 years of age. The owner shall not be able to sell or transfer the pit bull to any other person or entity located within the City of Glenwood, Iowa except to a member of the immediate family. The Glenwood Police Department shall be notified by the owner of any such sale or transfer within three (3) days of the sale or transfer, and the owner shall provide the name, age, address, and telephone number of the new owner.
B. The owner must provide or present to the Glenwood Police Department proof that the owner has procured liability insurance in the minimum amount of One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00), covering any damage or injury that may be caused by a pit bull during the duration of its license. Such policy shall contain a provision requiring the insurance company to provide written notice to the Glenwood Police Department not less than fifteen (15) days prior to any cancellation, termination, or expiration of the policy.
C. The owner, at his or her own expense, shall have the pit bull spayed or neutered within thirty (30) days of the final publication of this ordinance, and present written proof to the Glenwood Police Department from a licensed veterinarian that such sterilization has been performed.
D. The owner shall cause to be placed and remain in place a sign at his or her property entrance and which must contain the words “pit bull dog.” Said sign shall be a minimum of 8” X 10” in size and the lettering on such sign shall not be less than two (2) inches in height.
CHAPTER 54 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 265 -
E. At all times when a pit bull is at the property of the owner, the owner shall keep the pit bull confined. “Confined” as used in this section shall mean the dog shall be placed in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises which shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the nearest property line of the premises. Said pen or structure must be constructed of materials which prevent the pit bull from biting or otherwise attacking a person wholly outside of the pen or structure. No owner or person shall permit or allow such pit bull to be beyond the premises of such person unless the pit bull is securely leashed and muzzled by a responsible adult, or otherwise securely restrained in a kennel or other enclosure. The leash shall be no longer than four feet. “Muzzled” shall mean that the jaws of the pit bull are confined by a devise that prevents the pit bull from biting. A “secured temporary enclosure” shall mean an enclosure used for purposes of transporting a pit bull and which includes a top and bottom permanently attached to the sides except for a door for removal of the pit bull. Such enclosure must be constructed in order to ensure that the pit bull may not exit the enclosure on its own.
F. The owner of the pit bull must notify the Glenwood Police Department within five (5) days in the event the pit bull is lost, stolen, dies or has a litter.
G. In the event of a litter, the owner shall not keep any puppy of the litter for more than eight (8) weeks. Any puppy from the litter shall be permanently transferred out of the City limits of the City of Glenwood, Iowa within eight weeks of its birth.
3. The City of Glenwood is authorized to immediately impound any pit bull found in the City limits of the City of Glenwood for which the foregoing requirements have not been strictly complied with by the owner, and, upon such impoundment, shall be able to dispose of the pit bull in accord with Section 55.04 or Section 55.16 of the Glenwood City Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 791 – Oct. 07 Supp.)
[The next page is 269]

CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 269 -
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions
55.15 At Large Animals: Impoundment
55.02 Cruelty to Animals
55.16 Disposition of Animals
55.03 Abandonment
55.17 Impounding Costs
55.04 Exhibitions and Fights
55.18 Adoption Costs
55.05 Injuries to Animals
55.19 License Required – Exception
55.06 At Large Prohibited
55.20 License Application – Procedure and Fees
55.07 Bothersome Animals
55.21 Transfer or Change of Ownership
55.08 Damage or Interference
55.22 Tags Displayed
55.09 Annoyance or Disturbance
55.23 Duplicate Tag
55.10 Vicious Animals
55.24 Transportation Fees
55.11 Rabies Vaccination
55.25 Scheduled Violation
55.12 Owner’s Duty
55.26 Unhealthful or Unsanitary Conditions
55.13 Confinement
55.27 Municipal Infraction
55.14 Contained Animals: Impoundment
55.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Animal Protection and Control:
1. “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
2. “At large” means off the premises of the animal’s owner and not under the control of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, or housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel.
3. “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an animal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.2)
55.02 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS. No person who impounds or confines, in any place, any domestic animal, or fowl, or dog or cat, shall fail to supply such animal during confinement with a sufficient quantity of food or water, or shall fail to provide the dog or cat with adequate shelter, or shall torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, mutilate, overdrive, overload, drive when overloaded, beat, or kill any such animal by any means which causes unjustified pain, distress or suffering, whether intentionally or negligently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.03 ABANDONMENT. A person who has ownership of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another person who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.4)
55.04 EXHIBITIONS AND FIGHTS. No person shall arrange, promote or stage an exhibition at which any animal is tormented, or any fight between animals or between a person and an animal, or shall keep a place where such exhibitions and fights are staged for the entertainment of spectators.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 270 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.3)
55.05 INJURIES TO ANIMALS. No person, having no right to do so, shall maliciously kill, maim, or disfigure any animal of another, or maliciously administer poison to any such animal, or expose any poisonous substance with the intent that the same should be taken by any such animal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
55.06 AT LARGE PROHIBITED. No owner of any dog shall, knowingly or unknowingly, permit such dog to run at large, whether the dog be licensed or unlicensed.
55.07 BOTHERSOME ANIMALS. It is unlawful for a person to keep within the City bothersome animals such as bees, cattle, donkeys, mules, horses, swine, sheep, goats, fowl and geese, which tend to disrupt the peace and good order of the community.
55.08 DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE. It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference with, the premises.
55.09 ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE. It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow or permit such dog to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or persons by frequent and habitual howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise; or, by running after or chasing persons, bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles.
55.10 VICIOUS ANIMALS. It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious animal within the City. An animal is deemed to be vicious when it has attacked or bitten any person without provocation, or when propensity to attack or bite persons exists and is known or ought reasonably to be known to the owner. In addition to any remedies provided by this chapter, the City may cause removal of any vicious animal in accord with the provisions and procedures set forth in Chapter 54 of the Code of Ordinance.
(Ord. 747 – Nov. 04 Supp.)
55.11 RABIES VACCINATION. Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal. It is unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in the person’s possession, six months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. Dogs kept in kennels and not allowed to run at large are not subject to these vaccination requirements.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
55.12 OWNER’S DUTY. It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat or other animal which has bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 271 -
55.13 CONFINEMENT. If law enforcement receives information that an animal has bitten a person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, a law enforcement official shall order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be apprehended and impounded by law enforcement, and after ten (10) days may have the animal humanely destroyed. If such animal is returned, the owner shall pay the cost of impoundment. This section does not apply if any police service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the performance of its duties has bitten a person.
(Ord. 734 – Jan-04 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.14 CONTAINED ANIMALS: IMPOUNDMENT. Anyone keeping, sheltering or harboring a bothersome, interfering, annoying, or disturbing animal in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor and continuing violation of said sections may result in the impoundment and disposition of such animals as provided herein.
55.15 AT LARGE ANIMALS: IMPOUNDMENT. (Repealed by Ord. 734 – Jan-04 Supp.)
55.16 DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS. When an animal has been apprehended and impounded, written notice shall be provided to the owner within two (2) days of impoundment provided the owner’s name and current address can reasonably be determined by accessing a tag or other device that is on or part of the animal. Impounded animals may be redeemed by the owner only upon providing the impoundment facility a written release from the Glenwood Police Department that all impoundment costs and fees have been fully paid, and if the animal is a dog which is not vaccinated, by having the animal immediately vaccinated. Should the owner fail to redeem the animal within seven (7) days of the commencement of the impoundment, the animal shall be disposed in accordance with law or destroyed by euthanasia. If the animal is euthanized, the owner of the animal shall pay a forty dollar ($40.00) euthanasia fee to the Glenwood Police Department. Any dog or cat shall be properly sterilized before ownership may be transferred by way of sale or adoption.
(Ord. 864 – Mar. 15 Supp.)
55.17 IMPOUNDING COSTS. Impounding costs shall be sixty dollars ($60.00) for each impoundment during any calendar year for the first day, or any part thereof, and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day thereafter while the animal is impounded. No animal shall be impounded for more than seven (7) days unless the animal has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of §§54.04 and 55.13 of the Code of Ordinances and in sole discretion of the Glenwood Police Department. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the impoundment costs for an animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of §§54.04 and 55.13 of the Code of Ordinances shall be $350.00, payable to the Glenwood Police Department by or on behalf of owner.
(Ord. 864 – Mar. 15 Supp.)
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 272 -
55.18 ADOPTION COSTS. (Repealed by Ord. 734 – Jan-04 Supp.)
55.19 LICENSE REQUIRED – EXCEPTION. All dogs six months old or older kept, harbored or maintained by their owners in the City shall be licensed annually by their owners as provided in this chapter, and it is unlawful for the owner of any dog to fail to properly license the animal except that the following dogs need not be licensed provided they are properly immunized against rabies:
1. Dogs which are kept and raise solely for the bona fide purpose of sale and which are kept under constant restraint in a kennel pursuant to Chapter 162 of the Iowa Code, i.e. “Kennel Dogs”;
2. Guide dogs, owned by a blind or partially sighted person, and specifically trained to aid such person;
3. Dogs that are under the control of the owner or handlers, and which are in transit or are to be exhibited if they are to be within the City for less than thirty (30) days;
4. Service dogs specially trained, maintained and owned for the primary purpose of assisting a physically disabled person with daily living activities necessary to sustain a normal quality of life.
55.20 LICENSE APPLICATION – PROCEDURE AND FEES.
1. The owner of a dog for which a license is required shall on or before July 1st of each year apply to the Glenwood Police Department for a license for each dog owned by owner.
2. Such application shall be in writing on forms provided by the Glenwood Police Department and shall state the breed, sex, age, color, markings and name, if any, of the dog, and the name, address and telephone number of the owner, and be signed by the owner.
3. Before a license is issued for any dog, the owner must present evidence with the application that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies. Such evidence shall be a certificate of vaccination signed by a licensed veterinarian, and the certificate shall show that the vaccination is valid for a minimum of thirty (30) days from the date the license is purchased.
4. The annual license fee for each dog shall be $10.00.
5. All licenses shall expire on June 30 of the following year in which the license was issued.
6. The annual license fee shall become delinquent on July 31 of the year in which the same is due and payable as required in this section, and shall be considered delinquent thirty days after such animal has come into the possession of the owner or reached six months of age; and a penalty of $10.00 shall be added to the cost of each unpaid license fee on and after such date.
(Ord. 845 – Aug. 11 Supp.)
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 273 -
55.21 TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP. When the permanent ownership of a dog is transferred, the new owner shall within ten working days from the date of change of ownership make application for a new license as provided under the provisions of this section and shall pay the annual fee. It is unlawful for the new owner of any dog to fail to make application for a new license within the time herein specified.
55.22 TAGS DISPLAYED. Upon an application and payment of the license fee, a license certificate shall be issued to the owner. The tag shall have stamped thereon the number corresponding with the number on the license certificate. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a substantial collar or harness to which the license tag shall be affixed, and the owner shall see that the collar or harness bearing the license tag is constantly worn. It is unlawful for an owner to fail to insure that the license tag is at all times worn by the dog and any dog found not wearing a license tag shall be deemed not to be licensed and not have a current rabies vaccination and shall be treated as unlicensed and unvaccinated under the terms of the City and State laws.
(Ord. 869 – Sep. 16 Supp.)
55.23 DUPLICATE TAG. Upon filing of an affidavit with the Glenwood Police Department that a license tag has been lost or destroyed, the owner may obtain another tag upon the payment of a $5.00 fee.
(Ord. 845 – Aug. 11 Supp.)
(Sections 55.19 – 55.23 added by Ord. 689 – May 02 Supp.)
55.24 TRANSPORTATION FEES. The owner of any dog, cat or other animal apprehended, impounded or confined in accord with this Chapter or Chapter 54 of the City Code of Ordinances and subsequently transported by or on behalf of the City for extermination, adoption or other disposition outside the Glenwood city limits shall be assessed a transportation fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for each such animal transported.
(Ord. 864 – Mar. 15 Supp.)
55.25 SCHEDULED VIOLATION. Any person owning, possessing or maintaining a dog which has not been duly licensed or which does not display a tag in accord with Sections 55.19 through 55.22 shall be assessed a $50.00 municipal infraction penalty.
(Ord. 845 – Aug. 11 Supp.)
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 274 -
55.26 UNHEALTHFUL OR UNSANITARY CONDITIONS.
1. An owner shall keep all structures, pens, coops or yards wherein animals are confined clean, devoid of vermin and free of odors arising from feces.
2. No owner of any animal, or person in possession thereof, shall permit the animal to discharge feces upon any public or private property, other than the property of the owner of the animal. The owner or person in possession shall be deemed to permit the animal’s discharge of feces if the owner does not immediately thereafter take steps to remove and clean up the feces from the property.
3. All feces removed as aforesaid shall be placed in an airtight container and shall be stored in a sanitary manner in an appropriate refuse container until it is removed pursuant to refuse collection procedures or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner.
4. An owner may, as an alternative to subsection 3 above, collect the feces and turn it under the surface of the owner’s soil in any manner that prevents odor or collection of vermin.
(Ord. 764 – Sep. 05 Supp.)
55.27 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. Any fees incurred by or on behalf of the City as a result of impoundment, transportation, vaccination, or sterilization shall be immediately due and payable by the “Owner” of the animal as defined in §55.01. Failure to pay the fees as required by the terms of this Chapter may result in the issuance of a municipal infraction citation to said owner wherein the City shall seek reimbursement of said costs incurred on behalf of the Owner’s animal and a monetary fine in accord with §4.03 of the City Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 864 – Mar. 15 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 275 -
CHAPTER 56
CHICKENS WITHIN COPORATE LIMITS
56.01 Definitions
56.06 Disposal of Refuse
56.02 Permit Required
56.07 Distance from Dwellings
56.03 Permit Fee
56.08 Storage and Use and Maintenance
56.04 Revocation of Permit
56.09 Penalty
56.05 Nontransferable
56.10 Termination of Chapter
56.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
1. “Chickens” mean the domestic type of fowl birds kept for their eggs and meat, and shall apply only to those fowl birds with the common characteristics of chickens rather than other types of fowl.
2. “Owner” means any person or persons, firm, association, or corporation owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring fowl chickens.
3. “Owner” or “person or entity in lawful possession and control of any premises” means the fee title owner of any property or premises, or the person or entity in actual possession or control of such premises under a lease or real estate contract.
4. “Rear yard” means that space of a lot as defined in Section 166.28 of the City of Glenwood Land Development Ordinance, as from time to time may be amended.
5. “Director of compliance” or “director” means the person or persons authorized by the City to monitor and enforce the provisions of this chapter. In absence of any particular appointment by the City, the Code Enforcement Officer shall be considered the director of compliance for purposes of this chapter.
56.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. No person, firm, association or corporation in the City of Glenwood shall have in their possession or control, or keep or harbor any chickens, as defined in Section 1, without having first obtained a permit to do so from the director, which permit shall be issued only after payment of the required fee and after inspection of the premises by the director for compliance with this chapter, and the sanitation requirements of this chapter or any other applicable state or local law. No permits for the keeping or harboring of any fowl other than chickens shall be issued. Except as otherwise provided herein, a permit for the keeping of chickens shall be in effect for one year from the date of its issuance.
CHAPTER 56 CHICKENS WITHIN COPORATE LIMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 276 -
Application for such permits shall be made upon forms furnished by the City.
2. Upon expiration, such permit may be renewed by any person, firm, association or corporation to whom it has been issued, by filing an application for a renewal thereof with the director upon forms to be provided by the city. Approval of the application for renewal of a permit shall be made and the permit issued for the succeeding annual period only after payment of the required fee and after inspection of the premises for compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and the sanitation requirements of this chapter or any other applicable state or local law. Except as otherwise provided herein, every permit so renewed shall be for one year from and after the date of the renewal, and shall be subject to revocation in the same manner as the original permit.
3. Permits may be issued only to owners of any premises or persons or entities in lawful possession of any premises with the written consent of the owner of said premises, and only for premises consisting of single family, detached dwellings located in residentially zoned districts within the city corporate limits.
4. Upon issuance of a permit, the owner is deemed to have provided the Director, or his or her designee, the authority and right to enter upon the premises at his or her discretion for the purpose of inspecting the premises for compliance with this chapter.
56.03 PERMIT FEE. The fee for the initial issuance and any renewal of a permit for the keeping of chickens shall be as provided in the City’s prevailing schedule of fees as adopted by the City Council from time to time by resolution. The fee shall not be refundable if the permit is denied or revoked, or if the chickens are removed or die.
56.04 REVOCATION OF PERMIT. The Director may revoke a permit for the keeping of chickens for any violation of the provisions of this chapter, or any other pertinent sections of this municipal code, or any statute of the state of Iowa pertaining to the keeping of chickens. Notice of revocation shall be given in writing, delivered personally or by certified mail to the holder of such permit. The notice shall state the grounds upon which the permit has been revoked, and shall state that the holder of the permit is required to remove all chickens from the premises concerned within seven (7) days after receipt of notice of revocation. The notice shall also inform the permit holder of the right to appeal such revocation to the City Council.
CHAPTER 56 CHICKENS WITHIN COPORATE LIMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 277 -
56.05 NONTRANSFERABLE. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be sold, assigned, or transferred, and shall apply only to the premises designated and the person, firm, association or corporation to whom issued. A violation of this provision shall be cause for revocation of any such permit.
56.06 DISPOSAL OF REFUSE. All manure and spilled grain shall be removed from the premises, or any enclosure or structure thereon, at least once every forty-eight (48) hours, and shall be placed in suitable watertight and fly-tight containers until disposed. Such materials shall be disposed by causing same to be picked up by a licensed private refuse hauler.
56.07 DISTANCE FROM DWELLING.
1. No person within the city of Glenwood, Iowa, shall keep, shelter, harbor, or coop any chickens within eighty (80) feet of any dwelling other than the dwelling of the owner of such fowl chickens.
2. If the owner of the chickens is able to obtain the written consent of the owner and occupant of an effected dwelling, the eighty (80) foot requirement may be waived as to that dwelling, so long as the owner and occupant of said dwelling continues to consent to said waiver, and continues to reside in said dwelling.
3. Under no circumstances shall chickens be permitted to be kept within twenty (20) feet of any dwelling.
56.08 STORAGE AND USE AND MAINTENANCE
1. All grains and grain supplements intended for use as food for chickens shall be kept and stored in a rodent-tight building or container.
2. No owner or person in lawful possession and control of the premises shall keep, shelter, or harbor more than five (5) hens at a single residential dwelling.
3. No owner shall slaughter, maim, or other intentionally kill within the corporate limits any of its permitted chickens. Any chicken which may die within corporate limits shall be immediately removed from the city limits and disposed by the owner in a hygienic and safe manner.
4. All chickens permitted by the chapter shall be continuously housed or stored in a secure screened or walled and roofed enclosure, coop, shelters, and/or run in a manner that reasonably protects the chickens from predators, and of all of which shall be located entirely within the rear yard of the permitted premises. All such enclosures, coops, or shelters shall be not less than three (3) square feet in size per chicken provided such enclosure, coop, or shelter has a run, and such enclosure, coop, or shelter shall not exceed five (5) feet by five (5) feet,
CHAPTER 56 CHICKENS WITHIN COPORATE LIMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 278 -
or twenty-five (25) feet in total diameter; otherwise said enclosure, coop, or shelter shall be not less than ten (10) feet by five (5) feet, or fifty (50) feet in total diameter. No part of any such enclosure, coop, shelter, or run shall be located within eighty (80) feet of any dwelling or as otherwise set forth in Section 7 of this chapter. The materials utilized in the construction of the enclosure, coop, shelter, or run shall be subject to the approval of the director and shall be located in compliance with the applicable rear and side lot line restrictions.
5. All enclosures, coops, or shelters shall have a roost for each fowl chicken not less than eight (8) square inches.
6. All enclosures, coops, or shelters shall have not less than one (1) laying box for every three (3) chickens of which each laying box shall not be less than one (1) square foot in diameter. Each laying box shall be dressed with adequate and proper bedding materials.
7. No owner shall allow, whether knowingly or unknowingly, any chickens to run at large or otherwise outside of the enclosure, coop, shelter, or run for which the chickens are housed or stored.
56.09 PENALTY. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or any legal entity found guilty of a violation of any of the provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty provisions of a municipal infraction. Each day that a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. Any owner is deemed violating of this chapter by the City or the Director shall immediately have its permit revoked and shall be prohibited from receiving another permit for a minimum period of twelve (12) months after revocation of the permit.
56.10 TERMINATION OF CHAPTER. (Repealed by Ord. 883 – Mar. 18 Supp.)
(Ch. 56 - Ord. 871 – Oct. 16 Supp.)
[The next page is 291]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 291 -
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
60.01 Title
60.05 Traffic Accidents: Reports
60.02 Definitions
60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement
60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic
60.01 TITLE. Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as the Glenwood Traffic Code.”
60.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law, such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following meanings:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
1. “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including the following designated streets:
2. “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
3. “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
4. “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business.
5. “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway for a distance of two hundred (200) feet in either direction from a school house.
6. “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 292 -
7. “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
8. “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control sign or signal.
9. “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in the business, school or residence districts.
10. “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
11. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or alley.
60.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor vehicles and law of the road are enforced by the ________________________.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
60.04 POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC. A peace officer, and, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the fire department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 293 -
60.05 TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: REPORTS. The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273 & 321.274)
60.06 PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY. A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or other manifest of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the vehicle. (Ord. 636 - Sep. 98 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07 OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
CHAPTER 60 ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 294 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 297 -
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
62.01 Violation of Regulations
62.07 Tampering with Vehicle
62.02 Play Streets Designated
62.08 Eluding or Attempting to Elude Pursuing Law
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks
Enforcement Vehicle
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle
62.09 Obstructing View at Intersections
62.05 Quiet Zones
62.10 Reckless Driving
62.06 Funeral or Other Processions
62.11 Careless Driving
62.12 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
62.01 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS. Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of a peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or who fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in violation of this section. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by reference and are as follows:
1. Display of Registration and License to Drive: 321.17, 321.32, 321.37, 321.38, 321.57, 321.67, 321.78, 321.79, 321.91, 321.98, 321.99, 321.104, 321.115, 321.174, 321.174A, 321.180, 321.180B, 321.193, 321.194, 321.208A, 321.216, 321.216B, 321.216C and 321.218 through 321.224.
2. All Terrain Vehicles, Golf Carts, and Bicycles to Obey Traffic Regulations, Radar Jamming Devices, Road Workers: 321.232 through 321.234A, 235A and 321.247.
3. Traffic Signs, Signals, and Markings: 321.259 and 321.260.
4. Accidents and Accident Reporting: 321.262 through 321.266.
5. Operation of Motorcycles and Motorized Bicycles: 321.275.
6. Drag Racing; Speed; Open Containers; Control of Vehicle: 321.276, 321.277, 321.277A, 321.278, 321.281, 321.284, 321.284A, 321.288, 321.295, 321.333, 321.382 and 321.383.
7. Driving on Right, Meeting, Overtaking, Following, or Towing: 321.297 through 321.299 and 321.302 through 321.310.
8. Turning and Starting, Signals on Turning and Stopping: 321.312 through 321.318.
9. Right-of-Way: 321.319 through 321.324A.
10. Pedestrian Rights and Duties and Safety Zones: 321.329, 321.330, 321.332, 321.333, and 321.340.
11. Railroad Crossings: 321.341 through 321.344 and 321.344B.
12. Stopping, Standing, Parking: 321.354 and 321.359.
13. Unattended Vehicle, Obstructing Driver’s View, Crossing Median, Following Fire Apparatus, or Crossing Fire Hose, and Putting Glass, Etc., on Streets: 321.362 through 321.365 and 321.367 through 321.371.
14. School Buses: 321.372.
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 298 -
15. Lighting Equipment Required and Time of Use: 321.384 through 321.390, 321.392 through 321.395, 321.398, 321.402 through 321.405, 321.408, 321.409, 321.415, 321.417 through 321.423. In accordance with authorization granted by Section 321.395, Code of Iowa, motor vehicles parked upon any street where permitted by this chapter need not display required lights where there is sufficient light emitted from City street lights to reveal any person or object within a distance of five hundred (500) feet upon such street.
16. Brakes, Horns, Sirens, Mufflers, Wipers, Mirrors, Tires, Flares, Windows, Safety Belts, and Special Markings for Transporting Explosives: 321.430 through 321.434; 321.436 through 321.442; 321.444 through 321.446, 321.449 and 321.450.
17. Size, Weight, and Load: 321.454 through 321.458, 321.460 through 321.463, 321.465 and 321.466.
18. Unsafe Vehicles: 321.381 and 321.381A.
(Ord. 838 – Oct. 10 Supp.)
62.02 PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED. The Police Chief shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except at a driveway.
62.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLE. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for their accommodation. No person shall ride on the running board of a motor vehicle or in any other place not customarily used for
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 299 -
carrying passengers. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05 QUIET ZONES. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06 FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION. No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion. This provision does not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or peace officers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[3])
62.07 TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE. It is unlawful for any person, either individually or in association with one or more other persons, willfully to injure or tamper with any vehicle or break or remove any part or parts of or from a vehicle without the consent of the owner.
62.08 ELUDING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE PURSUING LAW ENFORCEMENT VEHICLE. No driver of a motor vehicle shall willfully fail to bring the motor vehicle to a stop or otherwise elude or attempt to elude a marked official law enforcement vehicle driven by a uniformed peace officer after being given a visual or audible signal to stop and in doing so exceed the speed limit by twenty-five (25) miles per hour or more. The signal given by the peace officer shall be by flashing red light or siren.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.279)
62.09 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS. It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other object to obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such obstruction shall be deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.10 RECKLESS DRIVING. No person shall drive any vehicle in such manner as to indicate a willful or a wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.277)
CHAPTER 62 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 300 -
62.11 CARELESS DRIVING. No person shall intentionally operate a motor vehicle on a street or highway in any one of the following ways:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.277A)
1. Creating or causing unnecessary tire squealing, skidding or sliding upon acceleration or stopping.
2. Simulating a temporary race.
3. Causing any wheel or wheels to unnecessarily lose contact with the ground.
4. Causing the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway.
(Ord. 624)
62.12 OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
1. Drivers. A driver of a motor vehicle upon a public street or highway shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an open or unsealed bottle, can, jar, or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284)
2. Passengers. A passenger in a motor vehicle upon a public street or highway shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an open or unsealed bottle, can, jar or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284A)
As used in this section “passenger area” means the area of a motor vehicle designed to seat the driver and passengers while the motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in their seating positions, including the glove compartment. An open or unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported in the trunk of the motor vehicle. An unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage may be transported behind the last upright seat of the motor vehicle if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk.
(Ord. 648 – Nov. 99 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 301 -
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
63.01 General
63.08 Special Speed Restrictions
63.02 Business District
63.09 Special 10 MPH Speed Zones
63.03 Residence or School District
63.10 (Repealed by Ordinance No. 590)
63.04 Suburban District
63.11 Special 35 MPH Speed Zones
63.05 Parks, Cemeteries and Parking Lots
63.12 Special 25 MPH Speed Zones
63.06 Minimum Speed
63.13 Special 20 MPH Speed Zones
63.07 Emergency Vehicles
63.14 Special Construction Zone Speed Limitations
63.01 GENERAL. Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02 BUSINESS DISTRICT. A speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour in the business district, unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285 [1])
63.03 RESIDENCE OR SCHOOL DISTRICT. A speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour in any school or residence district, unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285 [2])
63.04 SUBURBAN DISTRICT. A speed in excess of forty-five (45) miles per hour in any suburban district, unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285 [4])
63.05 PARKS, CEMETERIES AND PARKING LOTS. A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in any public park, cemetery or parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.06 MINIMUM SPEED. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
CHAPTER 63 SPEED REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 302 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
63.07 EMERGENCY VEHICLES. The speed limitations set forth in this chapter do not apply to authorized emergency vehicles when responding to emergency calls and the drivers thereof sound audible signal by bell, siren or whistle. This provision does not relieve such driver from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.231)
63.08 SPECIAL SPEED RESTRICTIONS. In accordance with requirements of the Iowa State Department of Transportation, or whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that any speed limit herein set forth is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
63.09 SPECIAL 10 MPH SPEED ZONES. A speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
1. Lake Park Road from Lake Drive to Old Highway 34.
2. Soccer Complex Road (Ord. 651 – Nov. 99 Supp.)
3. Louise Avenue from East Florence Street to Shelby Lane.
(Ord. 785 – Nov. 06 Supp.)
63.10 SPECIAL 30 MPH SPEED ZONES. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 590)
63.11 SPECIAL 35 MPH SPEED ZONES. A speed in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
1. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 849 – Jun. 12 Supp.)
2. Locus Street from Hazel Street to Coolidge Street.
3. Locust Street from Second Street to north corporate limits.
4. Sharp Street from Chestnut Street to the east corporate limits.
(Ord. 559)
CHAPTER 63 SPEED REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 303 -
63.12 SPECIAL 25 MPH SPEED ZONES. A speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour is unlawful in any of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
1. Sharp Street and East Sharp Street from Vine Street to Redbud Avenue.
2. Redbud Avenue from East Sharp Street north to corporate limits.
(Ord. 822 – Jan. 10 Supp.)
3. Railroad Avenue. (Ord. 849 – Jun. 12 Supp.)
63.13 SPECIAL 20 MPH SPEED ZONES. A speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour is unlawful in any of the following designated streets or parts thereof:
1. Coolidge Street from Grove Street to Hazel Street.
(Ord. 777 – Jun. 06 Supp.)
63.14 SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION ZONE SPEED LIMITATIONS. Speed in excess of the posted speed limit in a marked construction zone is unlawful. All fines for speeding in a construction zone shall double in sum.
(Ord. 831 – Oct. 10 Supp.)
CHAPTER 63 SPEED REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 304 -
[The next page is 309]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 311 -
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
65.01 Through Streets - Stop
65.06 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
65.02 Stop Required
65.07 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.03 Four-Way Stop Intersections
65.08 Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks
65.04 Yield Required
65.09 Official Traffic Controls
65.05 School Stops
65.01 THROUGH STREETS - STOP. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop, unless a yield is permitted by this chapter, before entering an intersection with the following designated through streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1. _______________________, from ________________________ to ____________________________;
2. _______________________, from ________________________ to ____________________________;
3. _______________________, from ________________________ to ____________________________;
4. _______________________, from ________________________ to ____________________________;
65.02 STOP REQUIRED. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1. ____________ Street. Vehicles traveling _________ on _________________________ shall stop at _____________________;
2. ____________ Street. Vehicles traveling _________ on _________________________ shall stop at _____________________;
3. ____________ Street. Vehicles traveling _________ on _________________________ shall stop at _____________________;
4. ____________ Street. Vehicles traveling _________ on _________________________ shall stop at _____________________;
5. ____________ Street. Vehicles traveling _________ on _________________________ shall stop at _____________________;
65.03 FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following designated four-way stop intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 312 -
1. Intersection of _______________ and __________________;
2. Intersection of _______________ and __________________;
3. Intersection of _______________ and __________________;
4. Intersection of _______________ and __________________.
65.04 YIELD REQUIRED. Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1. ______________ Street. Vehicles traveling _______ on ____________________ shall yield at _________________;
2. ______________ Street. Vehicles traveling _______ on ____________________ shall yield at _________________;
3. ______________ Street. Vehicles traveling _______ on ____________________ shall yield at _________________;
4. ______________ Street. Vehicles traveling _______ on ____________________ shall yield at _________________;
5. ______________ Street. Vehicles traveling _______ on ____________________ shall yield at _________________;
65.05 SCHOOL STOPS. At the following school crossing zones every driver of a vehicle approaching said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point ten (10) feet from the approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
1. Intersection of ______________ and ____________________;
2. Intersection of ______________ and ____________________;
3. Intersection of ______________ and ____________________;
65.06 STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK. The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 313 -
22. Fourth Street. Vehicles traveling on Fourth Street shall stop at Myrtle Street.
23. Timberlane. Vehicles traveling south on Timberlane shall stop at Fairview Drive.
24. Fairview Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Fairview Drive shall stop at Linn Street.
25. Fairview Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Fairview Drive shall stop at the County Road.
26. Valleyway Drive. Vehicles traveling south on Valleyway Drive shall stop at Fairview Drive.
27. Railroad Avenue. Vehicles traveling southwest on Railroad Avenue shall stop at the intersection of Hazel Street and Railroad Avenue. (Ord. 755 – Nov. 04 Supp.)
28. Hazel Street. Vehicles traveling on Hazel Street shall stop at Arnold Street.
29. Hazel Street. Vehicles traveling on Hazel Street shall stop at Green Street.
30. Hazel Street. Vehicles traveling on Hazel Street shall stop at Coolidge Street.
31. Hazel Street. Vehicles traveling on Hazel Street shall stop at First Street.
32. Hazel Street. Vehicles traveling on Hazel Street shall stop at Fourth Street.
33. Hazel Street. Vehicles traveling south on Hazel Street shall stop at Third Street.
34. Ebaugh Street. Vehicles traveling northeasterly on Ebaugh Street shall stop at Arnold Street.
35. Townsend Street. Vehicles traveling on Townsend Street shall stop at Hazel Street.
36. Grove Street. Vehicles traveling south on Grove Street shall stop at Townsend Street.
37. Grove Street. Vehicles traveling on Grove Street shall stop at Green Street.
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 314 -
38. Grove Street. Vehicles traveling north on Grove Street shall stop at Third Street.
39. Grove Street. Vehicles traveling on Grove Street shall stop at Fourth Street.
40. Grove Street. Vehicles traveling on Grove Street shall stop at Fifth Street.
41. Grove Street. Vehicles traveling on Grove Street shall stop at Coolidge Street.
42. Nuckolls Street. Vehicles traveling on Nuckolls Street shall stop at Hazel Street.
43. Green Street. Vehicles traveling on Green Street shall stop at Hazel Street.
44. Tyson Street. Vehicles traveling west on Tyson Street shall stop at Hazel Street.
45. Tyson Street. Vehicles traveling on Tyson Street shall stop at Vine Street.
46. Myrtle Street. Vehicles traveling on Myrtle Street shall stop at First Street.
47. Myrtle Street. Vehicles traveling on Myrtle Street shall stop at Third Street.
48. Myrtle Street. Vehicles traveling on Myrtle Street shall stop at Fifth Street.
49. Myrtle Street. Vehicles traveling on Myrtle Street shall stop at Fourth Street.
50. Second Street. Vehicles traveling on Second Street shall stop at Myrtle Street.
51. Fifth Street. Vehicles traveling on Fifth Street shall stop at Hazel Street.
52. Fifth Street. Vehicles traveling on Fifth Street shall stop at Myrtle Street.
53. Glenbrook Drive. Vehicles traveling south on Glenbrook Drive shall stop at Sixth Street.
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 315 -
54. Tenth Street. Vehicles traveling east on Tenth Street shall stop at Linn Street.
55. Sharp Street. Vehicles traveling on Sharp Street shall stop at Myrtle Street.
56. Eleventh Street. Vehicles traveling west on Eleventh Street shall stop at Linn Street.
57. Elm Street. Vehicles traveling north on Elm Street shall stop at Sixth Street.
58. Pinehurst Circle. Vehicles traveling on Pinehurst Circle shall stop at Glenbrook Drive.
59. Hillcrest Avenue. Vehicles traveling southeasterly on Hillcrest Avenue shall stop at Glenbrook Drive.
60. Hillway Drive. Vehicles traveling on Hillway Drive shall stop at Fairview Drive.
61. Glenwood Heights Apartment Drive. Vehicles traveling on Glenwood Heights Apartment Drive shall stop at Ebaugh Street.
62. Iowa Street. Vehicles traveling on Iowa Street shall stop at Main Street.
63. Orchard Drive. Vehicles traveling on Orchard Drive shall stop at Main Street.
64. Northeast Elementary School Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Northeast Elementary School Drive shall stop at Linn Street.
65. East Florence Avenue. Vehicles traveling south on East Florence Avenue shall stop at Tenth Street.
66. Main Street. Vehicles traveling west on Main Street shall stop at Lacey Street.
67. Independence Street. Vehicles traveling north on Independence Street shall stop at Main Street.
68. Lacey Street. Vehicles traveling west on Lacey Street shall stop at Iowa Street.
69. Camp Road. Vehicles traveling north on Camp Road shall stop at Main Street.
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 316 -
70. Central Street. Vehicles traveling south on Central Street shall stop at Main Street.
71. Indian Hills. Vehicles traveling northwesterly on Indian Hills shall stop at Lacey Street.
72. Arnold Street. Vehicles traveling on Arnold Street shall stop at Hazel Street.
73. Chestnut Street. Vehicles traveling on Chestnut Street shall stop at the intersection of Chestnut Street and Nuckolls Street.
74. Nuckolls Street. Vehicles traveling on Nuckolls Street shall stop at the intersection of Nuckolls and Chestnut Streets.
75. Railroad Avenue. Vehicles traveling northeast on Railroad Avenue shall stop at Vine Street.
76. Third Street. Vehicles traveling east on Third Street shall stop at Linn Street.
77. Valley Street. Vehicles traveling east on Valley Street shall stop at Glenbrook Drive.
78. Eleventh Street. Vehicles traveling west on Eleventh Street shall stop at Linn Street. Vehicles traveling east on Eleventh Street shall stop at Timberlane. (Ord. 571)
79. Valleyway Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Valleyway Drive shall stop at Timberlane.
80. Fourth Street. Vehicles traveling east on Fourth Street shall stop at Elm Street.
81. Industrial Road. Vehicles traveling west on Industrial Road shall stop by Railroad Avenue. (Ord. 755 – Nov. 04 Supp.)
82. Glenbrook Drive. Vehicles traveling south on Glenbrook Drive shall stop at Valley Street.
83. Second Street. Vehicles traveling east on Second Street shall stop at Linn Street.
84. Second Street. Vehicles traveling on Second Street shall stop at Chestnut Street.
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 317 -
85. Intersection of alley with Coolidge between Walnut Street and Locust Street. Vehicles traveling south in the alley between Walnut Street and Locust Street shall stop at Coolidge. (Ord. 558 - Aug. 94 Supp.)
86. Woodlawn Avenue. Vehicles traveling southwest on Woodlawn Avenue shall stop at Glenbrook Drive.
87. Terrace Circle. Vehicles traveling southwest on Terrace Circle shall stop at Glenbrook Drive.
88. Birch Street. Vehicles traveling east on Birch Street shall stop at Glenbrook Drive. (Ord. 571 - Mar. 95 Supp.)
89. Elmwood Circle. Vehicles traveling north on Elmwood Circle shall stop at Valley Street. (Subsections 86-89 Ord. 563 - Sep. 94 Supp.)
90. Ridgeway Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Ridgeway Drive shall stop at Hillway Drive.
91. Hillway Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Hillway Drive shall stop at Valleyway.
92. Ridgeway Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Ridgeway Drive shall stop at Valleyway.
93. Industrial Road. Vehicles traveling west on Industrial Road shall stop at County Road.
94. Timberlane. Vehicles traveling southeasterly on Timberlane shall stop at County Road. (Subsection 90-94 Ord. 571 - Mar. 95 Supp.)
95. Hazel Street. Vehicles traveling south on Hazel Street shall stop at Fifth Street. (Ord. 597 - Jul. 96 Supp.)
96. Fourth Street. The vehicles traveling on Fourth Street shall stop at Chestnut Street. (Ord. 602 - Oct. 96 Supp.)
97. Crossway Street. The vehicles traveling westerly on Crossway Street shall stop at Valleyway Street. (Ord. 607 - Jan. 97 Supp.)
98. Crossway Street. The vehicles traveling easterly on Crossway Street shall stop at Timber Lane. (Ord. 607 - Jan. 97 Supp.)
99. Shamrock Circle. The vehicles exiting Shamrock Circle shall stop at Valley Street. (Ord. 611 - Jan. 97 Supp.)
100. A 2-way stop for north and south bound traffic on Walnut Street at 9th Street shall be posted by a School Representative 30 minutes before school starts to 30 minutes after school starts and also 30 minutes before school ends to 30 minutes after school ends.
(Ord. 616 - Apr. 97 Supp.)
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 318 -
101. Linn Street. Vehicles traveling north and south on Linn Street shall stop at Tenth Street and Linn Street Intersection.
(Ord. 628 - Dec. 97 Supp.)
102. Gateway Drive. Vehicles traveling northeast on Gateway Drive shall stop at the intersection of U.S. Highway 275.
(Ord. 628 - Dec. 97 Supp.)
103. Louise Avenue. Vehicles traveling east and west on Louise Avenue shall stop at the intersection of East Florence Avenue and Louise Avenue. (Ord. 690 – May 02 Supp.)
104. Walnut Street. Vehicles traveling north and south on Walnut Street shall stop at the intersection of West Florence Avenue and Walnut Street. (Ord. 709 – Nov. 02 Supp.)
105. Gateway Drive. Vehicles traveling northeasterly on Gateway Drive shall stop at Locust Street.
106. Woodlawn Avenue. Vehicles traveling northeasterly on Woodlawn Avenue shall stop at Locust Street.
107. Harolds Drive. Vehicles traveling northeasterly on Harolds Drive shall stop at Locust Street.
108. Hazel Street. Vehicles traveling north or south on Hazel Street shall stop at Locust Street.
109. Sixth Street. Vehicles traveling west on Sixth Street shall stop at Locust Street.
110. Fifth Street. Vehicles traveling east on Fifth Street shall stop at Locust Street.
111. Fourth Street. Vehicles traveling east or west on Fourth Street shall stop at Locust Street.
112. Third Street. Vehicles traveling east or west of Third Street shall stop at Locust Street.
113. Second Street. Vehicles traveling east or west on Second Street shall stop at Locust Street.
114. First Street. Vehicles traveling east or west on First Street shall stop at Locust Street.
115. Coolidge Street. Vehicles traveling east or west on Coolidge Street shall stop at Locust Street.
116. Tyson Street. Vehicles traveling east or west on Tyson Street shall stop at Locust Street.
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 319 -
117. Green Street. Vehicles traveling east on Green Street shall stop at Locust Street.
118. Nuckolls Streets. Vehicles traveling east or west on Nuckolls Street shall stop at Locust Street.
119. Townsend Street. Vehicles traveling east or west on Townsend Street shall stop at Locust Street.
120. Arnold Street. Vehicles traveling east on Arnold Street shall stop at Locust Street.
121. Ebaugh Street. Vehicles traveling southeasterly on Ebaugh Street shall stop at Locust Street.
(#105 – 121 – Ord. 726 – Jul. 03 Supp.)
122. First Street. Vehicles traveling east and west on First Street shall stop at Grove Street. (Ord. 763 – Sep. 05 Supp.)
123. Second Street. Vehicles traveling east and west on Second Street shall stop at Grove Street. (Ord. 763 – Sep. 05 Supp.)
124. Birch Street. Vehicles traveling east on Birch Street shall stop at Glenbrook Drive. (Ord. 776 – Jun. 06 Supp.)
125. Birch Street. Vehicles traveling southwest on Birch Street shall stop at Valley Street. (Ord. 776 – Jun. 06 Supp.)
126. Sivers Road. Vehicles traveling northerly on Sivers Road shall stop at 4th Street. (Ord. 848 –Jun. 12 Supp.)
127. Sivers Road. Vehicles traveling west on Sivers Road shall stop at intersection of 4th Street and Sivers Road. (Ord. 848 –Jun. 12 Supp.)
128. Sharp Street. Vehicles traveling east or west on Sharp Street shall stop at Elm Street. (Ord. 853 –Nov. 12 Supp.)
65.03 FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following designated four-way stop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1. Green Street and Hazel Street. All vehicles approaching the intersection of Green Street and Hazel Street shall stop before entering such intersection.
2. Linn Street and Fourth Street. All vehicles approaching the intersection of Linn Street and Fourth Street shall stop before entering such intersection.
3. Myrtle Street and Fourth Street. All vehicles approaching the intersection of Myrtle Street and Fourth street shall stop before entering such intersection.
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 320 -
4. Arnold Street and Hazel Street. All vehicles approaching the intersection of Arnold Street and Hazel Street shall stop before entering such intersection.
5. Hazel and Coolidge Street. All vehicles approaching the intersection of Hazel Street and Coolidge Street shall stop before entering the intersection. (Ord. 566 - Dec. 94 Supp.)
65.04 SPECIAL YIELD REQUIRED. Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1. Grove Street. Vehicles traveling southbound on Grove Street shall yield the right of way to east and west bound traffic traveling on Third Street. (Ord. 763 – Sep. 05 Supp.)
65.05 SCHOOL STOPS. At the following school crossing zones every driver of a vehicle approaching said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point ten (10) feet from the approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
1. Intersection of Linn Street at the Northeast Elementary School Drive.
2. Intersection of Vine Street and Ninth Street.
3. Intersection of Fairview Drive and Linn Street.
(#3 - Ord. 799 – Dec. 07 Supp.)
65.06 STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK. The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.07 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED. Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle.
65.08 YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS. Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to yield to a pedestrian
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 321 -
crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
65.09 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS. Every driver shall observe and comply with the directions provided by official traffic control signals at the following intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
1. Intersection of Sharp Street and Locust Street.
2. Intersection of Sharp Street and Walnut Street.
3. Intersection of Sharp Street and Vine Street
4. 148 feet north of 6th Street on Locust Street.
CHAPTER 65 STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 322 -
[The next page is 325]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 329 -
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED. Upon the following streets and alleys vehicular traffic, other than permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction when appropriate signs are in place.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [4])
1. 9th Street shall be westbound only from Vine Street to Walnut Street between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:45 p.m.
2. Vine Street shall be southbound only from 9th Street to 10th Street between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:45 p.m.
3. Sharp Street will be westbound only from Myrtle Street to Elm Street from 3:00 p.m. until 3:20 p.m. on all school days. (Ord. 572)
4. Vine Street shall be northbound only from school property line at the south end to East Florence Avenue from 7:50 a.m. to 8:15 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 3:10 p.m. on all school days. (Ord. 584)
5. The Sports Complex Road will be for one-way traffic commencing at the east entrance at all times. (Ord. 650 – Nov. 99 Supp.)
6. Myrtle Street shall be southbound only from First Street to Sharp Street for a period of two hours starting one hour before the commencement of the first West Elementary School period on all Glenwood Community District school days. (Ord. 872 – Oct. 16 Supp.)
CHAPTER 68 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 330 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 331 -
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
69.01 Park Adjacent to Curb
69.11 Parking Limited to One Hour
69.02 Park Adjacent to Curb - One-way Street
69.12 Parking Limited to Two Hours
69.03 Diagonal Parking
69.13 Parking Limited to Ten Minutes
69.04 Angle Parking - Manner
69.14 Parking Limited
69.05 Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal
69.15 Snow Emergency
69.06 Parking Prohibited
69.16 Fire Lanes
69.07 Handicapped Parking
69.17 Parking Signs Required
69.08 No Parking Zones
69.18 Controlled Access Facilities
69.09 Overnight Parking
69.19 Glenwood Library Parking
69.10 Truck Parking Limited
69.01 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.02 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB - ONE-WAY STREET. No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03 DIAGONAL PARKING. Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
1. First Street in the center and on the north and south sides from Walnut Street to Vine Street.
2. Vine Street on both sides from Sharp Street to Second Street.
3. Vine Street in the center from Sharp Street to First Street.
4. Sharp Street on both sides from Vine Street to Walnut Street.
5. Walnut Street on both sides from Sharp Street to First Street.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 332 -
6. Walnut Street on both sides with parallel parking in the center from Sharp Street to First Street.
7. Vine Street on the east side from Sharp Street to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet south of Sharp Street.
69.04 ANGLE PARKING - MANNER. Upon those streets or portions of streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle, or the load thereon, when parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into the roadway more than a distance of sixteen (16) feet when measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.05 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL. No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours or for any of the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale;
2. Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency;
3. Advertising. Displaying advertising;
4. Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly established market place or when so authorized or licensed under this Code of Ordinances.
69.06 PARKING PROHIBITED. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [5])
2. Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 333 -
3. Mailboxes. Within twenty (20) feet on either side of a mailbox which is so placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
4. Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [1])
5. Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [2])
6. Intersection. Within, or within ten (10) feet of an intersection of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [3])
7. Fire Hydrant. Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [4])
8. Stop Sign or Signal. Within ten (10) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [6])
9. Railroad Crossing. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [8])
10. Fire Station. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [9])
11. Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [10])
12. Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [11])
13. Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [13])
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 334 -
14. Theaters, Hotels and Auditoriums. A space of not to exceed fifty (50) feet is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theater, auditorium, hotel having more than twenty-five (25) sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people are being held, within which space, when clearly marked, no motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is necessary for such purpose. (Ord. 670 – Mar. 01 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
15. Public Alleys. In any public alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
16. Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
69.07 HANDICAPPED PARKING. The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of handicapped parking spaces:
1. Nonresidential Off-street Facilities. Nonresidential off-street parking facilities shall set aside handicapped parking spaces in accordance with the following:
A. Municipal off-street public parking facilities or an entity providing nonresidential parking in off-street public parking facilities shall provide not less than two percent (2%) of the total parking spaces in each parking facility as handicapped parking spaces, rounded to the nearest whole number of handicapped parking spaces. However, such parking facilities having ten (10) or more parking spaces shall set aside at least one handicapped parking space.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[3a])
B. An entity providing off-street nonresidential public parking facilities shall review the utilization of existing handicapped parking spaces for a one-month period not less than once every twelve months. If upon review, the average occupancy rate for handicapped parking spaces in a facility exceeds sixty percent (60%) during normal business hours, the entity shall provide additional handicapped parking spaces as needed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[3b])
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 335 -
C. An entity providing off-street nonresidential parking as a lessor shall provide a handicapped parking space to an individual requesting to lease a parking space, if that individual possesses a permanent handicapped identification device issued in accordance with Section 321L.2 of the Code of Iowa.
D. A new nonresidential facility in which construction has been completed on or after July 1, 1991, providing parking to the general public shall provide handicapped parking spaces as stipulated below:
TOTAL PARKING SPACES IN LOT
REQUIRED MINIMUM NUMBER OF HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES
10 to 25
1
26 to 50
2
51 to 75
3
76 to 100
4
101 to 150
5
151 to 200
6
201 to 300
7
301 to 400
8
401 to 500
9
501 to 1000
†
1001 and over
‡
† Two percent (2%) of total
‡ Twenty (20) spaces plus one for each 100 over 1000
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[3d])
2. Residential Buildings and Facilities. All public and private buildings and facilities, temporary and permanent, which are residences, and which provide ten (10) or more tenant parking spaces, excluding extended health care facilities, shall set aside at least one handicapped parking space as needed for each individual dwelling unit in which a handicapped person resides. Residential buildings and facilities which provide public visitor parking of ten (10) or more spaces shall designate handicapped parking spaces in the visitors parking area in accordance with the table contained in subsection (1)(D) of this section.
(IAC, 661-18.7[321L])
3. Business District. With respect to any on-street parking areas provided by the City within the business district, not less than two percent (2%) of the total parking spaces within each business district shall be designated as handicapped parking spaces.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[4a])
4. Other Spaces. Any other person may set aside handicapped parking spaces on the person’s property provided each parking space is
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 336 -
clearly and prominently designated as a handicapped parking space. No person shall establish any on-street handicapped parking spaces without first obtaining Council approval.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.5[3e])
5. Improper Use. The use of a handicapped parking space, located on either public or private property, by a motor vehicle not displaying a handicapped identification device, displaying such a device but not being used by a handicapped person, or are in violation of the rules adopted under Section 321L.8 of the Code of Iowa, constitutes improper use of a handicapped identification device, which is a misdemeanor, and is subject to a mandatory $100.00 fine.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
6. Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
A. A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A (1) of the Code of Iowa when utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
B. A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone which is properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A (1) of the Code of Iowa.
(Ord. 659 – Sep. 00 Supp.)
69.08 NO PARKING ZONES. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic control signal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Main Street on both sides from Iowa Street to east corporate limits.
2. Lacey Street on both sides from Iowa Street to the railroad underpass.
3. Lacey Street on the west side from Main Street to a point 750 feet north of Main Street.
4. Lacey Street on the east side from Main Street to a point 600 feet north of Main Street.
5. Lacey Street on the east side from Main Street to Camp Road.
6. Lacey Street on the west side from Main Street to Camp Road.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 337 -
7. Tenth Street on the south side from Vine Street to a point 225 feet east of East Florence Avenue.
8. Louise Avenue on the south side and east side from East Florence Avenue to the dead end including the cul-de-sac and on Louise Avenue on the north and west side from a point two hundred thirteen (213) feet east of East Florence to a point four hundred fifty-eight (458) feet east/northeast of East Florence. (Ord. 741 – Jul. 04 Supp.)
9. Camp Road on both sides from Lacey Street to Main Street.
10. Buckner Drive on both sides from Camp Road to Independence Street.
11. Independence Street on both sides from Buckner Drive to Lacey Street.
12. Iowa Street on both sides from Lacey Street to Main Street.
13. Central Street on both sides from Main Street to Lacey Street.
(Ord. 722 – May 03 Supp.)
14. Center Street on the north side from Walnut Street to the cul-de-sac.
15. West Florence Avenue on the north side from Walnut Street to Owen Avenue.
16. West Florence Avenue on the south side from Walnut Street to a point 40 feet east of Walnut Street.
17. West Florence Avenue on the northeast side from the southern to the northern intersection of West Florence Avenue and Walnut Street.
18. Fairview Drive on the south side from Linn Street to the County Road.
19. Fairview Drive on the north side from Hillway Drive to the County Road.
20. Fairview Drive on the north side from Valleyway to a point 120 feet west of Valleyway.
21. Fairview Drive on the north side from a point 350 feet east of Linn Street to a point 250 feet southwest of Timberlane.
22. Ridgeway Drive on the north side from Valleyway Drive to Hillway Drive.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 338 -
23. Valleyway Drive on the west side from Fairview Drive to Timberlane.
24. Hillway Drive on the south side from Valleyway Drive, east to the curve and on the west from the curve to Fairview Drive. (Ord. 573)
25. Hillway Drive on the east side from Fairview Drive to a point fifty (50) feet north. (Ord. 573)
26. Timberlane, On the west side from Fairview Drive to its intersection with Sivers Road. (Ord. 573)
27. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 569)
28. Crossway from Valleyway to Timberlane.
29. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 569)
30. Second Street on the north side from Grove Street to Myrtle Street.
31. Hazel Street from Locust Street to Arnold Street.
32. Hazel Street on the east side from Arnold Street to Coolidge Street.
33. Hazel Street on the west side from Coolidge Street to Second Street.
34. Hazel Street on the east side from Second Street to Fifth Street.
35. Hazel Street from Fifth Street to a point two hundred seventy-five (275) feet north of Fifth Street.
36. Hazel Street on the east side from Sharp Street to a point thirty (30) feet south. (Ord. 877 – Mar. 18 Supp.)
37. Third Street from Elm Street to Grove Street.
38. Third Street on the north side from Locust Street to Walnut Street.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 339 -
39. Fourth Street on the south side from the west corporate line to Sivers Road. (Ord. 829 – Aug. 10 Supp.)
40. Fifth Street on the north side from Elm Street to Locust Street.
41. Sixth Street on the south side from Elm Street to Grove Street.
42. Sixth Street on the south side from Locust Street to Walnut Street.
43. Sixth Street from Vine Street to Chestnut Street.
44. Sixth Street on the north side from Vine Street to a point fifty (50) feet west.
45. Ninth Street on the north side from Walnut Street to Vine Street.
46. Tenth Street on the north side from Vine Street to Linn Street.
47. Eleventh Street on the north side from Linn Street to Timberlane.
48. First Street on the south side from Elm Street to Park Avenue.
49. First Street from Elm Street to Grove Street.
50. First Street on the south side from Grove Street to Myrtle Street.
51. First Street on the south side from Hazel Street to Locust Street.
52. First Street on the south side from Chestnut Street to Linn Street.
53. First Street on the north side from Vine Street to Chestnut Street.
54. Sharp Street from the west City limits to Locust Street.
55. Sharp Street from Vine Street to the east City limits.
56. Coolidge Street on the north side from Elm Street to Locust Street.
57. Coolidge Street from Locust Street to Vine Street.
58. Tyson Street on the north side from Hazel Street to Locust Street.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 340 -
59. Tyson Street from Vine Street to Chestnut Street.
60. Nuckolls Street on the north side from Grove Street to Hazel Street.
61. Nuckolls Street on the south side of Locust Street to a point one hundred fifty (150) feet west.
62. Townsend Street on the south side from Bowman Avenue to Locust Street.
63. Arnold Street on the north side from Bowman Avenue to Locust Street.
64. Ebaugh Street on the east side from South Locust Street to Arnold Street. (Ord. 829 – Aug. 10 Supp.)
65. Park Avenue on the west side from Sharp Street to First Street.
66. Elm Street from Coolidge Street to Sixth Street.
67. Grove Street on he east side from Townsend Street to Green Street.
68. Grove Street on the east side from Coolidge Street to Sharp Street.
69. Grove Street on the west side from Sharp Street to a point sixty (60) feet south.
70. Grove Street from First Street to Second Street.
71. Grove Street on the east side from Second Street to Third Street and on the west side from Third Street to a point two hundred (200) feet south.
72. Grove Street from Fifth Street to Sixth Street.
73. Myrtle Street on the east side from Sharp Street to a point two hundred fifty (250) feet north of Fifth Street.
74. Locust Street from the south corporate limits to the north corporate limits. (Ord. 829 – Aug. 10 Supp.)
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 341 -
75. Walnut Street on the east side from Tyson Street to Sharp Street.
76. Walnut Street from Second Street to the north intersection of West Florence and continuing north on the east side to the circle.
77. Vine Street from Iowa Street to Coolidge Street.
78. Vine Street from Fourth Street to Tenth Street.
79. Chestnut Street on the east side from Arnold Street to Sharp Street.
80. Linn Street on the west side from Sharp Street to First Street.
(Ord. 573)
81. Linn Street on the east side from Sharp Street to the City limits.
(Ord. 573)
82. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 569)
83. Linn Street on the west side from Fourth Street to the north corporate limits.
84. Sivers Road from Sharp Street to the City limits.
85. Indian Hills from Lacey Street to the west corporate limits.
86. Glenbrook Drive on the west side from Sixth Street to a point one hundred seventy (170) feet north of Hillcrest Avenue.
87. Glenbrook Drive on the east side from Pinehurst Circle to Terrace Circle, and on the north side from Terrace Circle to the turn and on the west side from the turn to Valley Street. (Ord. 573)
88. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 569)
89. Glenbrook Drive on the west side from a point one hundred forty (140) feet south of Woodlawn Avenue to a point three hundred ten (310) feet south of Woodlawn Avenue.
90. Hillcrest Avenue on the north and on the east sides from Glenbrook Drive to the dead end. (Ord. 573)
91. Hillcrest Avenue on the west side from a point two hundred (200) feet north of Glenbrook Drive to a point three hundred fifty (350) feet north of Glenbrook Drive.
92. Valley Street on the southwest side from Glenbrook Drive including the cul-de-sac to a point one hundred eighty (180) feet northwest of Birch Street. (Ord. 776 - Jun. 06 Supp.)
93. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 569)
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 342 -
94. Valley Street on the north side from Glenbrook Drive to a point one hundred sixty (160) feet west (Ord. 573)
95. Elmwood Circle from Valley Street to the cul-de-sac. (Ord. 573)
96. Pinehurst Circle from Glenbrook Drive to the cul-de-sac.
97. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 569)
98. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 569)
99. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 569)
100. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 569)
101. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 569)
102. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 569)
103. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 569)
104. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 569)
105. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 569)
106. Terrace Circle from Glenbrook Drive to the cul-de-sac.
107. Second Street on the north side from Linn Street to Chestnut Street.
108. Sixth Street from Elm Street west to center of Section 11, Township 72, Range 43 West of the 5th PM.
109. Linn Street from Fourth Street north to the north City limits.
110. The west side of Linn Street, from Fourth Street south, a distance of ninety (90) feet from the corner thereof. (Ord. 557)
111. The south side of Townsend Street between Chestnut Street and Linn Street. (Ord. 562 - Sep. 94 Supp.)
112. Walnut Street on the east side from Nuckolls Street to Townsend Street. (Ord. 578 - Aug. 95 Supp.)
113. East side of Woodlawn between U.S. Highway 275 and Glenbrook. (Ord. 589 - Dec. 95 Supp.)
114. Tyson Street on both sides from West right-of-way on Hazel Street West approximately 160 feet to East line of Section 14-72-43. (Ord. 593 - Feb. 96 Supp.)
115. Hazel Street on the West side from Fifth Street to a point sixty (60) feet South of the South curb line of Fifth Street.
(Ord. 598 - Jul. 96 Supp.)
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 343 -
116. Bowman Avenue on both sides from Arnold Street South to the dead end. (Ord. 610 - Jan. 97 Supp.)
117. Valleyway Street on the east side from Hillway Street to a point fifty (50) feet north of the north curb line of Hillway Street.
(Ord. 614 - Apr. 97 Supp.)
118. The east side of Ebaugh Street from the City limits to Arnold Street. (Ord. 621 - Sep. 97 Supp.)
119. Parking on the West side of Myrtle Street shall be allowed only from the intersection of Myrtle and Sharp Street, north to the intersection of Myrtle and First Street. No parking shall be allowed on the East side of Myrtle Street between the intersection of Myrtle Street and Sharp Street and the intersection of Myrtle Street and First Street.
(Ord. 626 - Nov. 97 Supp.)
120. On Myrtle Street from the intersection of First Street and Myrtle Street north to the intersection of Myrtle Street and Fourth Street; provided, however, that off street parking shall be allowed on the east side of Myrtle Street between First Street and Fourth Street with the exception of the 183 feet directly south of Fourth Street.
(Ord. 817 - Jan. 09 Supp.)
121. Between the signs on the curve on the east side of Glenbrook Drive from 176 feet north of Birch Street to 473 feet north of Birch Street. (Ord. 866 - Sep. 16 Supp.)
122. Shamrock Circle on the West side from Valley Street to a point 357 fee South. (Ord. 631 – Mar. 98 Supp.)
123. South side of Third Street from Hazel Street to Locust Street.
(Ord. 637 - Jan. 99 Supp.)
124. Linn Street 140 feet north of First Street on the west side.
125. Both sides of Fourth Street 276 feet west of Elm Street.
(Ord. 639 - Feb. 99 Supp.)
126. South side of Coolidge Street between Vine Street and Chestnut Street. (Ord. 646 - Nov. 99 Supp.)
127. The inside shoulder of Sports Complex Road, commencing from the east entrance. (Ord. 650 - Nov. 99 Supp.)
128. Walnut Street on the west side from First Street to a point 45 feet north.
129. First Street north side between Locust Street and Walnut Street from alley to a point 29 feet east of alley.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 344 -
130. First Street south side between Locust Street and Walnut Street from alley to a point 12 feet west of alley.
131. Second Street north side from Hazel Street to a point 180 feet west. (Ord. 673 – May 01 Supp.)
(Subsections 128 – 131 – Ord. 666 – Mar. 01 Supp.)
132. The west side of South Hazel Street between Townsend Street and Arnold Street. (Ord. 681 – Apr. 02 Supp.)
133. Tyson Street on south side from Vine Street to Chestnut Street.
(Ord. 695 – Jun. 02 Supp.)
134. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 708 – Nov. 02 Supp.)
135. Eleventh Street, both sides, from North Linn Street to Timber Lane. (Ord. 716 – Nov. 02 Supp.)
136. Glenbrook Drive on the west side from Woodlawn Avenue to a point sixty (60) feet south. (Ord. 741 – Jul. 04 Supp.)
137. North side of Third Street between Chestnut Street and Vine Street. (Ord. 742 – Jul. 04 Supp.)
138. Both sides of Tenth Street from East Florence west to Vine Street.
(Ord. 743 – Jul. 04 Supp.)
139. North side of Second Street from Locust to Hazel.
(Ord. 760 – Jun. 05 Supp.)
140. Birch Street on the north/northwest side from Glenbrook Drive to Valley Street. (Ord. 776 – Jun. 06 Supp.)
141. Birch Street on the south side starting at a point one hundred seventy-eight (178) feet east from Glenbrook Drive and going three hundred forty-eight (348) feet from Glenbrook Drive.
(Ord. 776 – Jun. 06 Supp.)
142. Birch Street on the south side from Glenbrook Drive to a point seventy (70) feet west. (Ord. 776 – Jun. 06 Supp.)
143. Birch Street on the south side from Valley Street to a point seventy (70) feet east. (Ord. 776 – Jun. 06 Supp.)
144. Fifth Street on the south side from 110 feet west of Locust Street to Locust Street. (Ord. 779 – Aug. 06 Supp.)
145. First Street on the south side from Park Avenue west four hundred (400) feet to the end of the public right-of-way. (Ord. 789 – Feb. 07 Supp.)
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 345 -
146. On the south side of the curve of East Florence Avenue from 155 feet west of Owen Avenue proceeding northwesterly then southerly for a total of two hundred sixty-five (265) feet. (Ord. 817 – Jan. 09 Supp.)
147. The north side of Fourth Street from Elm Street west to the corporate line. (Ord. 828 – Jan. 10 Supp.)
148. Chestnut Street on the west side from Fourth Street to Sixth Street. (Ord. 830 – Aug. 10 Supp.)
149. The east side of Grove Street from Green Street north to Coolidge Street.
150. The north side and the south side of Green Street from Grove Street west to the City of Glenwood’s west corporate line.
151. The west side of Hickory Ridge Drive, including the cul-de-sac.
152. The east side of Hickory Ridge Drive from Hilman Road and continuing southeast for six hundred (600) consecutive feet.
153. The south side of Hickory Ridge Lane.
(Subsections 149-153—Ord. 851 – Nov. 12 Supp.)
154. Each side of Industrial Road from Railroad Avenue for 430 feet east, including the cul-de-sac. (Ord. 863 – Nov. 14 Supp.)
155. Sixth Street on the north side from Grove Street to a point 50 feet west. (Ord. 866 – Sep. 16 Supp.)
156. Fourth Street on the north side from Elm Street to a point 35 feet east. (Ord. 877 – Mar. 18 Supp.)
157. Marian Avenue on the south side from Red Bud Avenue to the corporate line. (Ord. 878 – Mar. 18 Supp.)
69.09 OVERNIGHT PARKING.
1. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall park a vehicle on any of the following named streets for a period longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) a.m. and six o'clock (6:00) a.m. of any day: First Street from Locust Street to Vine Street; Sharp Street from Locust Street to Vine Street; Walnut Street from Second Street to Coolidge Street; and Vine Street from First Street to Sharp Street.
2. Except during snow emergencies when no vehicles shall be parked on the above-named referenced streets, overnight parking shall be allowed as follows: On the south side of Sharp Street from Walnut Street to the alley located immediately west of Walnut Street; on the east side of Walnut Street from Sharp Street to the alley located immediately
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 346 -
north of First Street; and on the west side of Vine Street from First street to Sharp Street.
3. The prohibitions provided in this section shall not apply to physicians or other persons on emergency call.
(Ord. 861 – May 14 Supp.)
69.10 TRUCK PARKING LIMITED. It is unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle, other than a light delivery truck, panel delivery truck, pickup, or passenger automobile as defined by the Code of Iowa, on any street or public alley within the City other than in areas zoned for light manufacturing, heavy manufacturing, general business zone, or heavy general business zone unless at the time said vehicle is so parked personal property is being loaded onto or is being unloaded from said truck.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
69.11 PARKING LIMITED TO ONE HOUR. It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than one hour between the hours of three o’clock (3:00) p.m. and six o’clock (6:00) p.m. on any day except Sunday upon the following designated streets.
1. Vine Street, on the east side, from eighty-three (83) feet south of Second Street to two hundred six (206) feet north of First Street.
69.12 PARKING LIMITED TO TWO HOURS. It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than two (2) hours between the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) p.m. on each day except Sunday upon the following designated streets:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
1. Sharp Street from Locust Street to Vine Street.
2. Vine Street from First Street to Sharp Street.
3. First Street on the north side from Locust Street to Vine Street.
4. First Street on the south side from Locust Street to Walnut Street.
5. First Street on the south side from Walnut Street to Vine Street.
6. Walnut Street on the west side from Sharp Street two hundred fifty (250) feet south. (Ord. 796 – Oct. 07 Supp.)
69.13 PARKING LIMITED TO TEN MINUTES. Except for Saturdays and Sundays, it is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than ten (10) minutes between the hours of seven-thirty (7:30) a.m. and four-thirty (4:30) p.m. on each day, upon the following designated streets and public parking areas:
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 347 -
1. Vine Street, on the east side, from Sharp Street to the Post Office drive.
2. (Repealed by Ord. 872 – Oct. 16 Supp.)
69.14 PARKING LIMITED. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following specifically designated no parking zones, except during time periods other than the periods posted, or when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic control signal.
1. Fourth Street, on the north side, from Locust Street to Sivers Road, from seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. to nine o’clock (9:00) a.m. and two o’clock (2:00) p.m. to four o’clock (4:00) p.m.
2. Vine Street, on the east side from the school property line at the south end to East Florence Avenue from twenty-five (25) minutes to the commencement of the school first period class and from fifteen (15) minutes prior to the end of the school last period class to ten (10) minutes after the end of the last school period on all school days; provided, however, that any standing or parking of a vehicle shall be strictly prohibited, as the exceptions outlined in this subsection shall be limited to the stopping of a vehicle for the sole purpose of loading and unloading children for transportation. (Ord. 872 – Oct. 16 Supp.)
3. Ninth Street, on the north side, from 7:50 a.m. to 8:15 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 3:10 p.m. on all school days.
4. Sharp Street, on the south side, from the intersection of Grove Street and Myrtle Street from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on all school days.
5. Linn Street, on the west side, from the intersection of First Street to Fourth Street from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
(Ord. 708 – Nov. 02 Supp.)
69.15 SNOW EMERGENCY.
1. When predictions or occurrences indicate the need, the Mayor may proclaim a snow emergency and the Police Chief shall inform the news media to publicize the proclamation. Such emergency may be extended or shortened when conditions warrant. Such a ban shall be of uniform application and the Police Chief is directed to publicize the requirements, using all available news media.
2. No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any public street or City-owned parking lot, other than designated overnight parking areas, during any snow emergency proclaimed by the
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 348 -
Mayor. The snow emergency parking ban shall continue from its proclamation through the duration of the snow or ice storm and the twenty-four (24) hour period after cessation of such, or until the snow is plowed or removed from such areas, whichever occurs sooner.
3. Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this section, the officer finding such vehicle shall made a reasonable effort to notify the party who can move the vehicle and, not succeeding, shall have the authority to have such vehicle towed at the owner’s expense.
69.16 FIRE LANES. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a fire lane as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236)
1. Fire Lanes Established. The Fire Chief may designate fire lanes on any private road or driveway where deemed necessary to assure access to property or premises by authorized emergency vehicles.
2. Signs and Markings. Wherever a fire lane has been designated, the Police Chief shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be placed identifying such fire lanes and the parking prohibition established by this section.
3. Exception. The provisions of this section do not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
69.17 PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED. Whenever by this chapter or any other section of this Code of Ordinances any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets or portions of streets it shall be the duty of the Police Chief to erect or cause to be erected appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. When the signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255 & 321. 256)
69.18 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES. Parking restrictions on controlled access facilities are as specified in Chapter 140 of this Code of Ordinances.
69.19 GLENWOOD LIBRARY PARKING. It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in the Glenwood Library parking lot situated on the east side of the Glenwood Library, located at 109 North Vine Street, unless such person utilizes the parking lot for the purpose of concurrently patronizing the Glenwood Library or to work or volunteer at the Glenwood Library.
(Ord. 818 – May 09 Supp.)
[The next page is 355]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 355 -
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
70.01 Arrest or Citation
70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations
70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate
70.06 Impounding Vehicles
70.01 ARREST OR CITATION. Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
1. Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person before a local magistrate, or
2. Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner of Public Safety and deliver the original and a copy to the court where the defendant is to appear, two copies to the defendant and retain the fifth copy for the records of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 & 321.485)
70.02 SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS. For violations of the Traffic Code which are designated by Section 805.8 of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 & 805.8A)
70.03 PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE. Admitted violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of Ordinances may be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the office of the City Clerk. The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) for all violations except improper use of a persons with disabilities parking (handicapped parking) permit. If such fine is not paid within thirty (30) days, it shall be increased by five dollars ($5.00). The simple notice of a fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities parking (handicapped parking) permit is one hundred dollars ($100.00). Failure to pay the simple notice of a fine shall be grounds for the filing of a complaint in District Court. (Ord. 730 – Aug. 03 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1a] & 321L.4[2])
70.04 PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED. When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
CHAPTER 70 TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 356 -
70.05 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING. In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that:
1. Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information was parked in violation of the Traffic Code, and
2. Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the registered owner at the time in question.
70.06 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES. A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
1. Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
2. Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
3. Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on parking during snow removal operations.
4. Parked Over Forty-eight Hour Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a continuous period of forty-eight (48) hours or more. A diligent effort shall first be made to locate the owner. If the owner is found, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
5. Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
[The next page is 361]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 361 -
CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
75.01 Purpose
75.05 Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles
75.02 Definitions
75.06 Negligence
75.03 General Regulations
75.07 Accident Reports
75.04 Operation of Snowmobiles
75.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized flotation-tire vehicle, with not less than three (3) and not more than six (6) low pressure tires, that is limited in engine displacement to less than one thousand (1,000) cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to less than one thousand (1,000) pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
2. “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control and that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain. “Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a certificate of title and registered for highway use under Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa, but which contains design features that enable operation over natural terrain. An operator of an off-road motorcycle is also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
3. “Off-road utility vehicle” means a motorized flotation-tire vehicle, with not less than four and not more than eight low-pressure tires, that is limited in engine displacement to less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to not more than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) pounds and that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control. An operator of an off-road utility vehicle is also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles. (Ord. 826 – Jan. 10 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND
SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 362 -
4. “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle weighing less than one thousand (1,000) pounds which uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a width of forty-eight (48) inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis or tread, and is designed for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-terrain vehicle which has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks or treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
(Ord. 800 – Dec. 07 Supp.)
75.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS. No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle or off-road utility vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their registration, equipment and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G & Ch. 321I)
(Ord. 800 – Dec. 07 Supp.)
75.04 OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES. The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:
1. Streets. Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets which have not been plowed during the snow season and on such other streets as may be designated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
2. Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only under the following circumstances:
A. Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
B. Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a prohibited street provided all of the following occur:
(1) The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
(2) The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the street;
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND
SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 363 -
(3) The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; and
(4) In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
3. Railroad Right-of-way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an operating railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
4. Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails except where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4 g])
5. Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City land without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.
6. Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is authorized by this chapter.
75.05 OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES. The operators of ATVs shall comply with the following restrictions as to where ATVs may be operated within the City:
1. Streets. ATVs and off-road utility vehicles may be operated on streets only in accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa or on such streets as may be designated by resolution of the Council for the operation of registered ATVs or registered off-road utility vehicles. In designating such streets, the Council may authorize ATVs and off-road utility vehicles to stop at service stations or convenience stores along a designated street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 & 3])
(Ord. 837 – Oct. 10 Supp.)
2. Trails. ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except where designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[3])
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND
SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 364 -
3. Railroad Right-of-way. ATVs shall not be operated on an operating railroad right-of-way. An ATV may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[h])
4. Parks and Other City Land. ATVs shall not be operated in any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of the City.
5. Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
75.06 NEGLIGENCE. The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile. The owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the owner’s consent to operate the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 & 321I.19)
75.07 ACCIDENT REPORTS. Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 & 321I.11)
(Ch. 75 – Ord. 744 - Nov. 04 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 369 -
CHAPTER 77
SKATEBOARDS, ROLLERSKATES AND SCOOTERS
77.01 Definitions
77.05 Staying to Right
77.02 Operation Prohibited
77.06 Nighttime Use
77.03 Use of Sidewalks
77.07 Special Penalty
77.04 Traffic Code Applies
77.08 Scheduled Violation
77.01 DEFINITIONS. As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined as:
1. “Skateboard” means a foot, motor or wind propelled vehicle consisting of a board equipped with two or more wheels, tandem and guided by the user or rider, standing on the same and pushing the same with foot power or operating with motor or wind power.
2. “Rollerskates” means skates with wheels instead of runners.
3. “Scooter” means a vehicle consisting of a narrow foot board mounted on two (2) wheels tandem, and guided by a handle attached to front wheel, which the operator stands with one foot on the foot board and pushes with the other.
77.02 OPERATION PROHIBITED. Skateboards, rollerskates and scooters are prohibited from public parks, and from streets and sidewalks within the corporate limits listed as follows:
1. Upon the streets and sidewalks of any Business District.
2. Upon the following streets:
A. Walnut Street.
B. Vine Street.
C. Sharp Street.
D. Locust Street.
E. Elm Street.
F. Fourth Street.
G. Third Street.
3. The following streets on the grounds of the Glenwood State Hospital School identified as follows:
A. Iowa Street
B. Main Street
C. Orchard Drive
CHAPTER 77 SKATEBOARDS, ROLLERSKATES AND SCOOTERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 370 -
D. Lacey Street
E. Central Street
F. Camp Road
G. Bockner Drive
H. Independence Street
I. Indian Hills Drive (Ord. 617)
77.03 USE ON SIDEWALKS. A person using a skateboard, rollerskates or scooter upon a sidewalk, where such use is not prohibited, shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
77.04 TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES. Every person operating a skateboard, rollerskates or scooter upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the State of Iowa, declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic code of the City, applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
77.05 STAYING TO RIGHT. Every person operating a skateboard, rollerskates or scooter upon the public roads shall stay as near as practicable to the right inside of the roadway, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or other vehicles proceeding in the same direction.
77.06 NIGHTTIME USE. No person shall operate a skateboard, rollerskates or scooter upon a public highway within the City at any time from sunset to sunrise or at such other times when conditions such as fog, snow, sleet or rain provide insufficient lighting to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet ahead.
77.07 SPECIAL PENALTY. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the standard penalty provided for violations of the Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s skateboard, rollerskates or scooter to be impounded by the City for not less than five (5) days for the first offense, ten (10) days for a second offense and thirty (30) days for a third offense.
77.08 SCHEDULED VIOLATION. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be assessed a municipal infraction penalty of $25.00 for a first offense, $50.00 for a second offense and $100.00 for a third and subsequent offenses. (Ord. 699 – Sep. 02 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 371 -
CHAPTER 78
GOLF CARTS
78.01 Purpose
78.04 Operation
78.02 Operations of Golf Carts Permitted
78.05 Motor Vehicle Law
78.03 Prohibited Streets and Other Restricted Areas
78.06 Golf Cart Insurance
of Operation
78.07 Violation and Penalty
78.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to permit the operation of golf carts on certain streets in the City of Glenwood, Iowa, as authorized by Section 321.247, Code of Iowa, as amended. This Chapter shall be applicable whenever a golf cart is operated on any street or alley, within the City as provided in this Chapter.
78.02 OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS PERMITTED. Golf carts may be operated upon the streets of Glenwood, Iowa, by persons possessing a valid Iowa operators license and at least eighteen (18) years of age, except as otherwise prohibited by this Chapter or the Code of Iowa.
78.03 PROHIBITED STREETS AND OTHER RESTRICTED AREAS OF OPERATION. Golf carts shall not be operated upon the City street which is a primary road extension through the City. Primary road extensions are those streets that are also a State Highway. Golf carts are also prohibited from traveling on the following streets within the City of Glenwood:
1. Sharp Street
2. Locust Street
78.04 OPERATION.
1. Traffic Code. Any person operating a golf cart, including those for which a City of Glenwood permit has been issued, shall adhere to all traffic signs and signals, and all other traffic rules and regulations and shall obey the orders and direction of any law enforcement officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or the direction of a fire department officer during a fire.
2. Speed. No golf cart shall be operated at a speed in excess of the lesser of 25 miles per hour or a posted speed limit, nor shall any golf cart be operated at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper for the existing conditions.
CHAPTER 78 GOLF CARTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 372 -
3. Trails. Golf carts shall not be operated on any recreational, bike or walking trails, unless the trail is specifically designed to allow use of motor vehicles.
4. Sidewalks. Golf carts shall not be operated upon sidewalks.
5. Parking. Golf carts shall not be operated upon that portion of a street right-of-way between the curb or edge of street paving and the sidewalk, referred to as “the parking.”
6. Direct Crossing. Golf carts may make a direct crossing of a prohibited street provided:
A. The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
B. The golf cart is brought to a complete stop before crossing the street;
C. The driver/operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard.
7. Parks. Golf carts shall not be operated within City parks and other land owned by the City, unless for a special event authorized by the City Council and the operator possesses a valid permit issued by the City of Glenwood.
8. Equipment. Golf carts operated upon streets within the City of Glenwood shall be equipped with at least the following:
A. Slow moving vehicle sign;
B. A bicycle safety flag, the top of which shall be a minimum of 5 feet from ground level;
C. Adequate brakes;
D. Headlights;
E. Taillights;
F. Brake lights.
9. Hours of Operation. Golf carts may be operated on City streets only from sunrise to sunset. However, a person operating a golf cart shall pull over to the side of the public street or alley and come to a complete stop at all such times a Glenwood Community School District school bus is operating within three hundred (300) feet of the golf cart, and shall remain stopped until the bus is beyond the 300 foot radius of the golf cart. (Ord. 873 – Apr. 17 Supp.)
CHAPTER 78 GOLF CARTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 373 -
10. Riding on Golf Carts. A person operating a golf cart shall not ride other than on a permanent seat which is designed to be a part of the golf cart and permanently attached thereto. No person operating a golf cart upon a public street or alley shall allow a passenger in the golf cart who has not yet obtained the age of eight (8) years, except during specifically designated events in include Glenwood’s annual Homecoming, Keg Creek Days, and Scarecrow Days celebrations. All passengers under the age of twelve (12) years shall wear and utilize an operable seat belt when the golf cart is in motion. No golf cart shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. (Ord. 873 – Apr. 17 Supp.)
11. Permits. No person shall operate a golf cart on any public street or alley for any purpose unless the operator possesses a City of Glenwood permit to operate a golf cart on the City streets, issued by the Glenwood Police Chief or authorized designee.
A. Golf cart owners may apply for a permit from the Glenwood Police Chief on forms provided by the City;
B. The Police Chief shall not issue a permit until the owner/operator has provided the following:
(1) Evidence that the operator is at least eighteen (18) years of age and possesses a valid driver’s license.
(2) Proof that the owner/operator has liability insurance covering operation of golf carts on City streets;
C. The applicant for a permit to operate a golf cart on the City streets, as a part of the application, shall verify the golf cart complies with State law and the provisions of this chapter;
D. The operator of a golf cart shall prominently display the Glenwood permit on a rear fender or similar component of the golf cart;
E. All permits issued shall uniquely identify the name and address of the owner/operator of the golf cart;
F. The fee for a permit to operate a golf cart on the City streets and alleys shall be $25.00 annually.
78.05 MOTOR VEHICLE LAW. Persons authorized to operate golf carts pursuant to this chapter shall obey all statutes and ordinances governing the operation of motor vehicles to the extent practically applicable.
78.06 GOLF CART INSURANCE. Financial responsibility required. The owner/operator of every golf cart being operated upon the streets and alleys of
CHAPTER 78 GOLF CARTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 374 -
the City of Glenwood, Iowa, shall have in effect liability insurance covering operation of the golf cart in the same limits, as required of automobiles by the financial responsibility provision of Section 321A, Code of Iowa.
78.07 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
1. Any person guilty of violating the provisions herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and revocation of the City of Glenwood permit for a period of two (2) months.
2. Any person guilty of violating this Ordinance two (2) times in a twelve (12) month period shall be subject to a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and revocation of the City of Glenwood permit for a period of two (2) years.
3. Any person guilty of violating this Ordinance three (3) times shall be subject to a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and permanent revocation of the City Glenwood permit.
(Ch. 78 – Ord. 865 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
[The next page is 381]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 381 -
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
80.01 Definitions
80.06 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles
80.07 Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail
80.08 Proceeds from Sales
80.04 Notification in Newspaper
80.09 Duties of Demolisher
80.05 Fees for Impoundment
80.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1])
1. “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
A. A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more than twenty-four (24) hours and lacks current registration plates or two (2) or more wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
B. A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than twenty-four (24) hours.
C. A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than twenty-four (24) hours.
D. A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten (10) days. However, a police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the ten-day period by commencing the notification process.
E. Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
F. A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out the impoundment order.
2. “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 382 -
3. “Police authority” means the Iowa state patrol or any law enforcement agency of a county or city.
80.02 AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police authority may employ its own personnel, equipment and facilities or hire a private entity, equipment and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles. If a police authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03 NOTICE BY MAIL. The police authority or private entity that takes into custody an abandoned vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by certified mail, the last known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in the vehicle, addressed to the parties’ last known addresses of record, that the abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody. Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle identification number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in the vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held, and inform the persons receiving the notice of their right to reclaim the vehicle and personal property within ten (10) days after the effective date of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of the notice. The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner, lienholders or claimants to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants of all right, title, claim and interest in the vehicle or personal property and that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property is deemed consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher and to disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction. The notice shall state that any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police authority or private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to contest those matters. If the persons receiving the notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 383 -
property within the ten-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or claimants shall no longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal property. A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right, title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders or claimants after the expiration of the ten-day reclaiming period.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.04 NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice under Section 80.03. The published notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles and personal property but shall be published within the same time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed notice in Section 80.03.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])
80.05 FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT. The owner, lienholder or claimant shall pay all towing and storage fees as established by the storage facility, whereupon the vehicle shall be released.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.06 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the police authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether or not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.07 DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES. The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of such motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two (2) or more wheels or other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
80.08 PROCEEDS FROM SALES. Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing and notification required, in accordance with State law. Any
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 384 -
balance shall be held for the owner of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and then shall be deposited in the State Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the police authority shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.09 DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER. Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or otherwise demolish such motor vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
(Ch. 80 – Ord. 768 – Sep. 05 Supp.)
[The next page is 395]

CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 396 -
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 UTILITIES BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The management of the City’s Water Utility is the responsibility of the Utilities Board of Trustees, established and operated as described in Chapter 25 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 397 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °

CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 399 -
CHAPTER 91
PRIVATE WELLS WITHIN THE CITY
91.01 Scope
91.06 Registration of Pre-existing Wells
91.02 Private Wells Prohibited
91.07 Abandoned Wells and Wells Located in
91.03 Private Wells Permitted
Contaminated Areas
91.04 Permit Required
91.08 Penalty
91.05 Permit Fee
91.01 SCOPE. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to drinking (potable) and non-drinking (non-potable) private wells located within the City limits. This chapter shall not apply to test or monitoring wells used for soil and groundwater investigation.
91.02 PRIVATE WELLS PROHIBITED. No person shall construct a private well within the City unless permitted by Section 91.03.
91.03 PRIVATE WELLS PERMITTED. A potable private well may be constructed within the corporate limits in the event there is no public water supply within 1000 feet of any property line of the property upon which the well is to be located. Such well shall remain separate from any public water supply. Such well shall not be constructed in an area the City considers to be contaminated or otherwise unsuitable for a private well.
A non-potable private well may be constructed within the corporate limits solely for the purpose of irrigation. Such well shall not be utilized to obtain water for drinking or other purposes. Such well shall be located at least 500 feet from the public water supply and shall remain separate from any public water supply. Any non-potable private well to be located in a City-owned park may, upon approval of the City Council, be released from the 500 foot requirement. No well shall be constructed in an area the City considers to be contaminated or otherwise unsuitable for a private well.
(Ord. 816 – Jan. 09 Supp.)
91.04 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall construct a private well unless the person obtains a permit from the City.
1. Any person wanting a potable private well permit shall make application to the City on the prescribed form. Prior to the issuance of the permit, a representative of the Glenwood Municipal Utilities Board shall inspect the proposed location to ensure the potable well is at least 1000 feet from the public water supply. The City’s permit shall be in addition to any permit required by the County and/or State.
CHAPTER 91 PRIVATE WELLS WITHIN THE CITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 400 -
2. Any person wanting a non-potable private well permit shall make application to the City on the prescribed form. Prior to the issuance of the permit, a representative of the Glenwood Municipal Utilities Board shall inspect the proposed location to ensure the non-potable well is at least 500 feet from the public water supply. The City’s permit shall be in addition to any permit required by the County and/or State.
91.05 PERMIT FEE. There shall be a permit fee set by the City in the amount of $50.00. A person applying for a permit shall pay the fee upon submission of the application. The applicant shall be responsible for any additional expenses associated with the private well.
91.06 REGISTRATION OF PRE-EXISTING WELLS. A person owning property in the City that contains a well constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified by this chapter, shall register the well with the City. Any property owner registering a pre-existing well shall obtain a registration form from the City. The property owner shall provide all information requested by the City, but not limited to the following:
1. Exact location;
2. Well history;
3. Separation from public water supply; and
4. Vulnerability status.
There shall be no fee to register a pre-existing well.
91.07 ABANDONED WELLS AND WELLS LOCATED IN CONTAIMINATED AREAS.
1. A pre-existing well located within what the City considers a contaminated area shall be required to be plugged and sealed in accordance with the Department of Natural Resources regulations.
2. Any abandoned well located within the City shall be required to be plugged and sealed in accordance with the Department of Natural Resources regulations.
91.08 PENALTY. Any person found guilty of a violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty provisions applicable. Each day that a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. At the discretion of the City Attorney, any violation of the provisions of this chapter may be pursued.
(Ch. 91 – Ord. 733 – Oct. 03 Supp.)
[The next page is 403]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 403 -
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
95.01 UTILITIES BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The management of the City’s Sanitary Sewer System is the responsibility of the Utilities Board of Trustees, established and operated as described in Chapter 25 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 719 – Feb. 03 Supp.)
CHAPTER 99 SEWER USE CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 404 -
[The next page is 437]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 437 -
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
105.01 Definitions
105.07 Burning Prohibited
105.02 Prohibition Against Hauling Solid Waste
105.08 Health and Fire Hazard
Without License
105.09 Littering Prohibited
105.03 Disposal Limited
105.10 Landfill Maintenance Fee
105.04 Disposal Instructions
105.11 Separation of Yard Waste Required
105.05 Hazardous and Excluded Materials
105.12 Residential Solid Waste Limitation
105.06 Incinerator Use
105.13 Containment of Solid Waste and Garbage Required
105.01 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words are defined:
1. “Association” means the Mills County Landfill Association.
2. “Garbage” means the solid or semi-solid animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooling and serving of foods, including cans, bottles and cartons in which it was received, and wrappings in which it may be placed for disposal.
3. “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361)
4. “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials or debris.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
5. “Residence” means any single-family dwelling and any multi-family dwelling up to and including four separate family quarters. Garden type apartments and row type housing units are considered residential premises regardless of the total number of such apartments or units which may be included in a given housing development.
6. “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish and other similar discarded solid or semi-solid materials, including but not limited to such materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, residential and domestic activities. This chapter does not prohibit the use of dirt, stone, brick or similar inorganic material for fill, landscaping, excavation or grading at places other than a sanitary disposal facility. This definition does not include sludge from sewage treatment operations which is being disposed under Iowa Department of Natural Resources regulations and permits, nor does it include disposal of humus generated through Iowa Department of Natural Resources regulations regulating compost or co-composting activities. Solid waste does not include
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 438 -
hazardous waste as defined in Section 45B.411 or source, special nuclear or by-product material as defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
7. “Solid waste collection” means the collection, removal or hauling of solid waste from any public or private place.
8. “Yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden waste, brush and trees. Yard waste does not include tree stumps.
105.02 PROHIBITION AGAINST HAULING SOLID WASTE WITHOUT LICENSE. No person shall collect, remove or haul solid waste within the City unless such person has been issued a current hauler’s license by the Association.
105.03 DISPOSAL LIMITED. No person shall permanently dispose of solid waste of any kind upon any land within the corporation limits of the City unless such land has been designated by the Association as a public landfill site; provided, however, that the prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to the deposit of inert wastes, not potentially injurious to health or the public welfare where permission to make such a deposit has been obtained from the owner or responsible agent, or to the filling in or grading of property with earth, mud, ashes or similar materials, providing all other applicable local and State laws have been complied with.
105.04 DISPOSAL INSTRUCTIONS. No person shall deposit any solid waste at any Association landfill site, except in compliance with posted instructions or instructions of an attendant in charge.
105.05 HAZARDOUS AND EXCLUDED MATERIALS. Certain materials may be excluded from those refuse materials, which may be deposited at an Association landfill site. These excluded materials may include junk automobile bodies and similar bulky objects which may require special processing prior to disposal; trees and tree limbs, unless they have been cut into pieces not exceeding ten feet in length; burning materials or materials containing hot or live coals; hazardous materials; and other materials which the Association deems necessary to exclude. However, hazardous materials may be deposited upon the receipt of written permission of a responsible official or attendant of the Association and subject to any special instructions issued with said permission. Hazardous material shall include: explosive materials, materials contaminated by infectious or contagious disease, fly ash or other fine or powdery material and other material which may present a special hazard to landfill personnel, equipment or the public.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 439 -
105.06 INCINERATOR USE. It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, or to install or offer to install, any device intended for use as a garbage or solid waste burner or incinerator.
105.07 BURNING PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any person to burn or incinerate or permit the burning or incineration of any solid waste. This section shall apply to all solid waste as defined and shall specifically include all waste paper, boxes, market waste, garden wastes, trees, tree limbs, leaves and any and all materials other than materials used as a fuel in a furnace or boiler. This section shall not apply to any incinerator operated under a license granted by the City or any incinerator operated by or for the City, or any burning conducted under the direction of the fire department of the City.
105.08 HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD. It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste that constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.
105.09 LITTERING PROHIBITED. No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa. Sec. 455B.363)
105.10 LANDFILL MAINTENANCE FEE. The landfill maintenance fee may be established by resolution of the Council If such fee is established, it shall be payable each month and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid within ten (10) days after such payment due date. Delinquent payments shall bear a penalty of five percent (5%) plus interest at the maximum rate permitted by law (but in no event shall the rate of interest exceed seven percent (7%) per annum) from said due date to the date of payment.
105.11 SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED. All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid waste accumulated on the premises and may be composted on the premises.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 440 -
105.12 RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE LIMITATION. Each dwelling unit shall be allowed no more than two (2) thirty-three (33) gallon trash containers per week. Each container shall weigh no more than fifty (50) pounds. The solid waste hauler shall set a reasonable fee for additional containers and shall enforce said fee. (Ord. 679 – Apr. 02 Supp.)
105.13 CONTAINMENT OF SOLID WASTE AND GARBAGE REQUIRED. All solid waste and garbage, including animal offal, intended to be discarded shall be placed and stored in an enclosed solid container or receptacle with a covered lid or top until such waste and garbage is disposed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 739 – Jan-04 Supp.)
[The next page is 455]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 455 -
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
110.01 Franchise Granted
110.07 Relocation of Company Facilities
110.02 Term
110.08 Quality of Service
110.03 Rules and Regulations
110.09 Adequate System Required
110.04 Construction
110.10 Confidential Information
110.05 Maintenance
110.11 Force Majeure
110.06 Extension of Company Facilities
110.12 Hold Harmless
110.01 FRANCHISE GRANTED. The City hereby grants a nonexclusive franchise to Peoples Natural Gas, a division of UtiliCorp United Inc., a Delaware corporation, (hereinafter called “Grantee”), its lessees, successors and assigns. This repeals the franchise previously granted by Ordinance No. 408. Grantee is hereby granted the right, privilege, franchise, permission and authority to construct, maintain, operate and extend in the present and future streets, alleys, avenues, bridges, public rights-of-way and public places as are now within the present or future limits of the City, a natural gas distribution system for the purpose of supplying natural gas or processed gas for all purposes to the inhabitants of the City and consumers in the vicinity thereof, and for the distribution of natural gas from or through the City to points beyond the limits thereof. The City further grants Grantee the right, permission and authority to lay, install, maintain and operate over, across and along all of the streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, public rights-of-way and public places of the City all mains, services, pipes, conduits and appliances necessary or convenient for transmitting, transporting, distributing and supplying natural gas for all purposes for which it may be used, and to do all other things necessary and proper in providing natural gas service to the inhabitants of the City and in carrying on such business.
110.02 TERM. The rights and privileges granted by this franchise shall remain in effect for a period of fifteen (15) years from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified by this chapter and for an additional ten (10) years thereafter unless the City provides written notice as provided herein to Grantee at least one hundred and eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the initial term.
110.03 RULES AND REGULATIONS. This franchise is granted subject to all conditions, limitations and immunities now provided for, or as hereafter amended, and applicable to the operations of a public utility, by the laws of the State. The rates to be charged by Grantee for service within the present or future corporate limits of the City and the rules and regulations regarding the character, quality and standards of service to be furnished by Grantee shall be under the jurisdiction and control of such regulatory body or bodies as may, from time to time, be vested by law with authority and jurisdiction over the rates, regulations and quality and standards of service to be supplied by Grantee. Provided, however, should any judicial, regulatory or legislative body, having proper jurisdiction, take any action that precludes Grantee from recovering from its customers any cost associated with services provided hereunder,
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 456 -
then Grantee and the City shall renegotiate the terms of this franchise in accordance with the action taken so as to allow Grantee to be made whole economically. In determining the rights and duties of the Grantee, the terms of this chapter shall take precedence over any conflicting terms or requirements contained in any other ordinance enacted by the City.
110.04 CONSTRUCTION. Any pavements, sidewalks or curbing taken up and any and all excavations made shall be done in such a manner as to cause only such inconvenience to the inhabitants of the City and to the general public as is reasonably necessary; and repairs and replacements shall be made promptly by Grantee, leaving such properties in as good a condition as existed immediately prior to excavation. Whenever the Grantee, in the construction or maintenance of its system or in the installation of any extension thereto, shall cut into or take up any pavement or shall make any excavation in any street, avenue, alley or public place within the corporate limits of the City, the same shall be done in a manner so as not to unreasonably interfere with the use of such thoroughfares by the public. The Grantee shall replace any street or backfill to meet, at a minimum, the specifications provided in the “Street Excavations Specifications for Surface Restoration of the City of Glenwood Public Works Department” dated March 1998, and as may from time to time be amended. The Grantee shall use such safeguards as may be necessary to prevent the injury to persons or property during such construction work and upon its completion, all pavement shall be replaced in as good condition as it was before taken up. All excavations shall be refilled and all obstructions shall be removed at the expense of the Grantee and to the reasonable satisfaction and approval of the City. In the event that the Grantee shall fail to comply with the provisions of this section after having been given reasonable notice, the City may do such work as may be needed to properly repair said thoroughfare and the cost thereof shall be repaid to the City by the Grantee.
110.05 MAINTENANCE. Grantee agrees that for the term of this grant, it will use its best efforts to maintain facilities and equipment sufficient to meet the current and future energy requirements of the City, its inhabitants and industries. While maintaining its facilities and equipment, Grantee shall obtain permits as required by ordinance, except that in emergency situations, Grantee shall take immediate unilateral actions as it determines are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare; in which case, Grantee shall notify the City as soon as reasonably possible.
110.06 EXTENSION OF COMPANY FACILITIES. Upon receipt and acceptance of a valid application for service, Grantee shall make reasonable extensions of its distribution facilities to serve customers located within the current or future corporate limits of the City.
110.07 RELOCATION OF COMPANY FACILITIES. If the City elects to change the grade of or otherwise alter any street, alley, avenue, bridge, public right-of-way or public place for a public purpose, Grantee, upon reasonable notice from the City, shall remove and relocate its facilities or equipment situated in the public rights-of-way, if such removal is necessary to prevent interference and not merely for the
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 457 -
convenience of the City, at the cost and expense of Grantee. If the City orders or requests Grantee to relocate its facilities or equipment primarily for non-public purposes or the primary benefit of a commercial or private project, or as a result of the initial request of a commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, and such removal is necessary to prevent interference and not merely for the convenience of the City or other right-of-way user, Grantee shall receive reimbursement for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocating its facilities or equipment. The City shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its public works projects so as not arbitrarily to cause Grantee unreasonable additional expense in exercising its authority under this section. The City shall also provide a reasonable alternative location for Grantee’s facilities.
110.08 QUALITY OF SERVICE. The Grantee shall at all times maintain under adequate pressure a supply of clean, standard gas of the British Thermal Unit heating value of not less than that prescribed in its Rules and Regulations relating thereto in effect and on file form time to time with the Iowa Utilities Board.
110.09 ADEQUATE SYSTEM REQUIRED. Grantee agrees for and in behalf of itself, its lessees, successors and assigns that for and during the term and period of this grant and all extensions thereof, it will maintain in the City an adequate, modern, standard and sufficient gas system and appurtenances, in accordance with its Rules and Regulations relating to customer connections and main and service line extensions currently in effect and on file from time to time with the Iowa Utilities Board, provided, however, that no obligation shall extend to or be binding upon the Grantee to construct or extend its mains or furnish natural gas or gas service within the City if Grantee is, for any reason, unable to obtain delivery of natural gas at or near the corporate limits of the City or an adequate supply thereof to warrant the construction or extension of its mains for the furnishing of such natural gas or gas service; provided further, that when the amount of natural gas supplied to Grantee at or near the City limits is insufficient to meet the additional firm requirements of connected or new consumers, Grantee shall have the right to prescribe reasonable rules and regulations for allocating the available supply of natural gas for such additional firm requirements to residential, commercial and industrial customers in that order of priority.
110.10 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. The City acknowledges that certain information it might request pursuant to this franchise may be of a proprietary and confidential nature. If Grantee requests that any information provided by Grantee to the City be kept confidential due to such proprietary or commercial value, the City and its employees, agents and representatives shall maintain the confidentiality of that information. If the City is requested or required by legal or administrative process to disclose any such confidential information, the City shall promptly notify Grantee of such request or requirement so that Grantee may seek an appropriate protective order or other relief. The City shall use all reasonable efforts to ensure that the confidentiality of Grantee’s confidential information is maintained.
110.11 FORCE MAJEURE. It shall not be a breach or default under this franchise if either party fails to perform its obligations hereunder due to Force Majeure. Force
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 458 -
Majeure shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (1) physical events such as acts of God, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, freezing, storms, floods, washouts, explosions, breakage or accident or necessity of repairs to machinery, equipment or distribution or transmission lines; (2) acts of others such as strikes, work-force stoppages, riots, sabotage, insurrections or wars; (3) governmental actions such as necessity for compliance with any court order, law, statute, ordinance, executive order or regulation promulgated by a governmental authority having jurisdiction; and any other causes, whether of the kind herein enumerated or otherwise not reasonably within the control of the affected party to prevent or overcome. Each party shall make reasonable efforts to avoid Force Majeure and to resolve such event as promptly as reasonably possible once it occurs in order to resume performance.
110.12 HOLD HARMLESS. Grantee, during the term of this franchise, agrees to save harmless and indemnify the City from and against all claims, demands, losses and expenses arising out of the negligence of Grantee, its employees or agents, in the constructing, operating and maintaining of distribution and transmission facilities or appliances of Grantee; provided, however, that Grantee need not save harmless the City from claims, demands, losses and expenses arising out of the negligence of the City, its employees or agents. Grantee shall maintain insurance at all times during the terms of this franchise and any extensions hereof in an adequate amount to cover and protect itself and others to whom Grantee may be held legally liable in the performance of its duties hereunder.
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 654 granting a gas franchise to Peoples Natural Gas, a division of UtiliCorp United Inc., was adopted on May 23, 2000.
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 459 -
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
111.01 Franchise Granted
111.10 Trimming Trees
111.02 Rights and Privileges
111.11 Information
111.03 Poles and Wires
111.12 Applicable Regulations
111.04 Construction and Maintenance
111.13 Franchise Fee
111.05 Excavations
111.14 Management Fees
111.06 Utility Easements
111.15 Applicability
111.07 Relocation Not Required
111.16 Termination
111.08 Relocation Reimbursement
111.17 Effective
111.09 Indemnification
111.01 FRANCHISE GRANTED. There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation, (hereinafter called the “Company,”) and its successors and assigns, the right and non-exclusive franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the City of Glenwood, Iowa, (hereinafter called the “City,”) a system for the transmission and distribution of electric energy and communications signals along, under, over and upon the streets, avenues, rights of way and alleys to serve customers within the City, and to furnish and sell electric energy to the City and its inhabitants. The Company is granted the right to exercise of powers of eminent domain, subject to City Council approval. This franchise shall remain in effect for a period of fifteen (15) years from the effective date of the ordinance codified by this chapter and for an additional ten (10) years thereafter unless the City provides written notice to the Company at least one hundred and eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the initial term.†
111.02 RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES. The rights and privileges hereby granted are subject to the restrictions and limitations of Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa 2017 or as subsequently amended or changed.
111.03 POLES AND WIRES. The Company shall have the right to erect all necessary poles and to place thereon the necessary wires, fixtures and accessories as well as to excavate and bury conduits or conductors for the distribution of electric energy and communication signals in and through the City, provided the same shall be placed in accord with this franchise and City code regulations of the City, regarding the placement of structures, facilities, accessories or other objects in the right of way, including ordinances which assign corridors or other placements to users of the right of way and requirements which may be adopted regarding separation of structures, facilities, accessories or other objects.
111.04 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE. The Company shall, excluding facilities located in private easements (whether titled in Company exclusively or in Company and other entities), in accordance with Iowa law including Company’s Tariff on file with and made effective by the Iowa Utilities Board as may
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 875, adopting an electric franchise for the City, was passed and adopted on March 28, 2017.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 460 -
subsequently be amended (“Tariff”), at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its existing installations located in, on, over or under the right of way of any public street, right of way or alley in the City in such a manner as the City may require for the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the street right of way or alley. Relocation expenses for other hard surfaces, including pedestrian and non-motorized vehicle pathways, will be paid by the City. If the City has a reasonable alternative route for the street, right of way or alley or an alternative construction method, which would not cause the relocation of Company installations or would minimize the cost or expense of relocation of Company installations, the City and Company shall work together to consider said alternative route or construction method. The City shall, in the extension or modification of streets and roads, make provision for the placement of company service lines and facilities on City-owned right of way without charge to Company. In planning for the extension or modification of streets, the City shall, to the extent practicable design such changes to limit the need for relocation of Company facilities. The City shall be responsible for surveying and staking the right-of-way for City projects that require the Company to relocate Company facilities. If requested, the City shall provide, at no cost to the Company, copies of the relocation plan and profile and cross section drawings. If vegetation and tree removals must be completed by the City as part of the City’s project and are necessary whether or not utility facilities must be relocated, the City at its own cost shall be responsible for said removals. If the timing of vegetation and tree removals does not coincide with Company’s facilities relocation schedule and the Company must remove vegetation and trees that are included in the City’s portion of the project, the City shall either remove them or reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred to remove said materials. If project funds from a source other than the City are available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities, the City shall use its best efforts to secure said funds and provide them to the Company to compensate the Company for the costs of relocation.
111.05 EXCAVATIONS. In making excavations in any streets, avenues and public places for the installation, maintenance or repair of conductor, conduits or the erection of poles and wires or other appliances, the Company shall not unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets. The Company in making such excavations shall, if required by ordinance, obtain a City permit therefore and provide City representatives with advance notice prior to the actual commencement of the work, and shall comply with all provisions and requirements of the City in its regulation of the use of City right of way in performing such work. In emergencies which require immediate excavation, the Company may proceed with the work without first applying for or obtaining the permit, provided, however, that Company shall apply for and obtain the excavation permit as soon as possible after commencing such emergency work. The Company shall comply with all City ordinances regarding paving cuts, placement of facilities and restoration of pavement and other public infrastructure. The Company shall replace the surface, restoring the condition as existed prior to the Company’s excavation but shall not be required to improve or modify the public right of way, sidewalks or other areas in or adjacent to the Company project to a condition superior to its immediate previously existing condition. Company shall complete all repairs in
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 461 -
a timely manner. Company agrees any replacement of road surface shall conform to current City ordinances regarding its depth and composition.
111.06 UTILITY EASEMENTS. The City’s vacating a street, avenue, alley, public ground or public right-of-way shall not deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing facilities on, below, above, or beneath the vacated property. Prior to the City abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley or public ground where the Company has facilities in the vicinity, the City shall provide Company with not less than sixty (60) days advance notice of the city’s proposed action and, upon request grant the Company a utility easement covering existing and future facilities and activities. If the City fails to grant the Company a utility easement for said facilities prior to abandoning or vacating a street, avenue, alley or public ground, the City shall at its cost and expense obtain easements for the existing Company facilities.
111.07 RELOCATION NOT REQUIRED. The Company shall not be required to relocate, at its cost and expense, Company facilities in the public right of way that have been relocated at Company expense at the direction of the City in the previous ten (10) years.
111.08 RELOCATION REIMBURSEMENT. Pursuant to relocation of Company facilities, if the City orders or requests the Company to relocate its existing facilities or equipment in order to directly facilitate a project for the primary benefit of a commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, the City shall require the developer or non-public entity to reimburse the Company for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocation of its existing facilities or equipment. The Company shall not be required at its expense to relocate in order to facilitate such private development.
111.09 INDEMNIFICATION. The Company shall indemnify, save and hold harmless the City from any and all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses, on account of injury or damage to any person or property, to the extent caused or occasioned by the Company’s negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation or maintenance of the electric facilities authorized by this franchise; provided, however, that the Company shall not be obligated to defend, indemnify and save harmless the City for any costs or damages to the extent arising from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees or agents.
111.10 TRIMMING TREES. The pruning and removal of vegetation and trees shall be done in accordance with current nationally accepted safety and utility industry standards and federal and state law, rules and regulations. The pruning and removal of vegetation and trees shall be done in accordance with current nationally accepted safety and utility industry standards and federal and state law, rules and regulations. The Company is authorized and empowered to prune or remove at Company expense, any tree extending into any street, avenue, right of way, alley, public place or public grounds to maintain electric reliability, safety, to restore utility service and to prevent limbs, branches, or trunks from interfering with the wires and facilities of the Company. The pruning and removal of vegetation and trees shall be completed in
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 462 -
accordance with nationally accepted safety and utility standards, NSI Z133.1-2012, American National Standard for Arboricultural Operations-Safety Requirements, and ANSI A300(part 1) – 2008 Pruning, (Revision of ANSI A300 part 1-2001) American National Standard for Tree, Shrub, and other Woody Plant Management – Standard of Practices (Pruning) or subsequent revisions to these standards, and City ordinances regarding the pruning of trees that incorporate by reference that standard.
111.11 INFORMATION. Upon reasonable request, the Company shall provide the City, on a project specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location, relative to boundaries of the right of way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it has control that is located in City right of way, including documents, maps, and other information in paper or electronic or other forms (“Information”). The Company and City recognize the Information may in whole or part be considered a confidential record under state or federal law or both. Therefore, City shall not release any Information without prior consent of the Company and shall return the Information to Company upon request. City recognizes that Company claims the Information may constitute a trade secret or is otherwise protected from public disclosure by state or federal law on other grounds, and agrees to retain the Information in its non-public files. Furthermore, the City agrees that no documents, maps or other Information provided to the City by the Company shall be made available to the public or other entities if such documents or Information are exempt from disclosure under the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Critical Energy Infrastructure requirements pursuant to 18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, or Chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa, as such statutes and regulations may be amended from time to time, then the Company shall provide the City with a written explanation of the basis for such assertion of confidentiality or exemption from disclosure within ten (10) days.
111.12 APPLICABLE REGULATIONS. The Company shall construct, operate and maintain its facilities in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board or its successors and Iowa law. During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish electric energy in the quantity and quality consistent with and in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board, the Company’s tariff and made effective by the Iowa Utilities Board or its successors and Iowa law.
111.13 FRANCHISE FEE. There is hereby imposed upon the customers a franchise fee of five (5) percent upon the gross revenues, minus uncollectible accounts, generated from sales of electricity and distribution service by the Company within the corporate limits of the City. The franchise fee shall be remitted by the Company to the City on or before the last business day of the calendar quarter following the close of the calendar quarter in which the franchise fee is charged.
1. The City agrees to modify the level of franchise fees imposed only once in any 24-month period.
2. The Company will commence collecting franchise fees on or before the first Company billing cycle of the first calendar month following ninety (90)
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 463 -
days of receipt of information required of the City to implement the franchise fee, including the City’s documentation of customer classes subject to or exempted from City-imposed franchise fee.
3. The City shall be solely responsible for identifying customer classes subject to or exempt from paying the City imposed franchise fee. The Company shall have no obligation to collect franchise fees from customers in annexed areas until and unless such ordinances have been provided to the Company by certified mail. The Company shall commence collecting franchise fees in the annexed areas no sooner than sixty (60) days after receiving annexation ordinances from the City.
4. The Company shall not, under any circumstances be required to return or refund any franchise fees that have been collected from customers and remitted to the City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or information in defense of the City’s imposition of franchise fees or the Company is required to assist the City in identifying customers or calculating any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers the City shall reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by the Company to provide such data or information.
111.14 MANAGEMENT FEES. Upon implementation of a franchise fee, the City shall not, pursuant to Chapter 480A.6 of the Code of Iowa, impose or charge Company right-of-way management fees for permits for Company construction, maintenance, repairs, excavation, pavement cutting or inspections of Company work sites and projects or related matters.
111.15 APPLICABILITY. This franchise shall apply to and bind the City and Company and their successors and assigns.
111.16 TERMINATION. Either City or Company (“party”) may terminate this franchise if the other party shall be materially in breach of its provisions. Upon the occurrence of a material breach, the non-breaching party shall provide the breaching party with notification by certified mail specifying the alleged breach. The breaching party shall have 60 days to cure the breach, unless it notifies the non-breaching party, and the parties agree upon a longer period for cure. If the breach is not cured within the cure period, the non-breaching party may terminate this franchise. A party shall not be considered to be in breach of this franchise if it has operated in compliance with State or Federal law. A party shall not be considered to have breached this franchise if the alleged breach is the result of the actions of a third party or the other party.
111.17 EFFECTIVE. This ordinance and the rights and privileges herein granted shall become effective and binding upon its approval and passage in accordance with Iowa law and the written acceptance by the Company. The City shall provide Company with an original signed and sealed copy of this ordinance within 10 days of its final passage. The Company shall, within thirty (30) days after the City Council approval of this ordinance, file in the office of the clerk of the City, its acceptance in writing of all the terms and provisions of this ordinance. Following City Council
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 464 -
approval, this ordinance shall be published in accordance with the Code of Iowa. The effective date of this ordinance shall be the date of publication. In the event Company does not file its written acceptance of this ordinance within thirty (30) days after its approval by the City Council, this ordinance shall be void and of no effect.
(Ch. 111 – Ord. 875 – Apr. 17 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 465 -
CHAPTER 112
TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
(RESERVED)
CHAPTER 112 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 466 -
[The next page is 471]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 471 -
CHAPTER 113
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND REGULATIONS
113.01 Definition of Terms
113.19 Renewal of Franchise
113.02 Grant
113.20 Conditions of Sale
113.03 Term
113.21 Transfer of Franchise
113.04 Acceptance; Effective Date
113.22 Testing for Compliance
113.05 Equal Protection
113.23 Books and Records
113.06 Conditions of Street Occupancy
113.24 Insurance Requirements
113.07 Restoration of Public Ways
113.25 Indemnification
113.08 Relocation at Request of Franchising Authority
113.26 Bonds and Other Surety
113.09 Relocation at Request of Third Party
113.27 Notice of Violation
113.10 Trimming of Trees and Shrubbery
113.28 Grantee’s Right to Cure or Respond
113.11 Use of Grantee’s Equipment by Franchising
113.29 Public Hearing
Authority
113.30 Enforcement
113.12 Safety Requirements
113.31 Acts of God
113.13 Aerial and Underground Construction
113.32 Misdemeanor
113.14 Required Extensions of Service
113.33 Documents Incorporated and Made a Part Hereof
113.15 Subscriber Charges for Extensions of Service
113.34 Preemption
113.16 Service to Public Buildings
113.35 Actions of Franchising Authority
113.17 Franchise Fee
113.36 Notice
113.18 Rates and Charges
113.01 DEFINITION OF TERMS. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number:
1. “Affiliate” means an entity which owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership with Grantee.
2. “Basic cable service” is the tier of service regularly provided to all subscribers that includes the retransmission of local broadcast television signals.
3. “Basic revenues” means the monthly cable service revenues received by Grantee from subscribers for basic cable service on an annual basis; provided, however, that such phrase shall not include: (i) revenues received from national advertising carried on cable system; (ii) any taxes on cable service which are imposed directly or indirectly on any subscriber thereof by any governmental unit or agency, and which are collected by the Grantee on behalf of such governmental unit or agency.
4. “Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 472 -
5. “Cable service” means (i) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service, and (ii) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or any other lawful communication service.
6. “Cable system” means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment or other communications equipment that is designed to provide cable service and other service to subscribers.
7. “FCC” means Federal Communications Commission, or successor governmental entity thereto.
8. “Franchise” means the initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate or otherwise, which authorizes construction and operation of the cable system for the purpose of offering cable service or other service to subscribers.
9. “Franchising authority” means the City of Glenwood, Iowa, or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.
10. “Grantee” means Heritage Cablevision, Inc., d/b/a TCI of the Heartlands, or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.
11. “Public way” means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or other public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the franchising authority in the service area which shall entitle the franchising authority and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing, and maintaining the cable system. Public way also means any easement now or hereafter held by the franchising authority within the service area for the purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the franchising authority and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting Grantee’s cable service or other service over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 473 -
12. “Service area” means the present municipal boundaries of the franchising authority, and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
13. “Service tier” means a category of cable service or other services provided by Grantee and for which a separate charge is made by Grantee.
14. “Subscriber” means a person or user of the cable system who lawfully receives cable services or other service therefrom with Grantee’s express permission.
15. “Video programming” means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station.
113.02 GRANT. The franchising authority hereby grants to Grantee a nonexclusive franchise which authorizes the Grantee to construct and operate a cable system and offer cable service and other services in, along, among, upon, across, above, over, under, or in any manner connected with public ways within the service area and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, or retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, or along any public way and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other related property or equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the cable system.
113.03 TERM. The franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be for an initial term of ten (10) years from the effective date of the franchise, as set forth in Section 113.04 unless otherwise lawfully terminated in accordance with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 827 – Jan. 10 Supp.)
113.04 ACCEPTANCE; EFFECTIVE DATE. Grantee shall accept the franchise granted pursuant hereto by signing the ordinance codified by this chapter and filing same with the Clerk or other appropriate official or agency of the franchising authority within thirty (30) days after the passage and final adoption of the ordinance codified by this chapter. Subject to acceptance by the Grantee, the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be the established renewal date of the franchise by the Iowa Utilities Board, which is May 22, 2009. (Ord. 827 – Jan. 10 Supp.)
113.05 EQUAL PROTECTION. In the event the franchising authority enters into a franchise, permit, license, authorization or other agreement of any kind with any other person or entity other than the Grantee to enter into the franchising authority’s streets and public ways for the purpose of constructing
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 474 -
or operating a cable system or providing cable service to any part of the service area, the material provisions thereof shall be reasonably comparable to those contained herein, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another and to provide all parties equal protection under the law.
113.06 CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY. All transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines, and equipment installed or erected by the Grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins any of said public ways.
113.07 RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS. If during the course of Grantee’s construction, operation, or maintenance of the cable system there occurs a disturbance of any public way by Grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace and restore such public way to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the public way existing immediately prior to such disturbance.
113.08 RELOCATION AT REQUEST OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY. Upon its receipt of reasonable advance notice, not to be less than five (5) business days, the Grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the public way, or remove from the public way, any property of the Grantee when lawfully required by franchising authority by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street abandonment, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by the franchising authority; but, the Grantee shall in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property. If public funds are available to any company using such street, easement, or right-of-way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds shall also be made available to the Grantee.
113.09 RELOCATION AT REQUEST OF THIRD PARTY. The Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the franchising authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building, provided: (a) the expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires is paid by said person, including, if required by the Grantee, making such payment in advance; and (b) the Grantee is given not less than ten (10) business days’ advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 475 -
113.10 TRIMMING OF TREES AND SHRUBBERY. The Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its cable system in the service area so as to prevent branches from coming in contact with the Grantee’s wires, cables, or other equipment. Grantee shall be permitted to charge persons who own, or are responsible for, such trees or natural growth for the cost of such trimming, provided that similar charges are assessed by and paid to the utilities or the franchising authority for tree trimming. The Grantee shall reasonably compensate the franchising authority or property owner for any damages caused by such trimming, or shall, in its sole discretion and at its own cost and expense, reasonably replace all trees or shrubs damaged as a result of any construction of the cable system undertaken by Grantee. Such replacement shall satisfy any and all obligations Grantee may have to the franchising authority or property owner pursuant to the terms of this section. Grantee will provide advance notice to the property owner before trimming trees.
113.11 USE OF GRANTEE’S EQUIPMENT BY FRANCHISING AUTHORITY. Subject to any applicable State or Federal regulations or tariffs, the franchising authority shall have the right to make additional use, for any public purpose, of any poles or conduits controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the Grantee in any public way; provided that (a) such use by the franchising authority does not interfere with a current or future use by the Grantee; (b) the franchising authority holds the Grantee harmless against and from all claims, demands, costs, or liabilities of every kind and nature whatsoever arising out of such use of said poles or conduits, including but not limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees and costs; and (c) at Grantee’s sole discretion, the franchising authority may be required either to pay a reasonable rental fee or otherwise reasonably compensate Grantee for the use of such poles, conduits, or equipment; provided, however, that Grantee agrees that such compensation or charge shall not exceed those paid by it to public utilities pursuant to the applicable pole attachment agreement, or other authorization, relating to the service area.
113.12 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS. Construction, installation, and maintenance of the cable system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All such work shall be performed in substantial accordance with applicable FCC or other Federal, State and local regulations. The cable system shall not unreasonably endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the service area.
113.13 AERIAL AND UNDERGROUND CONSTRUCTION. In those areas of the service area where all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 476 -
electric services are underground, the Grantee likewise shall construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground; provided that such facilities are actually capable of receiving Grantee’s cable and other equipment without technical degradation of the cable system’s signal quality. In those areas of the service area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are both aerial and underground, Grantee shall have the sole discretion to construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing contained in this section shall require Grantee to construct, operate, and maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances such as subscriber taps, line extenders, system passive devices (splitters, directional couplers), amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals, or other related equipment. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, in the event that all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are placed underground after the effective date of this chapter, Grantee shall only be required to construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground if it is given reasonable notice and access to the public utilities’ facilities at the time that such are placed underground.
113.14 REQUIRED EXTENSIONS OF SERVICE. The cable system as constructed as of the date of the passage and final adoption of this chapter substantially complies with the material provisions hereof. Grantee is hereby authorized to extend the cable system as necessary, as desirable, or as required pursuant to the terms hereof within the service area. Whenever Grantee shall receive a request for service from at least fifteen (15) subscribers within 1,320 cable-bearing strand feet (one-quarter cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable, it shall extend its cable system to such subscribers at no cost to said subscribers for system extension, other than the usual connection fees for all subscribers; provided that such extension is technically feasible, and if it will not adversely affect the operation, financial condition, or market development of the cable system, or as provided for under Section 113.15 of this chapter.
113.15 SUBSCRIBER CHARGES FOR EXTENSIONS OF SERVICE. No subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, for unusual circumstances, such as a subscriber’s request to locate the cable drop underground, existence of more than one hundred fifty (150) feet of distance from distribution cable to connection of service to subscribers, or a density of less than fifteen (15) subscribers per 1,320 cable-bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution cable, cable service or other service may be made available on the basis of a capital contribution in aid of construction, including cost of material, labor, and easements. For the purpose of determining the amount of capital
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 477 -
contribution in aid of construction to be borne by Grantee and subscribers in the area in which cable service may be expanded, Grantee will contribute an amount equal to the construction and other costs per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual number of potential subscribers per 1,320 cable-bearing strand feet of its trunk or distribution cable, and whose denominator equals fifteen (15) subscribers. Potential subscribers will bear the remainder of the construction and other costs on a pro rata basis. Grantee may require that the payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential subscribers be paid in advance.
113.16 SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS. The Grantee shall provide without charge, one (1) outlet of basic service to the franchising authority’s office building(s), fire station(s), police station(s), and public school building(s) that are passed by its cable system. The outlets of basic cable service shall not be used to distribute or sell cable services in or throughout such buildings; nor shall such outlets be located in common or public areas open to the public. Users of such outlets shall hold Grantee harmless from any and all liability or claims arising out of their use of such outlets, including but not limited to, those arising from copyright liability. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section, the Grantee shall not be required to provide an outlet to such buildings where the drop line from the feeder cable to said buildings or premises exceeds one hundred fifty (150) cable feet, unless it is technically feasible and so long as it will not adversely affect the operation, financial condition, or market development of the cable system to do so, or unless the appropriate governmental entity agrees to pay the incremental cost of such drop line in excess of 150 cable feet. In the event that additional outlets of basic cable service are provided to such buildings, the building owner shall pay the usual installation fees associated therewith, including, but not limited to, labor and materials. Upon request of Grantee, the building owner may also be required to pay the service fees associated with the provision of basic cable service and the additional outlets relating thereto.
113.17 FRANCHISE FEE. Grantee shall pay to the franchising authority a franchise fee equal to five percent (5%) of basic revenues (as defined in Section 113.01 of this franchising agreement) received by Grantee from the operation of the cable system on an annual basis; provided, however, Grantee may credit against any such payments: (i) any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed by franchising authority or other governmental entity on a cable operator, or subscriber, or both, solely because of status as such; (ii) any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or subscribers (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed, both on utilities and cable operators and their services), and (iii) any other special tax, assessment, or fee such as a business, occupation, and
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 478 -
entertainment tax. For the purpose of this section, the 12-month period applicable under the franchise for the computation of the franchise fee shall be the calendar year, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the franchising authority and Grantee. The franchise fee payment shall be due and payable ninety (90) days after the close of the preceding calendar year. Each payment shall be accompanied by a brief report from a representative of Grantee showing the basis for the computation. In no event shall the franchise fee payments required to be paid by Grantee exceed five percent (5%) of gross revenues received by Grantee in any 12-month period.
(Ord. 827 – Jan. 10 Supp.)
113.18 RATES AND CHARGES. The franchising authority may not regulate the rates for the provision of cable service and other services, including, but not limited to, ancillary charges relating thereto, except as expressly provided herein and except as authorized pursuant to Federal and State law including, but not limited to, the Cable Act and FCC Rules and Regulations relating thereto. From time to time, and at any time, Grantee has the right to modify its rates and charges including, but not limited to, the implementation of additional charges and rates; provided, however, that Grantee shall give notice to the franchising authority of any such modifications or additional charges thirty (30) days prior to the effective date thereof.
In the event that rates for basic cable are subject to approval of the franchising authority, the Grantee may, at its discretion and without consent of the franchising authority, increase rates for basic cable by an amount which is at least equal to the cumulative increase (calculated from the date of the last basic rate increase) in the Consumer Price Index of All Urban Consumers – United States Average (CPI) published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor.
113.19 RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE. The franchising authority and the Grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the franchising authority that relate to the renewal of the Grantee’s franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of the Cable Act, unless the procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provision of Federal or State law. In addition to the procedures set forth in the Cable Act, the franchising authority agrees to notify Grantee of its preliminary assessments regarding the identity of future cable-related community needs and interests, as well as the past performance of Grantee under the then current franchise term. The franchising authority further agrees that such a preliminary assessment shall be provided to the Grantee prior to the time that the four (4) month period referred to in the Cable Act is considered to begin. Notwithstanding anything to the
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 479 -
contrary set forth in this section, the Grantee and franchising authority agree that at any time during the term of the then current franchise, while affording the public appropriate notice and opportunity to comment, the franchising authority and Grantee may agree to undertake and finalize negotiations regarding renewal of the then current franchise and the franchising authority may grant a renewal thereof. The Grantee and the franchising authority consider the terms set forth in this section to be consistent with the express provisions of the Cable Act.
(Ord. 827 – Jan. 10 Supp.)
113.20 CONDITIONS OF SALE. Except to the extent expressly required by Federal or State law, if a renewal or extension of Grantee’s franchise is denied or the franchise is lawfully terminated, and the franchising authority either lawfully acquires ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another party, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at a fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern.
Grantee and franchising authority agree that in the case of a lawful revocation of the franchise, at Grantee’s request, which shall be made in its sole discretion, Grantee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to effectuate a transfer of its cable system to a qualified third party. The franchising authority further agrees that during such a period of time, it shall authorize the Grantee to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior franchise; however, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of time greater than six (6) months from the effective date of such revocation. If, at the end of that time, Grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assignee of its cable system which is reasonably acceptable to the franchising authority, Grantee and franchising authority may avail themselves of any rights they may have pursuant to Federal or State law; it being further agreed that Grantee’s continued operation of its cable system during the six (6) month period shall not be deemed to be a waiver, nor an extinguishment of, any rights of either the franchising authority or the Grantee. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section, neither franchising authority nor Grantee shall be required to violate Federal or State law.
113.21 TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE. Grantee’s right, title, or interest in the franchise shall not be sold, transferred, assigned, or otherwise encumbered, other than to an affiliate, without the prior consent of the franchising authority, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of Grantee in the franchise or cable system in order to secure indebtedness.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 480 -
113.22 TESTING FOR COMPLIANCE. The franchising authority may perform technical tests of the cable system during reasonable times and in a manner which does not unreasonably interfere with the normal business operations of the Grantee or the cable system in order to determine whether or not the Grantee is in compliance with the terms hereof and applicable State or Federal laws. Except in emergency circumstances, such tests may be undertaken only after giving Grantee reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than two (2) business days, and providing a representative of Grantee an opportunity to be present during such tests. In the event that such testing demonstrates that the Grantee has substantially failed to comply with a material requirement hereof, the reasonable costs of such tests shall be borne by the Grantee. In the event that such testing demonstrates that Grantee has substantially complied with such material provisions hereof, the cost of such testing shall be borne by the franchising authority. Except in emergency circumstances, the franchising authority agrees that such testing shall be undertaken no more than two (2) times a year in the aggregate, and that the results thereof shall be made available to the Grantee upon Grantee’s request.
113.23 BOOKS AND RECORDS. The Grantee agrees that the franchising authority may review such of its books and records, during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive basis, as are reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms hereof. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public records required to be kept by the Grantee pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, Grantee shall not be required to disclose information which it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature. The franchising authority agrees to treat any information disclosed by the Grantee to it as confidential and only to disclose it to employees, representatives, and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof.
113.24 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS. Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, during the term of the franchise, Comprehensive General Liability Insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage with statutory workers compensation coverage. Said insurance shall designate the franchising authority as an additional insured. Such insurance shall be non-cancelable except upon thirty (30) days’ prior written notice to the franchising authority.
113.25 INDEMNIFICATION. The Grantee agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless, and defend the franchising authority, its officers, boards and employees, from and against any liability for damages and for any liability or claims resulting from property damage or bodily injury (including accidental death), which arise out of the Grantee’s construction, operation, or maintenance
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 481 -
of its cable system, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.
113.26 BOOKS AND OTHER SURETY. Except as expressly provided herein, Grantee shall not be required to obtain or maintain bonds or other surety as a condition of being awarded the franchise or continuing its existence. The franchising authority acknowledges that the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of Grantee are sufficient to afford compliance with the terms of the franchise and the enforcement thereof. Grantee and franchising authority recognize that the costs associated with bonds and other surety may ultimately be borne by the subscribers in the form of increased rates for cable services. In order to minimize such costs, the franchising authority agrees to require bonds and other surety only in such amounts and during such times as there is a reasonably demonstrated need therefor. The franchising authority agrees that in no event, however, shall it require a bond or other related surety in an aggregate amount greater than $10,000, conditioned upon the substantial performance of the material terms, covenants, and conditions of the franchise. Initially, no bond or other surety will be required. In the event that one is required in the future, the franchising authority agrees to give Grantee at least sixty (60) days’ prior written notice thereof stating the exact reason for the requirement. Such reason must demonstrate a change in the Grantee’s legal, financial, or technical qualifications which would materially prohibit or impair its ability to comply with the terms of the franchise or afford compliance therewith.
113.27 NOTICE OF VIOLATION. In the event that the franchising authority believes that the Grantee has not complied with the terms of the franchise, it shall notify Grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance.
113.28 GRANTEE’S RIGHT TO CURE OR RESPOND. Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice described in Section 113.27: (a) to respond to the franchising authority contesting the assertion of noncompliance or; (b) to cure such default or; (c) in the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the franchising authority of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed.
113.29 PUBLIC HEARING. In the event that Grantee fails to respond to the notice described in Section 113.27 pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 113.28, or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within sixty (60) days after the Grantee is notified of the alleged default pursuant to Section 113.27, the franchising authority shall schedule a public meeting to
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 482 -
investigate the default. Such public meeting shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the franchising authority which is scheduled at a time which is no less than five (5) business days therefrom. The franchising authority shall notify the Grantee of the time and place of such meeting and provide the Grantee with an opportunity to be heard.
113.30 ENFORCEMENT. Subject to applicable Federal and State law, in the event the franchising authority, after such meeting, determines that Grantee is in default of any provision of the franchise, the franchising authority may:
1. Foreclose on all or any part of any security provided under this chapter, if any, including without limitation, any bonds or other surety; provided, however, the foreclosure shall only be in such a manner and in such amount as the franchising authority reasonably determines is necessary to remedy the default;
2. Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief;
3. In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the franchise, declare the franchise agreement to be revoked; or
4. Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages.
The Grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly with any provision of the franchise by reason of any failure of the franchising authority to enforce prompt compliance.
113.31 ACTS OF GOD. The Grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with the provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by strikes, acts of God, power outages, or other events reasonably beyond its ability to control.
113.32 MISDEMEANOR. In addition to those criminal and civil remedies provided by State and Federal law, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person, firm or corporation to create or make use of any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of the cable system without the express consent of the Grantee. Further, without the express consent of Grantee, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to tamper with, remove, or injure any property, equipment, or part of the cable system or any means of receiving cable service or other services provided thereto. Subject to applicable Federal and State law, the franchising
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 483 -
authority may incorporate into its criminal code, if not presently a part thereof, criminal misdemeanor law which will enforce the intent of this section.
113.33 DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED AND MADE A PART HEREOF. The following documents shall be incorporated herein by this reference, and in the case of a conflict or ambiguity between or among them, the document of latest date shall govern:
1. Any enabling ordinance in existence as of the date hereof;
2. Any franchise agreement between Grantee and franchising authority reflecting the renewal of the franchise, if any.
113.34 PREEMPTION. If the FCC, or any other Federal or State body or agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of the franchise, then to the extent such jurisdiction shall preempt and supersede or preclude the exercise of the like jurisdiction by the franchising authority, the jurisdiction of the franchising authority shall cease and no longer exist.
113.35 ACTIONS OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY. In any action by the franchising authority or representative thereof mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious, and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
113.36 NOTICE. Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or response to be served upon the franchising authority or Grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party five (5) business days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, at a post office or branch thereof regularly maintained by the U.S. Postal Service.
The notices or responses to the franchising authority shall be addressed as follows:
City of Glenwood
Attn: City Clerk
107 South Locust Street
Glenwood, IA 51534
The notices or responses to the Grantee shall be addressed as follows:
Mediacom Communications
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AND
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 484 -
2705 Ingersoll Avenue
Des Moines, Iowa 50312
Franchising authority and the Grantee may designate such other address or addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other.
(Ord. 827 – Jan. 10 Supp.)
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 554 adopting a cable TV franchise for the City was passed and adopted on March 22, 1994.
[The next page is 487]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 487 -
CHAPTER 114
REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION RATES
114.01 DEREGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION RATES. Effective August 1, 2006, the City of Glenwood shall be decertified as a rate regulator of cable television rates and as consistent with the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. 780 – Aug. 06 Supp.)
CHAPTER 114 REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 488 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 489 -
CHAPTER 115
CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
115.01 Authorization
115.03 Rules and Procedures
115.02 Notification
115.04 Compliance
115.01 AUTHORIZATION. The City of Glenwood (herein called “City”) has the legal authority to adopt and enforce customer service standards for the cable television system in the City as permitted by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992. Upon review of the customer service standards adopted by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) on March 11, 1993 by MM Docket No. 92-263 of the FCC, and deeming it in the best interest of the City, the City Council herewith adopts by reference the above mentioned customer service standards for cable television service effective (at least 90 days from passage of the ordinance or date of written notification to Cable Operator, whichever is later).
115.02 NOTIFICATION. The City Manager/Clerk shall notify the Cable Operator by registered mail with return receipt that the City has adopted said customer service standards for cable television service to become effective (at least 90 days from passage of the ordinance or date of written notification to Cable Operator, whichever is later).
115.03 RULES AND PROCEDURES. The City Council/Cable Commission appointed by the Council shall establish rules and procedures regarding the process to remedy possible violations of the customer service standards by the Cable Operator. The Council or Commission shall provide for notice and opportunity for hearing for both the customers and the Cable Operator in such process.
CHAPTER 115 CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 490 -
115.04 COMPLIANCE. If after notice and opportunity for hearing, the City determines that the Cable Operator is not in complete compliance with all the provisions of the customer service standards, the Cable Operator shall reduce the rate for the basic tier of cable service by [ten percent (10%)/twenty percent (20%)/twenty-five percent (25%)] until such time that the City has been satisfied that the Cable Operator is in compliance of all the provisions of the customer service standards. In addition, the Cable Operator shall pay to the City the sum of $100.00 for each day that the Cable Operator fails to be in compliance of all the provisions of the customer service standards after the date that the Council has passed a resolution stipulating the sections where the Cable Operator is in non-compliance.
(Chapter 115 added by Ordinance No. 556)
[The next page is 490.1]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 490.1 -
CHAPTER 116
ENERGY PROVIDERS FRANCHISE FEE
116.01 Franchise Fee Established
116.05 Map
116.02 Exemption from Other Fees
116.06 Annexation
116.03 Payment
116.07 Records
116.04 Billing
116.01 FRANCHISE FEE ESTABLISHED. The City of Glenwood, Iowa, (hereinafter referred to as the “Municipality”) hereby establishes a franchise fee on every natural gas company and every other person, firm or corporation, their successors and assigns, owning, operating, controlling, leasing or managing a natural gas system and/or generating, manufacturing, selling, distributing or transporting natural gas (hereinafter referred to, collectively, as “Energy Providers,” each, individually, an “Energy Provider”). Energy Providers shall collect from their customers located within the corporate limits of the Municipality as depicted on the Map (as defined below) including the City of Glenwood and pay to the City an amount equal to five percent (5%) of gross receipts Energy Providers derive from the sale, distribution or transportation of natural gas delivered within the limits of the Municipality. Gross receipts as used herein are revenues received from the sale, distribution or transportation of natural gas, after adjustment for the net write-off of uncollectible accounts and corrections of bills theretofore rendered.
116.02 EXEMPTION FROM OTHER FEES. The amount paid by Energy Providers shall be in lieu of, and Energy Providers shall be exempt from, all other fees, charges, taxes or assessments which the Municipality may impose for the privilege of doing business within the Municipality, including, without limitation, excise taxes, occupation taxes, licensing fees, or right-of-way permit fees, and in the event the Municipality imposes any such fee, charge, tax or assessment, the payment to be made by Energy Providers in accordance with this ordinance shall be reduced in an amount equal to any such fee, charge, tax or assessment imposed upon the Energy Providers. Ad valorem property taxes imposed generally upon all real and personal property within the Municipality shall not be deemed to affect Energy Providers’ obligations under this ordinance.
116.03 PAYMENT. Energy Providers shall report and pay any amount payable under this ordinance on a monthly basis. Such payment shall be made no more than thirty (30) days following the close of the period for which payment is due. Initial and final payments shall be prorated for the portions of
CHAPTER 116 ENERGY PROVIDERS FRANCHISE FEE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 490.2 -
the periods at the beginning and end of any franchise granted by the City of Glenwood, Iowa, to an Energy Provider.
116.04 BILLING. Energy Providers shall list the franchise fee collected from customers as a separate item on bills for utility service issued to their customers. If at any time the Iowa Utilities Board or other authority having proper jurisdiction prohibits such recovery, Energy Providers will no longer be obligated to collect and pay the franchise fee until an alternate lawful franchise fee can be negotiated and implemented. In addition, with prior approval of City, Energy Providers may reduce the franchise fee payable for natural gas delivered to a specific customer when such reduction is required to attract or retain the business of that customer.
116.05 MAP. Within ten (10) days of the date of this ordinance, the Municipality shall provide the Energy Providers with a map of its corporate limits (the “Map”). The Map shall be of sufficient detail to assist Energy Providers in determining whether their customers reside within the Municipality’s corporate limits. The Map along with Energy Provider’s Geographic Information System (“GIS”) mapping information shall serve as the sole basis for determining Energy Provider’s obligation hereunder to collect and pay the franchise fee from customers; provided, however, that if the Municipality’s corporate limits are changed by annexation or otherwise, it shall be the Municipality’s sole responsibility to (a) update the Map so that such changes are included therein, and (b) provide the updated Map to the Energy Providers. An Energy Provider’s obligation to collect and pay the franchise fee from customers within an annexed area shall not commence until the later: (a) of sixty (60) days after such Energy Provider’s receipt from the Municipality of an updated Map including such annexed area, or (b) such time after such Energy Provider’s receipt from the Municipality of an updated Map including such annexed area as is reasonably necessary for such Energy Provider to identify the customers in the annexed area obligated to pay the franchise fee.
116.06 ANNEXATION. The City shall provide copies of annexation ordinances to Energy Providers on a timely basis to ensure appropriate Franchise fee collection from customers within the corporate limits of the city as set forth in Section 116.04 above.
116.07 RECORDS. The Municipality shall have access to and the right to examine, during normal business hours, Energy Provider’s books, receipts, files, records and documents as is reasonably necessary to verify the accuracy of payments due hereunder; provided, that the Municipality shall not exercise such right more than twice per calendar year. If it is determined that a mistake was made in the payment of any franchise fee required hereunder, such mistake shall be corrected promptly upon discovery such that any under-payment by an
CHAPTER 116 ENERGY PROVIDERS FRANCHISE FEE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 490.3 -
Energy Provider shall be paid within thirty (30) days of recalculation of the amount due, and any over-payment by an Energy Provider shall be deducted from the next payment of such franchise fee due by such Energy Provider to the Municipality; provided, that neither party shall have the obligation to correct a mistake that is discovered more than one (1) year after the occurrence thereof.
(Ch. 116 – Ord. 874 – Apr. 17 Supp.)
CHAPTER 116 ENERGY PROVIDERS FRANCHISE FEE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 490.4 -
[The next page is 491]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 491 -
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
120.01 License or Permit Required
120.04 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.02 General Prohibition
120.05 Outdoor Service
120.03 Action by Council
120.06 Small Open Air Service and Consumption
120.01 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171)
120.02 GENERAL PROHIBITION. It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale, possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)
120.03 ACTION BY COUNCIL. The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of the liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application, necessary fee and bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce for such further action as is provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32 [2])
120.04 PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS. A person or club holding a liquor license or retail wine or beer permit and the person’s or club’s agents or employees shall not do any of the following:
1. Sell, dispense or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [1])
2. Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on the premises covered by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) a.m. on Sunday and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. on the following Monday; however, a holder of a license or permit granted the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor, beer or wine on Sunday may sell or dispense alcoholic
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 492 -
liquor, beer or wine between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00) a.m. of the following Monday, and further provided that a holder of any class of liquor control license or the holder of a class “B” beer permit may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00) a.m. on Monday when that Monday is New Year’s Day and beer for consumption off the premises between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00) a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is the day before New Year’s Day.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2b and 2k] & 123.150)
3. Sell alcoholic beverages, wine or beer to any person on credit, except with a bona fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests or to retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center or events center. (Ord. 745 – Nov. 04 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2c])
4. Employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises where sold.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2f])
5. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 647 - Nov. 99 Supp.)
6. In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow the mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine or any other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2i])
7. Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2a])
8. Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2j])
9. Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic liquor in any container except the original package
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 493 -
purchased from the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate consumption.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2d])
10. Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original package which has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2e])
11. Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee or employees of the licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or other container which is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2g])
12. Permit or allow any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to remain upon licensed premises unless over fifty percent (50%) of the dollar volume of the business establishment comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods. This provision does not apply to holders of a class “C” beer permit only. (Ord 625)
13. Sell, give, possess or otherwise supply a machine which is used to vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized form. (Ord. 787 – Nov. 06 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2l])
120.05 OUTDOOR SERVICE. Any licensee or permittee may serve the type of alcoholic liquor, beer or wine permitted by the license or permit in an outdoor area only after complying with the following conditions:
1. The outdoor area must be enclosed by a permanent or temporary retainer which clearly encloses the outdoor area contiguous to the licensed establishment. The retainer must either be:
A. At least seventy-two (72) inches in height and constructed in a manner that prevents the passage of beverage containers outside of the enclosed area;
B. Or consist of two (2) barriers, both of which must be at least forty-two (42) inches in height, and spaced at least six (6) feet apart to prevent the passage of beverage containers outside the enclosed area. No persons shall be allowed within the six (6) foot space between the barriers.
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 494 -
2. Emergency exits must be provided with a clean and unobstructed access to a public way.
3. The outdoor service area must have adequate lighting to allow for the easy identification of individuals within that area.
4. The licensee or permittee must provide adequate staff in order to have all entrances and exits between the enclosed area and the public way staffed to prevent the transfer of open beverage containers beyond the enclosed service area and to prevent entrance to the service area by individuals which have not presented valid identification and verification of being legal drinking age.
5. All alcoholic liquor, beer or wine shall be served in paper or plastic containers; however, should the licensee or permittee maintain an outdoor service area in compliance with the City of Glenwood’s ordinances and such outdoor service area is used in the licensee’s or permittee’s normal business operations on a continuous or seasonally continuous basis, the limitation of using only paper or plastic containers shall not apply. (Ord. 844 – Jun. 11 Supp.)
6. Any outdoor service area which exceeds twelve hundred (1200) square feet must have at least two (2) bathrooms or portable bathrooms provided within that outdoor service area.
7. A diagram showing the outdoor area and describing how it will be enclosed shall be submitted to the Clerk.
8. An endorsement from the insurance company acknowledging that the outdoor area is covered by the dram shop insurance policy shall be submitted to the Clerk.
9. An application from the licensee or permittee telling what dates the outdoor area will be used shall be submitted to the Clerk.
After compliance with the above listed requirements, the Clerk shall forward the appropriate information to the Council which may approve the outdoor service area and authorize the Clerk to forward the information to the Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Division.
120.06 SMALL OPEN AIR SERVICE AND CONSUMPTION. In areas not zoned residential or which otherwise do not prohibit the sale of alcohol, a liquor licensed establishment may utilize an open air area and serve liquor for consumption provided that the maximum open air area does not exceed four hundred (400) square feet, and it meets the conditions set forth herein:
1. The open air area shall securely attach to the licensed structure and shall not protrude into the public right of way, and shall be
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 495 -
constructed and maintained so that it may only be entered and exited from the portion of the premises which is not part of the open air area and which is part of the licensed establishment. The open air area shall be enclosed by a wrought iron or similar type of fence approved by the City and structurally sufficient, in the sole discretion of the City of Glenwood, to prevent uncontrolled entrance or exit from the licensed area. The fence shall not be less that 36 inches in height and shall so be constructed and maintained to restrict access from below the top height of the fence.
2. All exits from such area shall be for emergency use only and shall be equipped with the appropriate hardware to ensure such limited use.
3. No open containers of alcohol or consumption of alcohol are permitted in the open air area between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday, or 12 midnight and 7:00 a.m. Fridays and Saturdays. For special occasions or events, the liquor licensee for the open air area may seek prior City Council approval in the event the licensee desires to serve liquor and/or operate the open air area for hours longer than established herein.
4. Amplified music and sound will be permitted in the open area during the hours that consumption is permitted, but will be subject to the City of Glenwood’s noise ordinance.
5. The outdoor service area must have adequate lighting to allow for the easy identification of individuals within that area.
6. The licensee or permitted must provide adequate staff in order to have all entrances and exits between the enclosed area and the public way staffed to prevent the transfer of open beverage containers beyond the enclosed service area. For special events as from time to time deemed by the Mayor or designee, including Glenwood’s annual Homecoming celebration date and RAGBRAI, the liquor licensee shall provide its own security personnel to maintain and enforce the provisions of this chapter and of the Code of Ordinances.
7. All alcoholic liquor, beer or wine shall be served in paper or plastic containers; however, should the licensee or permittee maintain an outdoor service area in compliance with the City of Glenwood’s ordinances and such outdoor service area is used in the licensee’s or permittee’s normal business operations on a continuous or seasonally continuous basis, the limitation of using only paper or plastic containers shall not apply.
8. A diagram showing the outdoor area and describing how it will be enclosed shall be submitted to the City Clerk.
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 496 -
9. An endorsement from the insurance company acknowledging that the outdoor area is covered by the dram shop insurance policy shall be submitted to the Clerk.
10. If two violations of State law or the Glenwood Municipal Code occur in the open air area within a twelve-month period that result in the conviction of the owner liquor licensee and/or his/her employees or agents, the use of the outdoor area as part of the liquor license premises will cease for a period of twelve (12) months, starting on the date of the second conviction. The same penalty will occur if four different incidents occur in the outdoor area within a twelve-month period that result in at least one conviction of persons other than the owner or his/her employees or agents.
(Section 120.06 added by Ord. 856 – Jul. 13 Supp.)
[The next page is 499]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 499 -
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
121.01 Definitions
121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required
121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application
121.08 Self-service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees
121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
121.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
1. “Carton” means a box or container of any kind in which ten or more packages or packs of cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or otherwise distributed to consumers.
2. “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or any other material. However, this definition is not to be construed to include cigars.
3. “Package” or “pack” means a container of any kind in which cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or otherwise distributed to consumers.
4. “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes or tobacco products are sold, stored or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
5. “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption, cigarettes, irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales or who engages in the business of selling tobacco products to ultimate consumers.
6. “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access location.
7. “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 500 -
and other smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
121.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell or solicit the sale of any cigarettes within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit shall be displayed publicly in the place of business so that it can be seen easily by the public. No permit shall be issued to a minor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
2. Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a retailer of tobacco products at any place of business without first having received a permit as a tobacco products retailer for each place of business owned or operated by the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a tobacco permit. However, if a retailer only holds a cigarette permit and that permit is suspended, revoked or expired, the retailer shall not sell any cigarettes or tobacco products during such time.
121.03 APPLICATION. A completed application on forms provided by the State Department of Revenue and accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed at least five (5) days prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal application is not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is called to act on the application, the costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.04 FEES. The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:
FEE:
July, August or September
$ 75.00
October, November or December
$ 56.25
January, February or March
$ 37.50
April, May or June
$ 18.75
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 501 -
121.05 ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION. Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit, and any permit issued, to the Iowa Department of Public Health within thirty (30) days of issuance.
121.06 REFUNDS. A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the City, except during April, May or June, in accordance with the schedule of refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.07 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. No person shall sell, give or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco products or cigarettes to any person under eighteen (18) years of age. The provision of this section includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing cigarettes or tobacco products from a vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation, assess the following:
1. For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of fourteen (14) days.
2. For a second violation within a period of two (2) years, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days. The retailer may select its preference in the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
3. For a third violation within a period of three (3) years, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days.
4. For a fourth violation within a period of three (3) years, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of sixty (60) days.
5. For a fifth violation with a period of four (4) years, the retailer’s permit shall be revoked.
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 502 -
The Clerk shall give ten (10) days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])
121.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED. Beginning January 1, 1999, except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as provided in Section 453A.36(6) of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell or offer for sale cigarettes or tobacco products, in a quantity of less than a carton, through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09 PERMIT REVOCATION. Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail permit to the Iowa Department of Public Health within thirty (30) days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
(Ch. 121 - Ord. 767 – Sep. 05 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 503 -
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose
122.11 Revocation of License
122.02 Definitions
122.12 Notice
122.03 License Required
122.13 Hearing
122.04 Application for License
122.14 Record and Determination
122.05 License Fees
122.15 Appeal
122.06 Bond Required
122.16 Effect of Revocation
122.07 License Issued
122.17 Rebates
122.08 Display of License
122.18 License Exemptions
122.09 License Not Transferable
122.19 Religious and Charitable Organizations
122.10 Time Restriction
122.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against fraud, unfair competition and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants.
122.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to house or upon the public street.
2. “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to house or upon the public street an order for goods, subscriptions, merchandise or services to be delivered or performed at a future date. (Ord. 761 – Jun. 05 Supp.)
3. “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires, leases or occupies any building or structure whatsoever. Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer does not exempt any person from being considered a transient merchant.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 504 -
122.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in the business of a transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein provided is in violation of this chapter.
122.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. An application in writing shall be filed with the Police Chief for a license under this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name, permanent and local address and business address if any. The application shall also set forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature of the applicant’s business, the last three places of such business and the length of time sought to be covered by the license. An application fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall be paid at the time of filing such application to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated therein.
122.05 LICENSE FEES. The following license fees shall be paid to the Police Chief prior to the issuance of any license.
1. Solicitors. In addition to the application fee for each person actually soliciting (principal or agent), a fee for the principal of ten dollars ($10.00) per year.
2. Peddlers or Transient Merchants.
A. For one day ..................................... $ 5.00
B. For one week ................................... $ $25.00
C. For up to six (6) months.................. $ 100.00
D. For one year or major part thereof .. $ 175.00
122.06 BOND REQUIRED. Before a license under this chapter is issued, an applicant shall provide to the Police Chief evidence that the applicant has filed a bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Iowa Code and if required under such provisions. (Ord. 761 – Jun. 05 Supp.)
122.07 LICENSE ISSUED. If the Police Chief finds the application is completed in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be correct and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately.
122.08 DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s license in the merchant’s place of business.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 505 -
122.09 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the application.
122.10 TIME RESTRICTION. All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses are in force and effect only between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) p.m.
122.11 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. After notice and hearing, the _________________ may revoke any license issued under this chapter for the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
2. Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3. Endangered Public Welfare, Health or Safety. The licensee has conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order or morals.
122.12 NOTICE. The _________________ shall send a notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local address, not less than ten (10) days before the date set for a hearing on the possible revocation of a license. Such notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the matter.
122.13 HEARING. The _________________ shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative, fail to appear without good cause, the _________________ may proceed to a determination of the complaint.
122.14 RECORD AND DETERMINATION. The _________________ shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the _________________ finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or State law.
122.15 APPEAL. If the _________________ revokes or refuses to issue a license, the _________________ shall make a part of the record the reasons therefor. The licensee, or the applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 506 -
the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the _________________ by a majority vote of the Council members present and the _________________ shall carry out the decision of the Council.
122.16 EFFECT OF REVOCATION. Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the revocation.
122.17 REBATES. Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to a rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it expires. The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total license fee by the number of days for which the license was issued and then multiplying the result by the number of full days not expired. In all cases, at least five dollars ($5.00) of the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover administrative costs.
122.18 LICENSE EXEMPTIONS. The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.
1. Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for or selling subscriptions to newspapers.
2. Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America and similar organizations.
3. Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for sale their own products.
4. Students. Students representing the ___________________ School District conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.
5. Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit additional business or make special sales.
6. Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional use.
122.19 CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS. Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating under the provisions of Chapter 504A of the Code of Iowa desiring to solicit money or to distribute literature are exempt from the operation of Sections 122.04 and 122.05. All such organizations are required to submit in writing to the _________________ the name and purpose of the cause for which such
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 507 -
activities are sought, names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions, fees or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If the _________________ finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit organization the _________________ shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the above information to the applicant. In the event the _________________ denies the exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the decision to the Council, as provided in Section 122.15 of this chapter.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 508 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 521 -
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices
135.11 Failure to Maintain Parking or Terrace
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing
135.12 Dumping of Snow
135.03 Placing Debris On
135.13 Driveway Culverts
135.04 Playing In
135.14 Curb Cuts
135.05 Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
135.15 Erection and Removal of Structures Within Public
135.06 Use for Business Purposes
Right-of-way
135.07 Washing Vehicles
135.16 Placement of Garbage/Solid Waste Containers in
135.08 Burning Prohibited
Public Right-of-way
135.09 Excavations
135.17 Obstruction of Street or any Portion Thereof
135.10 Maintenance of Parking or Terrace
135.01 REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES. It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02 OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface, or injure any street or alley in any manner, except obstructions may be utilized if in accord with Section 135.17 of the Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 857 – Aug. 13 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03 PLACING DEBRIS ON. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, leaves, grass or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle or which, if washed into the storm sewer, could clog the storm sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04 PLAYING IN. It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled or play games on streets or alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05 TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY. It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer or member of the fire department.
135.06 USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES. It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering same for sale, without permission of the Council.
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 522 -
135.07 WASHING VEHICLES. It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street or alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08 BURNING PROHIBITED. No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish or other combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09 EXCAVATIONS. No person shall dig, excavate or in any manner disturb any street, parking or alley unless such person first obtains a permit therefor as hereinafter provided:
1. Application. Before such permit is granted, the person shall file with the City a written application. The application shall contain the following:
A. An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
B. A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is to be made;
C. The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and restoration of the street or alley surface; and
D. Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
2. Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner which will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.
3. Barricades, Fencing and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing and warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or maintaining adequate barricades, fencing or warning lights shall be paid to the City by the permit holder/property owner.
4. Insurance Required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the following minimum amounts:
A. Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
B. Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.
5. Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit holder/property owner.
6. Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City. Backfill shall not be deemed completed, nor resurfacing of any improved street or alley surface begun, until such backfill is inspected and approved by the City. The
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 523 -
permit holder/property owner shall provide the City with notice at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is desired.
7. Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of twenty-four (24) hours after the approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses therefor to the permit holder/property owner.
8. Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner. The permit holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
9. Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application and filing of insurance certificate, a permit shall be issued. A separate permit shall be required for each excavation.
135.10 MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE. It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain all property outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines upon public streets. Maintenance includes responsibility for retaining walls, timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up litter. Maintenance shall not include the removal of diseased trees or dead wood. (Ord. 774 – Mar. 06 Supp.)
135.11 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PARKING OR TERRACE. If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12 DUMPING OF SNOW. It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters, or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial drives in the business district it is absolutely necessary to move the snow onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed promptly by the property owner or agent, and only after first making arrangements for such prompt removal at the owner’s cost of the accumulation within a reasonably short time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
135.13 DRIVEWAY CULVERTS. The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s property, and before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City. In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the right to make the repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for the cost of said repairs, the cost
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 524 -
shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially assessed against the property as by law provided.
135.14 CURB CUTS. No person shall cut, break or otherwise alter in any fashion any curb along a public street. The cutting of any curb for any purpose shall be done by the City at the expense of the property owner or person requesting such curb cut.
135.15 ERECTION AND REMOVAL OF STRUCTURES WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
1. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, or locate any structure as defined in Section 166.02(57) of the Code of Ordinances, except mail boxes and retaining walls, beyond the lot and property lines and upon any public street or right-of-way. A retaining wall may only be constructed within the public right-of-way provided it is located not less than four (4) feet from the inside curb line of the street abutting said property and only with the prior approval of the Public Works Director.
2. Any structure, or part thereof, located within the public right-of-way, including retaining walls and mail boxes, may be altered, destroyed, or removed by the City for necessary or normal repair and maintenance within the public right-of-way. In such instance, the City shall not be obligated to repair, replace, or otherwise restore said structure to its prior condition and shall not be responsible for any costs incurred in replacing or restoring such structure to its prior condition.
(Ord. 641 – Mar. 99 Supp.)
135.16 PLACEMENT OF GARBAGE/SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. It shall be unlawful to maintain any container used for garbage/solid waste disposal beyond the lot and property lines and upon any right-of-way for a period of more than twenty-four (24) continuous hours. Any such container(s) placed, maintained, or located beyond the lot and property lines and upon any public right-of-way for a period of more than twenty-four (24) continuous hours shall be deemed a public nuisance. (Ord. 642 – Mar. 99 Supp.)
135.17 OBSTRUCTION OF STREET OR ANY PORTION THEREOF. Any person may make a written application with the City for the purpose of barricading or otherwise blocking a street or a potion thereof to restrict vehicular traffic. The application shall include the street or the portions thereof to be barricaded, the date and the times the barricades are to be erected and removed, and the reasons for the requested barricade. The City Council shall either approve or deny the application. If the application is approved, the City Council may impose any such conditions as it deems reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances. If approved, the applicant shall remit a fee for the use, erection, and the removal of the barricades by the City Public Works Department or its designee. The fee shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 857 – Aug. 13 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 525 -
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose
136.10 Failure to Repair or Barricade
136.02 Definitions
136.11 Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice and Accumulations
136.12 Awnings
136.04 Responsibility for Maintenance
136.13 Encroaching Steps
136.05 City May Order Repairs
136.14 Openings and Enclosures
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered
136.15 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
136.07 Permit Required
136.16 Defacing
136.08 Sidewalk Standards
136.17 Debris on Sidewalks
136.09 Barricades and Warning Lights
136.18 Merchandise Display
136.19 Sales Stands
136.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair, replacement or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner and to minimize the liability of the City.
136.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the sidewalk when it is hardening.
2. “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
3. “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
4. “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification required herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
5. “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
6. “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or suburban areas.
7. “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair, replacement or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling or depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 526 -
8. “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03 REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE AND ACCUMULATIONS. It is the responsibility of all abutting property owners to remove snow, ice and accumulations from sidewalks after a weather event. For all commercial properties, the property owners shall remove the snow, ice and accumulations from the sidewalks within twenty-four (24) hours of a weather event. For all other properties, the abutting property owner shall remove snow, ice and accumulations from sidewalks within forty-eight (48) hours of a weather event. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the following sections, if the property owner does not remove the snow, ice or accumulation within the specified time frame, the City may do so and assess the costs against the property owner for collection in the same manner as real estate taxes. The cost assessed shall be calculated at $2.00 a linear foot for each foot of the sidewalk in which the snow, ice, or accumulations have been removed by the City, with such costs not to exceed $150.00 per sidewalk. There shall also be assessed to the property owner on administrative fee of $30.00. (Ord. 860 – Apr. 14 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])
136.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE. It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to maintain in a safe, hazard-free condition and to the requirements of the City any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or traveled portion of the public street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2c])
(Ord. 832 – Oct. 10 Supp.)
136.05 CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS. If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d & e])
136.06 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED. The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 527 -
136.07 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall remove, reconstruct or install a sidewalk unless such person has obtained a permit from the City and has agreed in writing that said removal, reconstruction or installation will comply with all ordinances and requirements of the City for such work. The requirements of the City may include, but are not necessarily limited to, such matters as design appearance of the sidewalk, the colors of the sidewalk, the concrete or other materials utilized in the reconstruction or installation of the sidewalk, the dimensions and thickness of the sidewalk and the location of the sidewalk.
(Ord. 832 – Oct. 10 Supp.)
136.08 SIDEWALK STANDARDS. Sidewalks repaired, replaced or constructed under the provisions of this chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following standards:
1. Cement. Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the construction and repair of sidewalks.
2. Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction.
3. Sidewalk Base. Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-drained soil. Where soil is not well drained, a three (3) inch sub-base of compact, clean, coarse gravel, sand, or cinders shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil drainage is to be determined by the City.
4. Sidewalk Bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the constructed sidewalk will be at established grade.
5. Length, Width and Depth. Length, width and depth requirements are as follows:
A. Residential sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet wide and four (4) inches thick, and each section shall be no more than four (4) feet in length.
B. Business District sidewalks shall extend from the property line to the curb. Each section shall be four (4) inches thick and no more than six (6) feet in length.
C. Driveway areas shall be not less than six (6) inches in thickness.
6. Location. Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge (edge nearest the abutting private property) on the property line, unless the Council establishes a different distance due to special circumstances.
7. Grade. Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the street which shall be the established grade.
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 528 -
8. Elevations. The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation even with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half (½) inch above the curb for each foot between the curb and the sidewalk.
9. Slope. All sidewalks shall slope one-quarter (¼) inch per foot toward the curb.
10. Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a “broom” or “wood float” finish.
11. Curb Ramps and Sloped Areas for Persons with Disabilities. If a street, road, or highway is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed or installed at each intersection of the street, road, or highway with a sidewalk or path. If a sidewalk or path is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed or installed at each intersection of the sidewalk or path with a street, highway, or road. Curb ramps and sloped areas that are required pursuant to this subsection shall be constructed or installed in compliance with applicable Federal requirements adopted in accordance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act, including (but not limited to) the guidelines issued by the Federal Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board. (Ord. 836 – Oct. 10 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)
136.09 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS. Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue, highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply with provisions hereof.
136.10 FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE. It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of failure or inability to make
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 529 -
necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.11 INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS. No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove or deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.12 AWNINGS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any sidewalk unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight (8) feet above the surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely fastened to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians.
136.13 ENCROACHING STEPS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the Council.
136.14 OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES. It is unlawful for a person to:
1. Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the Council.
2. Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public.
3. Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on or within six (6) feet of any sidewalk.
136.15 FIRES OR FUELS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.16 DEFACING. It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or writing on any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.17 DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash,
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 530 -
garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
136.18 MERCHANDISE DISPLAY. It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case shall more than three (3) feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such purposes.
136.19 SALES STANDS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 541 -
CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
139.01 Naming New Streets
139.04 Official Street Name Map
139.02 Changing Name of Street
139.05 Revision of Street Name Map
139.03 Recording Street Names
139.01 NAMING NEW STREETS. New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
1. Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the existing street.
2. Ordinance. All street names, except streets named as a part of a subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by ordinance.
3. Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
139.02 CHANGING NAME OF STREET. The Council may, by ordinance, change the name of a street.
139.03 RECORDING STREET NAMES. Following adoption of an ordinance naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and County Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04 OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP. Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section 139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of Glenwood, Iowa.”
139.05 REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP. If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Council with an entry on the Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the City Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map: (brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk. No
CHAPTER 139 NAMING OF STREETS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 542 -
amendment to this chapter which involves naming or changing the name of a street shall become effective until after such change and entry has been made on said map.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Street Name Map of the City:
ORDINANCE NO.
SUBJECT
DATE
509
Sivers Road
6-27-89
522
Heritage Lane
6-12-90
525
South Hazel Street
12-11-90
658
Linden Lane
9-12-00
755
Sharp Street, South Locust Street, Railroad Avenue
11-9-04
775
Stonebriar Lane
3-14-06
807
East Sharp Street, Redbud Avenue, Oak Street, Existing Street Names of Marian Avenue and Hershey Avenue
2-12-08
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 551 -
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
145.01 Enforcement Officer
145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe
145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building
145.07 Right to Demolish
145.04 Written Notice to Owner of Building or Structure
145.08 Costs
145.01 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Either the Mayor or the Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 808 – Mar. 08 Supp.)
145.02 GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE. All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this chapter, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 & 364.12[3a])
145.03 UNSAFE BUILDING. “Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all of the following criteria:
1. Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of (a) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (b) faulty construction; (c) the removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (d) the deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or (e) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
2. Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
3. Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is likely to cause sickness or disease.
CHAPTER 145 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 552 -
4. Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
5. Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04 WRITTEN NOTICE TO OWNER OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such is found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice stating the defects thereof. This written notice may require the owner, person or persons in charge of the building or structure, within 48 hours or such reasonable time as the circumstances may require, to commence either the required repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions thereof. All such work shall be completed within 90 days from date of the written notice, unless otherwise agreed to by the enforcement officer. If necessary, such written notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to be vacated immediately and not reoccupied until the required repairs and improvements are completed and inspected and approved by the enforcement officer.
1. Written Notice Served. The written notice shall be served upon the record owner of the building or structure in one of the following manners:
A. By way of certified mail in accord with Iowa Code §354.123(3)(h);
B. By registered mail;
C. By personal service; or
D. By publication in the Glenwood Opinion Tribune if the record owner of the building or structure is unable to be located and upon the enforcement officer or Mayor attesting in affidavit form that a diligent search for the known address of the record owner of the building or structure was made, but to no avail. In the event of service by publication, the code enforcement officer or Mayor shall also cause the written notice to be posted upon the dangerous building or structure.
CHAPTER 145 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 553 -
2. Oral Hearing. All written notices shall also advise the owner that he or she may request an oral hearing before the City Council on the written notice by filing a written request for oral hearing within the time provided in the written notice.
(Ord. 808 – Mar. 08 Supp.)
145.05 CONDUCT OF HEARING. If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the following:
1. Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the date, time and place of hearing.
2. Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
3. Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and may issue such order as it deems appropriate.†
145.06 POSTING OF SIGNS. The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY OF GLENWOOD, IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the building.
145.07 RIGHT TO DEMOLISH. In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08 COSTS. Costs incurred under Section 145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury. Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied as a special assessment against the land on which the building or structure is located, and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for collection in the manner provided for other taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the Council for the administration of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX to this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this procedure. We recommend you review the situation with your attorney before initiating procedures and follow his or her recommendation carefully.
CHAPTER 145 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 554 -
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 555 -
CHAPTER 146
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
146.01 Definitions
146.03 Foundation Requirements
146.02 Conversion to Real Property
146.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)
1. “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure, built under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403, which was constructed on or after June 15, 1976, and is required by Federal law to display a seal from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
2. “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home means any such vehicle built before June 15, 1976, which was not built to a mandatory building code and which contains no State or Federal seals.
3. “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which three (3) or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of any of these homes, are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and electrical services available. The term “mobile home park” is not to be construed to include mobile homes, buildings, tents or other structures temporarily maintained by any individual, educational institution or company on their own premises and used exclusively to house their own labor or students. The mobile home park shall meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that are in effect.
146.02 CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY. A mobile home or manufactured home which is located outside a mobile home park shall be converted to real estate by being placed on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for real estate taxes except in the following cases:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26 & Sec. 435.35)
CHAPTER 146 MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 556 -
1. Dealer’s Stock. Mobile homes or manufactured homes on private property as part of a dealer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used as a place for human habitation.
2. Existing Homes. A taxable mobile home or manufactured home which is located outside of a mobile home park as of January 1, 1995, shall be assessed and taxed as real estate, but is exempt from the permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until the home is relocated.
146.03 FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS. A mobile home or manufactured home located outside of a mobile home park shall be placed on a permanent frost-free foundation system which meets the support and anchorage requirements as recommended by the manufacturer or required by the State Building Code. The foundation system must be visually compatible with permanent foundation systems of surrounding residential structures. Any such home shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the State Building Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10)
(Ch. 146 - Ord. 635 - Sep. 98 Supp.)
[The next page is 559]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 561 -
CHAPTER 148
ALARM SYSTEMS
148.01 Definitions
148.04 Prohibition and Terms
148.02 Registration
148.05 Revocation of Registration
148.03 Duties
148.06 Penalty
148.01 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
1. “Alarm answering service or remote monitoring point” means a business providing the function of receiving on a continuous basis, through trained employees, emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter relaying a message by line voice to the Mills County Communications Center (911) or the Glenwood police or fire departments.
2. “Alarm system” means and includes any device used to detect or prevent intrusion, criminal activity, fire, or other such emergency situations which, when activated, causes notification to be made directly or indirectly to the Mills County Communications Center or the Glenwood police or fire departments, or any device or system designed primarily for the purpose of giving an audible or visual signal for an attempted intrusion, criminal activity, fire or other such emergency. An alarm system shall not include an alarm installed on a motor vehicle.
3. “Alarm user” means the person, firm, corporation or entity of any kind in control of any building, structure or facility who purchases, leases, contracts for, or otherwise obtains an alarm system.
4. “Annunciator” means that part of an alarm system which communicates the fact that the system has been triggered or activated.
5. “Audible annunciator” or “visual annunciator” means an annunciator which gives alarm by means of a bell, siren, buzzer, flashing light, or similar sound or light-producing device when activated, which is mounted at some location which is clearly visible when observed, or clearly audible at a distance of fifty feet or more outside of any building in which it is mounted. Annunciators can communicate directly with the Mills County Communications Center or indirectly through the use of an alarm answering service or remote monitoring point.
6. “False alarm” means and includes any signal, directly or indirectly originating from an alarm system, eliciting an urgent response by police or rescue personnel when a situation requiring an urgent
CHAPTER 148 ALARM SYSTEMS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 562 -
response does not, in fact, exist. The term does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. The burden of proving that such alarm was not a false alarm shall be on the alarm user.
7. “Local alarm system” means and includes an alarm system which, when activated, causes an audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated and is intended to be seen and/or heard by others outside of the protected premises.
148.02 REGISTRATION. Effective from July 1, 2002, and after, it shall be unlawful for any alarm user to use or operate any alarm system without a current valid registration therefor. Any person, firm or corporation installing an alarm system after July 1, 2002, shall have thirty days from the date of installation to obtain a registration therefor.
1. Application. The application for an alarm system registration shall list:
A. The registrant’s name, Glenwood address, telephone number, date of birth and social security number;
B. The protected property’s address, any business name by which the premises may be known as, including the name of the complex or center where it is located, the type of premises it is, and the telephone number(s) for the protected property;
C. Type of alarm(s) and/or signal(s) being communicated by file annunciator and the type of activity indicated by the alarm(s) system(s);
D. The name, date of birth, social security number, home and business address and telephone number of the owner(s), lessee(s) and occupant(s) of the protected premises;
E. The name, date of birth, social security number, home and business address and telephone number of three natural contact persons, or an alarm answering service, having ready access to the protected premises and who may be called upon to assist in the event the alarm is activated.
2. Issuance, Expiration, Renewal and Termination.
A. Upon receipt of the registration application, the Mayor, if it is determined that the proposed system will comply with the provisions of this chapter, may issue a registration to the applicant. The registration will bear the applicant’s identifying
CHAPTER 148 ALARM SYSTEMS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 563 -
number and expiration date in addition to the terms and conditions which must be complied with to keep the registration in full force and effect.
B. The registration shall expire twenty-four months after the date of its issuance, and may be renewed in the same manner as original registrations are obtained.
C. Renewal registrations will be dated on the date of issuance. The renewal application shall contain the applicant’s signed statement that there have been no changes in any of the information furnished on the previous application.
D. An alarm system registration shall automatically terminate upon any change of alarm user or protected premises. No registration is transferable to new premises or new user. No refunds will be given on termination of any registration for any reason.
3. Fee. The original and renewal applications shall be accompanied with a $25.00 fee, payable to the City. A late charge as set out in the prevailing schedule of fees will be assessed on all registration holders who do not file the renewal application prior to the expiration date of their existing registrations.
148.03 DUTIES. All registration holders shall:
1. Within ten days following any change of circumstances or any change of information contained within the application, file an amendment to his/her application setting forth the currently accurate information. No additional fee shall be required unless the change has terminated the registration;
2. Cause to be trained and retrained all employees, family members and other persons who make regular use of the protected premises and who may, in the normal course of their activities, be in a position to accidentally trigger an alarm. Such training shall include procedures and practices to avoid accidental alarms, and steps to follow in the event the system is accidentally triggered;
3. At all times be responsible for the proper maintenance and repair of the system and for the repair and/or replacement of any component, method of installation, design feature or like condition which may give rise to a false alarm;
4. Set or program each alarm system so that each audible annunciator will automatically silence within fifteen minutes after being activated and will not sound again unless a new act or circumstance
CHAPTER 148 ALARM SYSTEMS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 564 -
triggers it. Annunciators associated with fire alarms shall not be required to shut off automatically, nor shall water-flow alarms with local annunciators only be regulated by this chapter;
5. At all times abide by and comply with the rules and regulations for the operation of an alarm system established by the Mayor pursuant to this section and incorporated into the grant of the alarm system registration by this reference.
148.04 PROHIBITION AND TERMS.
1. No alarm system shall be installed, used, including the occurrence of false alarms as defined in this chapter, or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
2. No test of an alarm system incorporating a local audible annunciator shall be conducted between the hours of ten p.m. of any day and seven a.m. of the following day. No test of any alarm system shall be conducted contrary to the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this code, nor contrary to applicable State law.
3. At any time prior to or following the issuance of any registration, the Mayor may conduct such investigation as determined necessary to verify that the information furnished by the applicant is accurate, and that the alarm system is in conformance to this chapter as well as all other applicable provisions of the law.
148.05 REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION. The Mayor may, upon the recommendation of the Mills County Communications Director or the Chief of Police of Glenwood or the City’s legal department, revoke any outstanding registration and prohibit any further use of the alarm system in question until such time that the Mayor determines that the alarm system in question is operational and functional under the provisions of this chapter.
148.06 PENALTY. Any alarm user, registration holder or applicant who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction and may be fined the sum of $50.00 for a first offense violation, the sum of $75.00 for a second offense violation and the sum of $100.00 for a third and subsequent offenses per calendar year. (Ord. 700 – Sep. 02 Supp.)
(Ch. 148 – Ord. 688 – May 02 Supp.)
[The next page is 571]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 585 -
CHAPTER 160
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
160.01 Purpose
160.14 Administration
160.02 Definitions
160.15 Flood Plain Development Permit Required
160.03 Lands to Which Chapter Applies
160.16 Application for Permit
160.04 Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries
160.17 Action on Permit Application
160.05 Compliance
160.18 Construction and Use to Be as Provided in
160.06 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
Application and Plans
160.07 Interpretation
160.19 Conditional Uses, Appeals and Variances
160.08 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
160.20 Factors Upon Which the Decision to Grant Variances
160.09 Establishment of Zoning (Overlay) Districts
Is Based
160.10 Floodway (Overlay) District - FW
160.21 Conditions Attached to Variances
160.11 Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District - FF
160.22 Appeals to the Court
160.12 General Flood Plain (Overlay) District - FP
160.23 Nonconforming Uses
160.13 Shallow Flooding (Overlay) District - SF
160.24 Amendments
160.01 PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City and its residents and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare and comfort and convenience of its residents by minimizing flood losses with provisions designed to:
1. Reserve sufficient flood plain area for the conveyance of flood flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
2. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities.
3. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public utilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction or substantial improvement.
4. Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for intended purposes because of flood hazard.
5. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance Program.
160.02 DEFINITIONS. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
1. “Base flood” means the flood having one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (See 100-year flood.)
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 586 -
2. “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see “lowest floor.”
3. “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
4. “Existing construction” means any structure for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map. May also be referred to as “existing structure.”
5. “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the effective date of these flood plain management regulations.
6. “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
7. “Factory-built home” means any structure designed for residential use which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site. For the purpose of this chapter, factory-built homes include mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular homes and also includes “recreational vehicles” which are placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
8. “Factory-built home park” means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.
9. “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
10. “Flood elevation” means the elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance,
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 587 -
the 100-year flood elevation is the elevation of floodwaters related to the occurrence of the 100-year flood.
11. “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map prepared as part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
12. “Flood plain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result of a flood.
13. “Flood plain management” means an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of flood plains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and flood plain management regulations.
14. “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
15. “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the flood plains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot.
16. “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the flood plain, other than the floodway, which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed without causing substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.
17. “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing in the National Register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or,
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 588 -
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by either (i) an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
18. “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a basement except when all the following criteria are met:
A. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of Section 160.11(4)(A); and
B. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or storage; and
C. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one foot above the 100-year flood level; and
D. The enclosed area is not a “basement” as defined in this section.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria A, B, C and D above, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that does not satisfy the criteria above.
19. “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks) means those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
20. “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of these flood plain management regulations.
21. “100-Year Flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100) years.
22. “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 589 -
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
23. “Special flood hazard area” means the land within a community subject to the “100-year flood.” This land is identified as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
24. “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
25. “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks and other similar uses.
26. “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
27. “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which satisfies either of the following criteria:
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 590 -
A. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either (i) before the “start of construction” of the improvement, or (ii) if the structure has been “substantially damaged” and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe conditions for the existing use. The term also does not include any alteration of an “historic structure,” provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as an “historic structure.”
B. Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by twenty-five percent (25%) or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map, shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed twenty-five percent.
28. “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the flood plain management regulations.
29. “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter.
160.03 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map as being within the boundaries of the Floodway, Floodway Fringe, General Flood Plain and Shallow Flooding (Overlay) Districts. The Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for the City, dated _____________________, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained with the Flood Insurance Study are also declared to be a part of this chapter.
160.04 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. The boundaries of the zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the ______________________ shall make the necessary interpretation. The ______________________ shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the ______________________ in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 591 -
160.05 COMPLIANCE. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
160.06 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall prevail. Any ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
160.07 INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
160.08 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. The standards required by this chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does not imply that areas outside the designated Flood Plain (Overlay) District areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
160.09 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS. The flood plain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided into the following districts:
1. Floodway District (FW)
2. Floodway Fringe District (FF)
3. General Flood Plain District (FP)
4. Shallow Flooding District (SF).
The boundaries are as shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map. Within these districts all uses not allowed as permitted uses or permissible as conditional uses are prohibited unless a variance to the terms of this chapter is granted after due consideration by the Board of Adjustment.
160.10 FLOODWAY (OVERLAY) DISTRICT - FW.
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 592 -
include placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstruction, the storage of material or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse.
A. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
B. Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips.
C. Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
D. Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
E. Such other open-space uses similar in nature to the above uses.
2. Conditional Uses. The following uses which involve structures (temporary or permanent), fill, storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be permitted only upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the Board of Adjustment as provided for in Section 160.19. Such uses must also meet the applicable provisions of the Floodway District Performance Standards.
A. Uses or structures accessory to open-space uses.
B. Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement enterprises.
C. Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands, signs, and billboards.
D. Extraction of sands, gravel, and other materials.
E. Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, and wharves.
F. Utility transmission lines and underground pipelines.
G. Other uses similar in nature to uses described in subsection 1 and in this subsection which are consistent with the provisions of subsection 3 and the general spirit and purpose of this chapter.
3. Performance Standards. All Floodway District uses allowed as a permitted or conditional use shall meet the following standards:
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 593 -
A. No use shall be permitted in the Floodway District that would result in any increase in the 100-year flood level. Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.
B. All uses within the Floodway District shall:
(1) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(2) Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
(3) Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
C. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any other facility or system.
D. Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe District and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
E. Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and shall not be for human habitation.
F. Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other material may be allowed if readily removable from the Floodway District within the time available after flood warning.
G. Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
H. Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
I. Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 594 -
160.11 FLOODWAY FRINGE (OVERLAY) DISTRICT - FF. All uses within the Floodway Fringe District shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe District. All uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and shall meet the following applicable performance standards.
1. All structures shall:
A. Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
B. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
C. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
2. Residential Buildings. All new or substantially improved residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level. Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the 100-year flood level and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed, subject to favorable consideration by the Board of Adjustment, where existing topography, street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential structures shall be provided with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.
3. Nonresidential Buildings. All new or substantially improved non-residential buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that the structure, below the 100-year flood level, is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
4. All new and substantially improved structures.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 595 -
A. Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor” (not including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and low damage potential storage.
B. New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
C. New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
5. Factory-built Homes.
A. All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level.
B. All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
6. Utility and Sanitary Systems.
A. On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding.
B. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 596 -
system as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
C. New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
D. Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
7. Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or (i) not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to flood waters or (ii) be readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
8. Flood control structural works such as levees, flood-walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a minimum of 3 feet of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition, structural flood control works shall be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
9. Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
10. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-year flood elevation data for those areas located within the Flood Plain (Overlay) District.
11. Accessory Structures.
A. Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures accessory to a residential use are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation requirements where the following criteria are satisfied:
(1) The structure shall not be used for human habitation.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 597 -
(2) The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.
(3) The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
(4) The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which may result in damage to other structures.
(5) The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above the 100-year flood level.
B. Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of the structure and its contents.
12. Recreational Vehicles.
A. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of Section 160.11(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when the following criteria are satisfied.
(1) The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than 180 consecutive days, and,
(2) The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
B. Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180 consecutive days and are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements of Section 160.11(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes.
13. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the stream bed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
160.14 ADMINISTRATION. The __________________ shall administer and enforce this chapter and will herein be referred to as the Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the Administrator include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
1. Review all flood plain development permit applications to assure that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
2. Review all flood plain development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from Federal, State or local
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 598 -
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of Natural Resources for flood plain construction.
3. Record and maintain a record of (i) the elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures or (ii) the elevation to which new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
4. Notify adjacent communities and/or countries and the Department of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
5. Keep a record of all permits, appeals, and such other transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
6. Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form supplied by the Federal Insurance Administrator.
7. Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations or modifications to the community’s boundaries.
8. Review subdivision proposals to insure such proposals are consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Council of potential conflicts.
160.15 FLOOD PLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED. A Flood Plain Development Permit issued by the Administrator shall be secured prior to any flood plain development (any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations) including the placement of factory-built homes.
160.16 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. Application for a Flood Plain Development Permit shall be made on forms supplied by the Administrator and shall include the following information.
1. Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which application is to be made.
2. Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done (i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that will readily identify and locate the work to be done.
3. Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
4. Elevation of the 100-year flood.
5. Elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a building is to be floodproofed.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 599 -
6. For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
7. Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
160.17 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION. The Administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed flood plain development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The Administrator shall not issue permits for variances except as directed by the Board of Adjustment.
160.18 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATION AND PLANS. Flood Plain Development Permits issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing or other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.
160.19 CONDITIONAL USES, APPEALS AND VARIANCES. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide (i) applications for conditional uses upon which the Board is authorized to pass under this chapter; (ii) appeals, and (iii) requests for variances to the provisions of this chapter; and shall take any other action which is required of the Board.
1. Conditional Uses. Requests for conditional uses shall be submitted to the Administrator, who shall forward such to the Board of Adjustment for consideration. Such requests shall include information ordinarily submitted with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary by the Board of Adjustment.
2. Appeals. Where it is alleged there is any error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal such action. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment and with the official from whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason for the appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
3. Variances. The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 600 -
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards.
A. Variances shall only be granted upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.
B. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood would result. Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.
C. Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
D. In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator that (i) the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and (ii) such construction increases risks to life and property.
E. All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the Department of Natural Resources.
4. Hearings and Decisions of the Board of Adjustment.
A. Hearings. Upon the filing with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal, an application for a conditional use or a request for a variance, the Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to parties in interest. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence. The Board may require the appellant or applicant to provide such information as is reasonably deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance and/or evaluation of a professional engineer or other expert person or agency, including the Department of Natural Resources.
B. Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal, conditional use or variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an appeal, the Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm wholly or in part, or
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 601 -
modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision. In granting a conditional use or variance, the Board shall consider such factors as contained in this section and all other relevant sections of this chapter and may prescribe such conditions as contained in Section 160.21.
160.20 FACTORS UPON WHICH THE DECISION TO GRANT VARIANCES IS BASED. In passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
1. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
2. The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or downstream to the injury of others.
3. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
4. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
5. The importance of the service provided by the proposed facility to the City.
6. The requirements of the facility for a flood plain location.
7. The availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
8. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
9. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for the area.
10. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
11. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.
12. The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas, electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.
13. Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this chapter.
160.21 CONDITIONS ATTACHED TO VARIANCES. Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
1. Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 602 -
2. Limitation on periods of use and operation.
3. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
4. Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
5. Floodproofing measures designed to be consistent with the flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, durations, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with the regulatory flood. The Board of Adjustment shall require that the applicant submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 603 -
(1) Anchorage to resist floatation and lateral movement.
(2) Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads, and shutters, or similar methods of construction.
(3) Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures.
(4) Use of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce seepage of water through walls.
(5) Addition of mass or weight structures to resist flotation.
(6) Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
(7) Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to prevent the entrance of flood waters.
(8) Pumping facilities or comparable practices for subsurface drainage systems for building to relieve external foundation wall and basement flood pressures.
(9) Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or floating debris.
(10) Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup sewage and storm waters into the buildings or structures.
(11) Location of all electrical equipment, circuits and installed electrical appliances in a manner which will assure they are not subject to flooding.
F. Appeals To The Court. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board.
160.25 NONCONFORMING USES. A structure or the use of a structure on land which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following conditions:
1. Value. No structural alteration, addition, or repair to any nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall exceed fifty
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 604 -
percent (50%) of its value at the time of its becoming a nonconforming use, unless the structure is permanently changed to a conforming use.
2. Use Discontinued. If such use is discontinued for eighteen (18) consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter. The assessor shall notify the Administrator in writing of instances of nonconforming uses which have been discontinued for eighteen (18) months.
3. Destroyed. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including floods, to an extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its value prior to destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
4. Nuisances. Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
5. Conditional Use. Except as provided in Section 160.25(4), any use which has been permitted as a Conditional Use or Variance shall be considered a conforming use.
160.26 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION. Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of Conditional Uses or Variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 647 – Nov. 99 Supp.)
160.27 AMENDMENTS. The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this chapter may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed as provided in Section 414.4, 414.5 and 414.21 of the Code of Iowa. No amendment, supplement, change, or modification to this chapter shall be undertaken without prior approval of the Department of Natural Resources.
[The next page is 625]
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 625 -
CHAPTER 165
ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
EDITOR’S NOTE
The “Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance for the City of Glenwood, Iowa,” adopted August 14, 2001, by Ordinance No. 675, and amendments thereto, contained in a separate volume, are a part of this Code of Ordinances and are in full force and effect. The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Zoning and Subdivision Regulations of the City.
ORDINANCE
ADOPTED
SUBJECT
680
October 23, 2001
Required Yards; Permitted Signs; Sewer
683
February 12, 2002
Penalties for Violation of Regulations
686
March 26, 2002
Supplemental Regulations; Fences
691
April 23, 2002
Table 168-2: Matrix of Permitted Uses
692
May 14, 2002
Zoning Land as GC and UC
697
July 23, 2002
Setback Adjustments
702
July 23, 2002
Setback Adjustments
705
September 10, 2002
Real Estate Designated as GC
710
September 24, 2002
Board of Adjustment; Appeals
720
January 28, 2003
Signs; Building Permit
723
April 22, 2003
Assisted Living Provisions
724
April 22, 2003
Rezoning from R4 to R3
735
December 9, 2003
Supplemental Regulations; Lot Size
736
December 9, 2003
Minimum Width and Floor Area
737
December 9, 2003
Sign Regulations
740
April 13, 2004
Supplemental Design Standards
756
December 28, 2004
Amendment Procedures; Building Permits; Setback Adjustments; Definitions
759
March 29, 2005
Commercial Design Standards
762
June 28, 2005
Table 168-3: Site Development Regs.; Table 175-1: Permitted Signs
765
August 9, 2005
Table 168-3: Site Development Regs.
771
November 8, 2005
Off-street Parking
778
June 13, 2006
Building Permits; Setback Adjustments;
Parking for Personal and Recreational Vehicles; Prepared Surface
781
July 25, 2006
Fences, Setbacks, Swimming Pools
783
August 22, 2006
Rezoning from GC and AR to HC
CHAPTER 165 ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 626 -
ORDINANCE
ADOPTED
SUBJECT
788
October 24, 2006
Rezoning from LI to R-4
793
July 10, 2007
Window Defined
794
July 24, 2007
Table 168-2: Conditional Uses
798
October 9, 2007
Jurisdiction
805
November 20, 2007
Table 168-2; Setback Adjustments
809
February 26, 2008
Zoning Properties R-4, LI, R-2, RR, AR
819
July 28, 2009
Single-Family Residential; Supplemental Design Standards; Architectural Requirements
823
September 8, 2009
Convenience Storage
833
August 24, 2010
Table 168-2: Matrix of Permitted Uses
839
November 9, 2010
Table 168-2: Matrix of Permitted Uses
840
December 28, 2010
Table 168-2: Matrix of Permitted Uses
843
April 12, 2011
Table 168-2: Matrix of Permitted Uses
850
March 27, 2012
Residential Roofs
886
December 19, 2017
Unified Land Development
CHAPTER 165 ZONING AND SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES - GLENWOOD, IOWA
- 495 -
A Unified
Land Development
Ordinance for
The City of Glenwood, IA
This Restructured Conversion Prepared by: JDW Midwest, LLC
Date: September 2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS
City of Glenwood - Land Development Ordinance i
SECTION 165 – GENERAL PROVISIONS Page
165.01 Title 165-1
165.02 Jurisdiction 165-1
165.03 Purpose 165-1
165.04 Consistency with Comprehensive Plan 165-1
165.05 Conflicting Provisions 165-1
165.06 Relief from Other Provisions 165-2
165.07 City of Exemption 165-2
165.08 Severability of Provisions 165-2
165.09 Publication 165-2
SECTION 166 – DEFINITIONS Page
166.01 Purpose 166-1
166.02 General Construction of Language 166-1
166.03 Definition of Terms 166-2
166.04 A 166-2
166.05 B 166-3
166.06 C 166-4
166.07 D 166-6
166.08 E 166-6
166.09 F 166-6
166.10 G 166-7
166.11 H 166-7
166.12 I 166-8
166.13 J 166-8
166.14 K 166-8
166.15 L 166-8
166.16 M 166-10
166.17 N 166-11
166.18 O 166-12
166.19 P 166-12
166.20 Q 166-14
166.21 R 166-14
166.22 S 166-14
166.23 T 166-15
166.24 U 166-16
166.25 V 166-16
166.26 W 166-16
166.27 X 166-16
166.28 Y 166-16
166.29 Z 166-17
TABLE OF CONTENTS
City of Glenwood - Land Development Ordinance ii
SECTION 167 – USE TYPES Page
167.01 Purpose 167-1
167.02 Determinations 167-1
167.03 Agricultural Use Types 167-1
167.04 Residential Use Types 167-2
167.05 Civic Use Types 167-4
167.06 Office Use Types 167-8
167.07 Commercial Use Types 167-8
167.08 Parking Use Types 167-9
167.09 Industrial Use Types 167-15
167.10 Transportation Use Types 167-16
167.11 Miscellaneous Type Uses 167-18
SECTION 168 – ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS Page
168.01 Purpose 168-1
168.02 Establishment of Districts 168-1
168.03 Application of Districts 168-1
168.04 Hierarchy 168-2
168.05 Development Regulations 168-2
168.06 Zoning Map 168-2
168.07 Interpretation of District Boundaries 168-2
168.08 Vacation of Streets and Alleys 168-3
168.09 Annexation of Territory 168-3
168.10 Required Conformance 168-3
168.11 Required Frontage 168-3
Table 168-1: Purpose of Zoning Districts 168-5
168.12 Levels of Permitted Uses 168-7
168.13 Guide to Site Development Regulators 168-7
Table 168-2: Permitted Uses by Zoning Districts 168-10
Table 168-3: Summary of Site Development Regulations 168-15
SECTION 169 – PERFORMANCE POINT EVALUATION SYSTEM Page
169.01 Purpose 169-1
169.02 Application 169-1
169.03 Performance Point Requirements 169-1
169.04 Project Evaluation 169-1
169.05 Evaluation Standards 169-2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
City of Glenwood - Land Development Ordinance iii
SECTION 170 – SPECIAL AND OVERALL DISTRICTS Page
170.01 General Purpose 170-1
170.10 MU Mixed Use District 170-2
170.101 Purpose 170-2
170.102 Permitted Uses 170-2
170.103 Site Development Regulations 170-2
170.104 Adoption of District 170-3
170.105 Amendments 170-3
170.20 PD Planned Development District 170-4
170.201 Purpose 170-4
170.202 Permitted Uses 170-4
170.203 Objectives of Planned Development Districts 170-4
170.204 Site Development Regulations 170-5
170.205 Access to Public Streets 170-5
170.206 Application Process 170-5
170.207 Adoption of District 170-6
170.208 Amendment Procedure 170-7
170.209 Building Permits 170-7
170.210 Terminations of PUD District 170-7
170.30 NC Historic Neighborhood Conservation District 170-8
170.301 Purpose 170-8
170.302 Application and Use 170-8
170.303 Procedure for Adoption 170-8
170.304 Adoption of District 170-9
170.305 Building Permits 170-9
170.40 RC Conservation Development Overlay District 170-10
170.401 Purpose 170-10
170.402 Process 170-10
170.403 Permitted Uses 170-10
170.404 Permitted Yield 170-10
170.405 Minimum Percentage of Open Space 170-11
170.406 Conservation Areas as Open Space 170-11
170.407 Location Standards for Open Space 170-12
170.408 Special Processes for Conservation Developments 170-13
170.409 Ownership and Maintenance of Common Open Space 170-14
170.410 Maintenance of Standards 170-16
170.411 Evaluations Criteria 170-16
170.50 FP/FW Floodplain/Floodway Overlay District 170-18
170.501 Purpose 170-18
TABLE OF CONTENTS
City of Glenwood - Land Development Ordinance iv
170.502 Findings of Fact 170-18
170.503 Permits and Administration 170-21
170.504 Establishment if Zoning Districts 170-22
170.505 Standards 170-22
170.506 Floodplain Overlay District Regulations 170-24
170.507 Floodplain Overlay District Permitted Uses 170-26
170.508 Requests for Variances 170-26
170.509 Zoning Regulations for Nonconforming Uses 170-28
170.510 Definitions 170-29
SECTION 171 – SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS Page
171.01 Purpose 171-1
171.02 Supplemental Use Regulations: Agricultural Uses 171-1
171.03 Supplemental Use Regulations: Residential Uses 171-2
171.04 Supplemental Use Regulations: Civic Uses 171-7
171.05 Supplemental Use Regulations: Commercial Uses 171-8
171.06 Supplemental Design Standards in LC Districts 171-11
171.07 Supplemental Use Regulations: Industrial Uses 171-15
171.08 Performance Standards for Industrial Uses 171-16
171.09 Maximum Permitted Sound Levels Adjacent to Residential Districts 171-18
171.10 Supplemental Use Regulations: Miscellaneous Uses 171-18
171.11 Supplemental Use Regulations: Accessory Uses 171-20
171.12 Supplemental Use Regulations: Outdoor Storage Outside of
the L1 Zoning District 171-22
171.13 Supplemental Use Regulations: Temporary Uses 171-23
SECTION 172 – SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS Page
172.01 Purpose 172-1
172.02 Required Street Frontage 172-1
172.03 Lot Size Exceptions 172-1
172.04 Setback Adjustments 172-2
172.05 Height Exceptions 172-7
172.06 Exceptions for Conservations Subdivisions 172-8
172.07 Fence Regulations 172-9
172.08 Appeals 172-12
SECTION 173 – LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS Page
173.01 Purpose 173-1
173.02 Applicability 173-1
173.03 Landscaping Requirements 173-1
173.04 Landscaping Materials and Installations Standards 173-1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
City of Glenwood - Land Development Ordinance v
Table 173-1: Required Landscape Depth 173-2
173.05 Bufferyard Provisions 173-2
Table 173-2: Bufferyard Requirements (in feet) 173-3
173.06 Screening Standards 173-3
173.07 Parking Lot Landscaping 173-4
173.08 Tree Plantings 173-5
173.09 General Provisions 173-5
SECTION 174 – OFF-STREET PARKING Page
174.01 Purpose 174-1
174.02 General Application 174-1
174.03 Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements 174-1
Table 174-1: Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements 174-2
174.04 Parking Facility Location 174-4
174.05 Parking for People with Disabilities 174-5
Table 174-2: Accessible Parking Design Standards 174-5
174.06 Off-Street Parking Design Standards 174-6
174.07 Bicycle Parking 174-8
174.08 Off-Street Loading 174-8
174.09 Stacking Requirement for Drive-Through Services 174-8
174.10 Parking for Personal and Recreational Vehicles 174-8
174.11 Supplementary Regulations Storage and Parking of Unlicensed or Other Vehicles 174-11
SECTION 175 – SIGN REGULATIONS Page
175.01 Purpose 175-1
175.02 Definition of Terms 175-1
175.03 General Sign and Street Graphics Regulations 175-4
175.04 General Regulations: Basic Design Elements for on-Premise Signs 175-7
175.05 General Regulations: Other Design Elements 175-9
175.06 General Permit Procedures 175-10
175.07 Method of Measurement for Regulations 175-11
175.08 Permitted Sign Types by Zoning Districts 175-11
175.09 Auxiliary Design Elements 175-11
175.10 Maximum Permitted Sign Area 175-11
175.11 Permitted Signs by Numbers, Dimensions, and Locations 175-11
Table 175-1: Permitted Signs by Type and Zoning Districts 175-12
Table 175-2: Permitted Signs by Type and Zoning Districts 175-13
Table 175-3: Permitted Signs by Maximum Permitted Area and District 175-14
Table 175-4: Permitted Signs by Numbers. Dimensions, and Locations 175-15
TABLE OF CONTENTS
City of Glenwood - Land Development Ordinance vi
SECTION 176 – NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT Page
176.01 Purpose 176-1
176.02 Regulations 176-1
176.03 Nonconforming Lots 176-1
176.04 Nonconforming Structures 176-1
176.05 Nonconforming Uses 176-3
SECTION 177 – ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES Page
177.01 Purpose 177-1
177.02 Site Plan Review Procedure 177-1
177.03 Conditional Use Permits 177-3
Table 177-1: Criteria for Site Plan Review and Conditional Use Permits 177-6
177.04 Amendment Procedure 177-8
177.05 Building Permits and Certificates of Zoning Compliance 177-10
177.06 Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses 177-11
177.07 Board of Adjustment 177-12
177.08 Power and Duties of the Board of Adjustment 177-13
177.09 Appeals from the Board of Adjustment 177-15
177.10 Duties of Zoning Administrator, Board of Adjustment, City Council,
and Courts on Matters of Appeal 177-15
177.11 Severability Clause 177-15
177.12 Complaints Regarding Violations 177-15
177.13 Penalties for Violation 177-16
SECTION 178 – SUBDIVISIONS: Basic Conditions Page
178.01 Purpose 178-1
178.02 Jurisdiction and Applicability 178-1
178.03 Interpretation, Conflict, and Severability 178-2
178.04 Performance of Work by the City 178-2
SECTION 179 – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: Approvals & Procedures Page
179.01 Purpose 179-1
179.02 Administrative Subdivisions 179-1
179.03 Minor Subdivisions 179-2
1479.04 Major Subdivisions 179-4
Table 179-1: Applications Requirements 179-8
SECTION 180 – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: Design Criteria & General Standards Page
180.01 Purpose 180-1
180.02 Site Design and Constraints 180-1
180.03 Subdivision and Development Design Categories and Rules 180-3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
City of Glenwood - Land Development Ordinance vii
Table 180-1: Development Types and Policy Requirements 180-4
SECTION 181 – SUBDIVISION DESIGN: Circulation System Design Page
181.01 Purpose 181-1
181.02 General Standards 181-1
181.03 Street Hierarchy and Design 181-2
181.04 Lighting and Wiring 181-6
181.05 Traditional Neighborhood Developments (TNDs) 181-7
Table 181-1: Street Hierarchy 181-10
Table 181-2: Car-way Width, Grade, and Intersection Standards 181-11
Table 181-3: Curb, Sidewalk, and Right-of-way Requirements 181-11
Table 181-4: Street Design Requirements 181-11
SECTION 182 – SUBDIVISION DESIGN: Public Improvements and Infrastructure Page
182.01 Purpose 182-1
182.02 Water 182-1
182.03 Sanitary Sewers 182-1
182.04 Storm Water Management 182-3
182.05 Parks and Public Facilities 182-5
182.06 Reservation of Additional Lands 182-6
182.07 Topography and Grading 182-6
182.08 Timing and Conveyance 182-6
182.09 Timing of Payment 182-7
182.10 Developer Agreements 182-7
182.11 Easements 182-8
182.12 Dedications 182-9
SECTION 183 – SUBDIVISION DESIGN: Improvement Financing and Guarantees Page
183.01 Purpose 183-1
183.02 Application 183-1
183.03 Responsibility of Subdivider 183-1
183.04 Subdivision Agreement 183-1
183.05 Subdivisions Contiguous with City 183-3
183.06 Performance Guarantees 183-3
183.07 Notifications of Completion and Acceptance by City 183-3
General Provisions
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 165-1
SECTION 165
General Provisions
165.01 Title
Chapters 165 through 176 of the Glenwood Municipal Code shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glenwood.
165.02 Jurisdiction
The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be applicable to all property within the corporate limits of the City of Glenwood as provided by Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.
165.03 Purpose
The purpose of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glenwood are to:
a. Serve the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city and its jurisdiction.
b. Classify property in a manner that reflects its suitability for specific uses.
c. Provide for sound, attractive development within the city and its jurisdiction.
d. Encourage compatibility of adjacent land uses.
e. Protect environmentally sensitive areas.
f. Further the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Glenwood.
165.04 Consistency with Comprehensive Development Plan
The City of Glenwood intends that this Zoning Ordinance and any amendments to it shall be consistent with the City’s comprehensive Development Plan. It is the City’s intent to amend this ordinance whenever such action is deemed necessary to keep regulatory provisions in conformance with the Comprehensive Development Plan.
165.05 Conflicting Provisions
The Zoning Ordinance shall be held to provide the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. If any provision of the Zoning Ordinance conflicts with any other provision of the Zoning Ordinance, and other Ordinance of the City if Glenwood, or any applicable State of Federal Law, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
General Provisions
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 165-2
165.06 Relief from Other Provisions
Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user from satisfying and condition or requirement associated with a previous approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit issued under any local, State, or Federal ordinance or statute.
165.07 Severability of Provision
If any chapter, section, clause, or phrase of this Zoning Ordinance is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions if this Ordinance.
165.08 Publication
This Ordinance shall be published in book or pamphlet form and shall, together with the maps being a part hereof, shall be filed with the City Clerk of the City of Glenwood, Iowa.
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-1
SECTION 166
Definitions
166.01 Purpose
Article Two shall be known as the Definitions. The purpose of these provisions is to promote consistency and precision in the interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance. The meaning and construction of words as set forth shall apply throughout the Zoning Ordinance, unless where modified in a specific section or where the context of such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction.
166.02 General Construction of Language
The following general rules of construction apply to the text of the Zoning Ordinance.
a. Heading
Section and subsection headings contained herein are provided for illustrative purposes only and shall not be deemed to limit, govern, modify, or otherwise affect the scope, meaning, or intent if any provision of the Zoning Ordinance.
b. Illustration
In the case of any real or apparent conflict between the text of the Ordinance and any illustration explaining the text, the text shall apply.
c. Shall and May
“Shall” is always mandatory. “May” is discretionary.
d. Tenses and Numbers
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
e. Conjunctions
Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
1. “And” indicates that all connected items if provisions apply.
2. “Or” indicates that the connected items if provisions may apply singly or in any combination.
3. “Either … or” indicates that the connected items or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.
f. Referenced Agencies
Unless otherwise indicated, all public officials, bodies, and agencies referred to in this Chapter are those of the City of Glenwood.
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-2
166.03 Definition of Terms
For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined, certain sections contain definitions which are additional to those listed here. Where terms are not specifically defined, their ordinarily accepted meaning or meanings implied by their context shall apply.
166.04 A
1. Abutting: Having lot lines or district boundaries in common, including property separated by a public street or alley. Used interchangeably with adjacent.
2. Accessory Structure: A structure which is incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use or building on the same site.
3. Accessory Use: A use which is incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use on the same site.
4. Addition: Any construction which increases the size of a building or structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor area.
5. Agent of Owner: Any person showing written verification that he/she is acting for, and with the knowledge and consent of, a property owner.
6. Alley: A public right if way, other than a street and twenty feet if less in width which is used as a secondary means of access to abutting property.
7. Alteration: Any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of spaces, the supporting members, the positioning on a site, or the appearance of a building or structure.
8. Apartment: A housing unit within a building, designed for and suitable for occupancy by only one family. Apartments are generally located within multi-family residential buildings.
9. Assisted Living: Assisted living means provision of housing with services which may include but are not limited to health-related care, personal care, and assistance with instrumental activities of daily living to six or more tenants in a physical structure which provides a homelike environment. Assisted living also includes encouragement of family involvement, tenant self-direction, and tenant participation in decisions that emphasize choice, dignity, privacy, individuality, shared rick, and independence. Assisted living includes the provision of housing and assistance with instrumental activities of daily living only if personal care or health-related care is also included.
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-3
10. Attached: Having one or more walls in common with a principal building or connected to a principal building by an integral architectural element, such as a covered passageway; façade wall extension; or archway.
166.05 B
1. Base Zoning District: A district established by this Ordinance which prescribes basic regulations governing land use and site development standards. No more than one Base Zoning District shall apply to any individually platted lot or parcel unless the lot or parcel is part of a Planned Unit Development.
2. Basement: A level if a building below street level that has at least one-half of its height below the surface if adjacent ground. A basement: used for independent dwelling or business purposes shall be considered a story for the purposes of height measurement.
3. Beginning of Construction: The initial incorporation if labor and materials within the foundation of a building or structure.
4. Billboard: Any structure or portion thereof having an area if one hundred (100) square feet or more on which lettered, figured or pictorial matter is displayed for advertising for off premises purposes.
5. Block: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, by streets and the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, or by a combination of the above with a watercourse, lake, railroad, or other significant natural or man-made barrier, and which has been designated as such on a plat for the purposes of legal description of a property.
6. City Block Face: The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersections streets, or between the one nearest intersecting street and a major physical barrier, including, but not limited to, railroads, streams, lakes, or the corporate limits of Glenwood.
7. Board of Adjustment: A body, established by the City expressly for the purpose of granting relief from situations of hardship and to hear appeals as provided by this Ordinance.
8. Bufferyard: A landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another.
9. Building: A structure entirely separated from any other structure by space or by walls and having a roof and built to provide shelter, support, or enclosure for persons of property.
10. Building Coverage: The area of a site covered by buildings or roofed areas, excluding allowed projecting eaves, balconies, and similar features.
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-4
11. Building Envelope: The three-dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot after all zoning and other applicable municipal requirements have been met.
12. Building Line: The outer boundary of a building established by the location of its exterior walls.
13. Building Official: The city official, designated by the City Council, who is responsible for the enforcement of the applicable building code and conditional uses.
14. Building Permit: A document that must be issued by the Building Official prior to erecting, constructing, enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, improving, removing, converting, or demolishing any building or structure regulated by this Ordinance or by the applicable building codes of the City of Glenwood. Issuance of a building permit follows review of plans by the Building Official to determine that the proposed use of the building or land complies with the provisions if the Zoning Ordinance.
15. Business: Activities that include the exchange of manufacture of goods or services on a site.
16. Business Center: A building containing more than one commercial business, or any group of non-residential buildings within a common development, characterized by shared parking and access.
166.06 C
1. Certificate of Occupancy: An official certificate issued by the Building official or his/her designee prior to occupancy of a completed building or structure, upon finding of conformance with the applicable building code and this Zoning Ordinance.
2. Change of Use: The replacement of an existing use by a new use.
3. City: City of Glenwood, Iowa.
4. City Council: The City Council of Glenwood, Iowa.
5. Common Area: An area held, designed, and designated for common or cooperative use within a development.
6. Development: A development proposed and planned as one unified project not separated by a public street or alley.
7. Common Open Space: Land within or related to a development that is not individually owned or dedicated for public use, designed and generally intended for the common use of the residents of the development.
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-5
8. Compatibility: The degree to which two or more different land use types are able to exist together in close proximity, with no one use having significant negative effects on any other use.
9. Comprehensive Plan: The duly adopted Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Glenwood.
10. Conditional Use: A use which is allowed in a zoning district which may be subject to specific qualifying criteria and conditions and whish requires a finding by the Planning Commission of consistency with certain standards set forth in this Ordinance to evaluate its consistency with the character of other permitted uses in or around the proposed site.
11. Condominium: An ownership regime whereby the title to each unit of occupancy is held in separate ownership, and the real estate in which the units are located is held in common ownership solely by the owners of the units with each owner having an undivided interest in the common real estate. Condominiums may include residential, commercial, office, or industrial uses.
12. Conservation: Development: A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on a site to allow remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, or the preservation of historically or environmentally sensitive features.
13. Conservation (of cluster) Subdivision: Wholly or in majority, a residential subdivision that permits a reduction in lot area, setback, or other site development regulations, provided 1) there is no increase in the overall density permitted for a conventional subdivision in a given zoning district, and 2) the remaining land area is used for common space.
14. County: Mills County, Iowa.
15. Courtyard: An open, unoccupied space, bounded on two or more sides by the walls of the building.
16. Conventional Subdivision: A subdivision which literally meets all nominal standards of the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances for the dimensions, setbacks, street frontage, and other site development regulations.
17. Creative Subdivision: A subdivision which, while complying with the Subdivision Ordinance diverges from nominal compliance with site development regulations in the Land Development Ordinance. Creative subdivisions imply a higher level of pre-planning than conventional subdivisions. They may be employed for the purpose of environmental protection or the creation of superior community design. Types of Creative subdivisions include Conservation Subdivisions and Traditional Neighborhood Districts.
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-6
166.07 D
1. Density: The amounts of development per specific unit of a site.
2. Drive-In Services: Uses which involve the sale of products or provision of services to occupants.
3. Detached: Fully separated from any other building or jointed to another building in such a manner as not to constitute an enclosed or covered connection.
4. Driveway: A permanently paved, surfaced area providing vehicular access between a street and an off-street parking or loading area.
5. Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarters. With cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family, as defined in Section 116.09 (1), maintaining a household.
166.08 E
1. Easement: A privilege or right of use granted on, above, under, or across a particular tract of land for a specific purpose by one owner to another owner, public or private agency, or utility.
2. Enclosed: A roofed or covered space fully surrounded by walls.
166.09 F
1. Family: One of more persons living together and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking, and eating facilities within an individual housing unit, no more that 4 or whom may be unrelated. The following persons shall be considered related for the purpose of this ordinance:
(a) Persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption.
(b) Persons residing with a family for the purpose of adoption.
(c) Not more than eight persons under 19 years of age, residing in a foster house licensed of approved by the State of Iowa.
(d) Not more than eight persons 19 years of age or older residing with a family for the purpose of receiving foster care licensed of approved by the State of Iowa.
(e) Person(s) living with a family at the direction of a court.
2. Fascia: A parapet-type wall used as part of the façade of a flat-roofed building and projecting no more that six feet from the immediately adjacent building face. Such a wall shall enclose at least three sides of the projecting flat roof and return to the parapet wall of the building.
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-7
3. Federal: Pertaining to the Government of the United States of America.
4. Floor Area: See Gross Floor Area.
5. Floor Area Ratio: The quotient of gross floor area of all buildings on a site divided by gross site area of the site.
6. Frontage: The length of a property line of any one premises abutting and parallel to the public street, private way, or court from which access is permitted.
166.10 G
1. Garage: An Accessory building or portion of a main building used primarily for storage of motor vehicles.
2. Grade: The horizontal elevation of the finished surface of ground, paving, or sidewalk adjacent to any building line as follows:
(a) For buildings having walls facing one street only, the grade shall be the elevation of the ground at the center of the wall facing the street.
(b) For buildings having walls facing more than one street, the grade shall be the average elevation of the grades of all walls facing each street.
(c) For buildings having no walls facing a street, the grade shall be the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
3. Gross floor Area: The total enclosed area of all floors of a building, measured to the inside surfaces of the exterior walls. This definition excludes the areas of basements, elevator shafts, airspaces above atriums and enclosed off-street parking and loading areas serving a principal use. The floor area of buildings devoted to bulk storage of materials including, but not limited to, grain elevators and petroleum storage tanks, shall be determined on the basis of height in feet, with each ten feet of height being equivalent to one floor.
166.11 H
1. Height: The vertical distance from the established grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip, shed, or gambrel roofs. For other cases, height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the established grade to the highest point of a structure as herein defined. Where a building or structure is located in a slope, height shall be measured from the average grade level adjacent to the building or structure.
2. Home based Business/Home Occupation: An accessory occupational use conducted entirely within a dwelling unit by its inhabitants, which is clearly incidental to the
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-8
residential use of the dwelling unit or residential structure and does not change the residential character of its site.
3. Housing Unit or Dwelling Unit: A building or portion of a building arranged for and intended for occupancy as an independent living facility for one family including permanent provisions for cooking.
166.12 I
1. Impervious Coverage: The total horizontal area of all buildings, roofed or covered spaces, paved surface areas, walkways and driveways, and any other sire improvements that decrease the ability of the surface of the site to absorb water, expressed as a percent of site area. The surface water area of pools is excluded from this definition.
166.13 J
166.14 K
166.15 L
1. Landscaped Area: The area within the boundaries of a given lot, site or common development consisting primarily of plant material, including but not limited to grass, trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, and other organic plant materials; or grass paver masonry units installed such that the appearance of the area is primarily landscaped.
(a) Perimeter Landscaped Area: Any required landscaped area that adjoins the exterior boundary of a lit, site or common development.
(b) Interior Landscaped Area: Any landscaped area within a site exclusive of required perimeter landscaping.
2. Lane: An approved private right-of-way which provides access to residential properties and meets at least three of the following conditions:
(a) Serves twelve or fewer housing units of platted lots.
(b) Does not function as a local street because if its alignment, design, or location.
(c) Is completely internal to a development.
(d) Does not exceed 600 feet in length.
3. Loading Area: An off-street area used for the loading or unloading of goods from a vehicle in connection with the use if the sire on which such area is located.
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-9
4. Lot: A parcel of property with a separate and distinct number or other identifying designation which has been created, assigned and recorded in the Office of the Mills County Recorder. Each individual lot is subject to the provisions of each particular base Zoning District.
(a) Corner Lot: A lot located at the junction of at least two streets, private ways or courts or at least two segments of a curved street, private way or court, at which the angle of intersection is no greater than 135 degrees.
(b) Double Frontage Lot: A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on two streets, private ways or courts. Primary access shall be restricted on a double frontage lot to the minor of the two streets or to the front line as determined at time of platting or as defined by this ordinance (also known as a Through Lot).
(c) Interior Lot: A Lot other than a corner lot.
(d) Common Development Lot: When two or more contiguous lots are developed as part of a single development. These lots may be considered a single lot for purposes of this ordinance.
5. Lot Area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
6. Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance measured between the front and rear lot lines.
7. Lot Line: A property boundary line(s) of record that divides one lot from another lot or a lot from the public or private street right-of-way or easement. Once established, lot lines may not be redefined due to a change or address which would result in a new definition of the following defined lot lines.
(a) Front Lot Line: The lot line separating a lot and a public or private street right-of-way or easement.
i. For an interior lot, the lot line separating the lot from the right-of-way or easement.
ii. For a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a public or private street or easement. In instances of equal dimension, the front lot line shall be determined by the Building Official, or as may be noted on the final plat.
iii. For a double frontage lot, the lot lines separating the lot from the right-of-way or easement of the more minor street. In cases where each street has the same classification, the front lot line shall be determined by the Building Official at the time of application for the original building permit for the lot, or as may be noted on the final plat.
(b) Rear Lot Lines: The lot lines which is opposite and most distant from the front line.
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-10
(c) Side Lot Line: Any lot line that is neither a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street, private way or court is a street side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line.
8. Lot Width: The horizontal distance measured between the side lot lines of a lot, at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required setback line.
166.16 M
1. Manufactured Home Dwelling: A factory built single-family dwelling, structure which is to be used as a place for human habitation, which is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 U.S. 3. Sec. 5403, Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, and which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than to a permanent sire; does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axels. A mobile home constructed to the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards promulgated by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development is not a manufactured home unless it has been converted to real property and is taxed as a site-built dwelling as is provided in the Code of Iowa section 435.26, and which complies with the following architectural and aesthetic standards listed below. For the purpose of any of these regulations, manufactured homes shall be considered the same as a single-family detached dwelling. In common with single-family detached dwellings, a manufactured home dwelling unit shall have the following characteristics:
(a) The home shall have at least 800 square feet of floor area;
(b) The home shall have an exterior width of at least 200 feet;
(c) The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of 3 inched for each 12 inches of horizontal run.
(d) The exterior material is of a color, material, and scale comparable with those existing in the residential site on which the manufactured home dwelling is being permanently installed;
(e) The home shall have a nonreflective roof material which is or simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile, or rock;
(f) Permanent utility connections shall be installed in accordance with local regulations;
(g) The home shall have all wheels, axels, transporting lights, and towing apparatus removed;
(h) The home shall be installed upon a permanent foundation that is constructed and built in accordance with the regulations of the City of Glenwood.
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-11
2. Mixed Use Building: A building or structure that incorporates two or more types within a single building or structure, provided that each use type is permitted within the individual Base Zoning District in which the building or structure is to be located.
3. Mixed Use Development: A single development which incorporates complementary land use types into a single development.
4. Mobile Homes: A building type designed to be transportable in one or more sections, constructed on a permanent chassis or undercarriage, and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or other use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, but not bearing a seal attesting to the approval and issuance of the Iowa Department of Health or conformance to the manufactured home procedural and enforcement regulations, as adopted by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development; or not otherwise satisfying the definition of Manufactured Home Dwellings.
5. Mobile Home Park: A unified development under single ownership, developed, subdivided, planned, and improved for the placement of mobile home units for non-transient use. Mobile Home Parks include common areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry, utility services, storage, storm shelter, and other services; but do not include mobile home sales on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for the purposes of display, inspection, sale, or storage.
6. Mobile Home Subdivision: A development subdivided, planned, and improved for the placement of mobile home units on lots for uses by the individual owners of such lots. Mobile Home Subdivisions may include common areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry, utility services, storage, storm shelter, and other services; but do not include mobile home sales lots on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for the purpose of display, inspection, sale, or storage.
166.17 N
1. Nonconforming Development: A Building, structure, or improvement which does not comply with the regulations for its zoning district set forth by this Zoning Ordinance, but which complied with applicable regulations at the time of construction.
2. Nonconforming Lot: A lot which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning ordinance. No action can be taken which would increase the non-conforming characteristics of the lot.
3. Nonconforming Sign: A sign that was lawfully erected prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption,
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-12
revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning ordinance.
4. Nonconforming Structure: A structure which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoptions, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning ordinance. No action can be taken which would increase the non-confirming characteristics of the structure.
5. Nonconforming Use: A land use which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning ordinance. No action can be taken which would increase the nonconforming characteristics of the land use.
6. Nuisance: An unreasonable and continuous invasion of the use and enjoyment of a property right which a reasonable person would find annoying, unpleasant, obnoxious, or offensive.
166.18 O
1. Open Space: Are included on any site or lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky, except for allowed projections of cornices, overhangs, porches, balconies, or plant material.
2. Outdoor Storage: The storage of materials, parts, or products that are related to the primary use of a site for a period exceeding three days.
3. Overlay District: A district established by this Ordinance to prescribe special regulations to be applied to a site only in combination with a base district.
4. Owner: An individual. Firm, association, syndicate, partnership, or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of land.
166.19 P
1. Parking Facility: An area on a lot and/or within a building, including one or more parking spaces, along with provision for access circulation, maneuvering, and landscaping, meeting the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. Parking facilities include parking lots, private garages, and parking structures. Vehicle storage is distinct from parking and is regulated by provisions in Sections 167.07b, 167.08, 167.09, and Table 4-2. Vehicle storage is also governed by provisions of Article 9: Parking Regulations.
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-13
2. Parking Spaces: An area on a lot and/or within a building, intended for the use of temporary parking of a personal vehicle. This term is used interchangeably with “parking stall”. Each parking space must have a means of access to a public street. Tandem parking stalls in single-family detached, single-family attached, and townhome residential uses shall be considered to have a means of access to a public street.
3. Paved: Permanently surfaced with poured concrete, concrete pavers, brick pavers, or asphalt.
4. Permanent Swimming Pools: Swimming pools above ground or in ground which remain erected substantially year-round or those constructed with durable materials such as wood, metal, and/or hard plastic (excludes toddler waking pools).
5. Permitted Use: A land use type allowed as a matter of right in a zoning district, subject only to special requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
6. Planning Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Glenwood, as authorized pursuant to Chapter 414 of the Iowa Code. The Planning and Zoning Commission is also to be known as the Planning and Zoning Board, as such titles are used interchangeably in the City Code of Ordinances.
7. Planned Unit Development: A development of land which is under unified control and is planned and developed as a whole, in a single development operation or programmed series of development stages. The development may include streets, circulation ways, utilities, buildings, open spaces, and other site features and improvements.
8. Porch, Unenclosed: A roofed or unroofed open structure projecting from an exterior wall of a building and having no enclosed features more than thirty inches above its floor other than wire screening and a roof with supporting structure.
9. Premises: A lot, parcel, tract or plot of land, contiguous and under common ownership or control, together with the buildings and structure thereon.
10. Prepared Surface: A surface o gravel, pervious paving surfaces as defined by this Land Development Ordinance.
11. Principal Use: The main use of land or structures as distinguished from an accessory use.
12. Private Garage: A building for the storage of motor vehicles where no repair service facilities are maintained and where no motor vehicles are kept for rental or sale.
13. Property Line: See “Lot Line.”
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-14
166.20 Q
166.21 R
1. Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle towed of self-propelled on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or used for temporary dwelling, recreational, or sporting purposes. Recreational vehicles include, but are not limited to, travel trailers, campers, motor coach homes, converted buses and trucks, boats, and boat trailers.
2. Regulations: A specific requirement set forth by this Zoning Ordinance which must be followed.
3. Remote Parking: A supply of off-street parking at a location not on the site of a given development.
166.22 S
1. Screening: The method by which a view of one site from another adjacent site is shielded, concealed, or hidden. Screening techniques include fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other featured as may be permitted by the landscape provisions of this ordinance.
2. Setback: The distance, as required by the minimum setback(s) which establishes the horizontal component(s) of the building envelope.
3. Sign: A symbolic, visual device fixed upon a building, vehicle, structure, or parcel of land, which is intended to convey information about a product, business, activity, place, person, institution, candidate, or political idea.
4. Site: The parcel of land to be developed or built upon. A site may encompass a single lot; or a group of lots developed as a common development under the special and overlay districts provisions of his ordinance.
5. Site Plan: A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, and principal site development features proposed for a specific parcel of land; and any other information that may be reasonably requested by the City in order that an informed decision can be made on the associated request.
6. Special Permit Use: A use with operating and/or physical characteristics different from those of permitted uses in a given zoning district which may, nonetheless, be compatible with those uses under special conditions and with adequate public review. Special permit uses area allowed in a zoning district only at the discretion of
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-15
and with the explicit permission of the {Planning Commission, as provided by Article 12 of this Ordinance.
7. State: The State of Iowa.
8. Story: The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and he surface of the next floor above it; if there is n floor above it, the space between such floor and the next ceiling above it. A half story is a story under a sloped roof, the wall heights of which in at least two opposite exterior walls are less than four feet.
9. Street: A right of way, dedicated to public use, which affords a primary means of access to the abutting property. This definition is intended to be inclusive of the term as defined in Iowa State Statutes.
10. Street, Arterial: Street or highways intended to provide for through traffic movement between areas of the city or across the city. Major arterials usually imply relatively high speeds and traffic generally intended to provide trips of moderate lengths and imply lower operating speeds and more frequent points of local access than major arterial streets.
11. Street, Collector: A street connecting neighborhoods within the same communities; designed to carry tragic from local to arterial streets.
12. Street, Intersecting and Principal: In regard to a site, the principal street shall be the street to which the majority of lots on a blockface are oriented; the intersecting street shall be a street other than a principal street.
13. Street, Local: A street which is used primarily for access to the abutting properties.
14. Street, Major: A street carrying traffic between neighborhoods, connecting neighborhoods with major activity centers, or accommodating major through traffic. Major streets are designated as collectors, arterials, or expressways by the Comprehensive Development Plan and are normally included in and eligible for assistance under the TEA-21 program.
15. Structure: Any object constructed or built and attached or anchored permanently or semi-permanently to the ground in such a way as to prevent routine movement. For the purpose of this ordinance, and building mounted on a skid will be considered a structure.
166.23 T
1. Townhouse: A dwelling unit having a common wall with or abutting one or more adjacent dwelling units in a townhouse structure, with its own front and rear access to the outside, and neither above nor below any other dwelling unit.
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-16
2. Townhouse Structure: A building formed by at least two and not more than twelve contiguous townhouses with common or abutting walls.
166.24 U
1. Use: The conduct of an activity. Or the performance of a function or operation, on a site or in a building or facility.
2. Utilities: Installations, either above or below ground, necessary for the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, treatments, or storage of water, solid or fluid wastes, storm water, energy media, gas, electronic, or electromagnetic signals, or other services which are precedent to development and use of land.
166.25 V
166.26 W
1. Window: An opening in a building for admitting light and/or air, having pane of panes of glass.
166.27 X
166.28 Y
1. Yard Required: That portion of a lot which lies between a lot line and the corresponding building setback line or the required landscape area. This area shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward expect as may be specifically provided for or required by this ordinance.
(a) Front Yard: The space extending the full width of a lot, lying between the front lot line and the front setback line. For a corner lot, the front yard shall normally be defined as that yard along a street which meets one of the following two criteria:
i. The yard along the blockface to which a greater number of structures oriented; or
ii. The yard along a street that has the smaller horizontal dimension.
(b) Rear Yard: The space extending the fill width of a lot, lying between the rear lot line and the rear setback line.
(c) Side Yard: The space extending the depth of a lot from the front to ear lot lines, lying between the side yard setback line and the interior lot line.
DEFINITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 166-17
(d) Street Side Yard: On a corner lot, the space extending from the front yard to the rear yard, between the street side yard setback line and the street side lot line.
166.29 Z
1. Zoning Administrator: The designee of the City Council responsible for the interpretation, administration and enforcement of the Glenwood Zoning Ordinance.
2. Zoning District: A designated specified land classification, within which all sites are subject to a unified group of use and the site development regulations set forth in this Zoning Ordinance.
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-1
SECTION 167
Use Types
167.01 Purpose
Article Three shall be known as the Use Types. The purpose of the Use Types is to establish a classification system for land uses and a consistent set of terms defining uses permitted or conditionally permitted within various zoning districts. The Use Types section also provides a procedure for determining the applicable use type of any activity not clearly within any defined use type.
167.02 Determinations
a. Classification of Uses
In the event of any question as to the appropriate use types of any existing or proposed use or activity, the Zoning Administrator of the City of Glenwood shall have the authority to determine the appropriate use type. A determination of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. In making such determinations, the Zoning Administrator and Board of Adjustment shall consider such characteristics or specific requirements of the use in common with those included as examples of use types. Those examples, when included in use type descriptions, are intended to be illustrative, as opposed to exclusive lists.
b. Records
The Zoning Administrator shall make all such determinations of appropriate use types in writing. The record of he determination shall contain a report explaining the reasons for the determination.
167.03 Agricultural Use Types
Agricultural use types include the on-site production and sale of plant and animal products by agricultural methods.
a. Horticulture
The growing of horticultural and floricultural specialties, such as flowers, shrubs, or trees intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes. This definition may include accessory retail sales under certain conditions. Typical uses include wholesale plant nurseries and greenhouses.
b. Crop Production
The raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops for field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis. This definition may include accessory retail sales under certain conditions.
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-2
c. Animal Production
The raising of animals or production of animal products, such as eggs or dairy products on an agricultural or commercial basis on a site which is also used for crop production or where grazing of natural vegetation is the major feed source; or the raising of animals for recreational use. Typical uses include grazing, ranching, dairy framing, and poultry farming.
d. Commercial Feedlots
The use of a site for the confined feeding or holding of livestock or poultry within buildings, lots, pens, or other close quarters which are not used for crop production or where grazing of natural vegetation is not the major feed sources. Livestock and poultry shall include any animal or fowl which are used primarily for use as food or food products for human consumption, or for laboratory or testing purposes. A Commercial Feedlot does not include areas which are used for the raising of crops or other vegetation, and upon which livestock are allowed to graze or feed.
e. Livestock Sales
The use of a site for the temporary confinement and exchange or sale of livestock. Typical uses include sales barns.
167.04 Residential Use Types
Residential use types include uses providing wholly or primarily non-transient living accommodations. They exclude institutional living arrangements providing 24-hour skilled nursing or medical care, forced residence, or therapeutic settings.
a. Single- Family Residential
A single-family residential use in which one dwelling unit is located on a single lot, with no physical or structural connection to any other dwelling unit.
1. Single-family detached residential units shall meet the following standards:
(a) The unit shall have at least 800 square feet of floor area;
(b) The unit shall have an exterior width of at least 20 feet;
(c) The structure shall have a nonreflective roof material which, if visible, is or simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile, rock or standing seam metal with concealed fasteners. Any standing seam metal roof shall be stamped by a licensed engineer, shall be installed by a certified installer of standing seam metal roofs in accord with the regulations provided in the International Residential Code Book, as from time to time may be amended.
(d) The unit shall have permanent utility connections installed in accordance with the regulations of the City of Glenwood.
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-3
(e) The unit shall be installed upon a permanent foundation that is constructed and built in accordance with the regulations of the City of Glenwood.
2. Single-Family Residential (Attached): A single-family residential use in which one dwelling unit is located on a single lot and is attached by a common vertical wall to only one other adjacent dwelling unit on another single lot.
b. Duplex Residential
The use of a legally-described lot for two dwelling units each occupied by one family within a single building, excluding manufactured or mobile home units, but including modular housing units.
c. Two-Family Residential
The use of a site for two dwelling units, each occupied by one family, each in a separate building, excluding a mobile home unit.
d. Townhouse Residential
The use of a site for three or more attached dwelling units, each occupied by one family and separated by vertical side walls extending from foundation through roof without openings. Each townhouse unit must have at least two exposed exterior walls.
e. Multiple-Family Residential
The use of a site for three or more dwelling units within one building not otherwise defined as townhouse units.
f. Downtown Residential
The use of upper levels above street level of a building within the Central Business District of the City of Glenwood for single-or multiple-family residential uses.
g. Group Residential
The use of a site for a residence by more than four unrelated persons, not defined as a family, on a weekly or longer basis.
h. Manufactured Home Residential
Use of a site for one or more manufactured home dwellings, as defined in Section 216.
i. Mobile Home Park
Use of a site under single ownership for one or more mobile home units. Generally, the land in which mobile homes are placed in a Mobile Home Park is leased from the owner of the facility.
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-4
j. Mobile Home Subdivision
Division of a tract of land into lots that meet all the requirements of the City of Glenwood’s subdivision ordinance for the location of the mobile homes. Generally, a lot within a Mobile Home Subdivision is owned by the owner of the mobile home placed upon such lot.
k. Retirement Residence
A building or group of buildings which provide residential facilities for more than four residents of at least sixty-two years of age, or households headed by a householder of at least sixty-two years of age. A retirement residence may provide a range of residential building types and may also provide support services to residents, including but not limited to food service, general health supervision, medication services, housekeeping services, personal services, recreation facilities, and transportation services. The retirement residence may accommodate food preparation in independent units or mal service in one or more common areas. Retirement residences may include additional health care supervision or nursing care.
167.05 Civic Use Types
Civic use types include the performance of utility, educational, recreational, cultural, medical, protective, governmental, and other uses which are strongly vested with social importance.
a. Administration
Governmental offices providing administrative, clerical or public contact services that deal directly with the citizen, together with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include federal, state, county, and city offices.
b. Assisted Living
Assisted living means provision of housing with services which may include, but are not limited to, health-related care, personal care, and assistance with instrumental activities of daily living to six or more tenants in a physical structure which provides a homelike environment. Assisted living also includes encouragement of family involvement, tenant self-direction, and tenant participation in decisions that emphasize choice, dignity, privacy, individuality, shared risk, and independence. Assisted living includes that provision of housing and assistance with instrumental activities of daily living if personal care or health-related care is also included.
c. Cemetery
Land used of intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbarium, crematoria, mausoleums and
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-5
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
d. Clubs
Uses providing meeting, recreational, or social facilities for a private, non-profit or noncommercial association, primarily for use by members and guests.
1. Clubs (Recreational): Clubs which provide indoor and/or outdoor athletic facilities, with or without social or meeting facilities. Typical uses include country clubs, private or nonprofit community or recreational centers, and private golf courses and driving ranges.
2. Clubs (Social): Clubs which provide primarily social or meeting facilities. Typical uses include private social clubs and fraternal organizations.
e. College and University Facilities
An educational institution of higher learning which offers a course of study designed to culminate in the issuance of a degree certified by a generally recognized accrediting organization.
f. Convalescent Services
A use providing bed care and inpatient services for persons requiring regular medical attention but excluding a facility providing surgical or emergency medical services and excluding a facility providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or communicable disease. Typical uses include nursing homes.
g. Cultural Services
A library, museum, or similar registered non-profit organizational use displaying, preserving, and exhibiting objects of community and cultural interest in one or more of the arts and sciences.
h. Day Care Services (Limited)
This Use Type includes all classifications of day care facilities that operate providing care for not more than six (6) children. This term includes nursery schools, preschools, day care centers for children or adults, and similar uses but excludes public and private primary and secondary educational facilities. Day Care Services must be legally operated per the Code of Iowa.
i. Day Care Services (General)
This Use Type includes all classifications of day care facilities that operate providing care for more than six (6) children. This term includes nursery schools, preschools, day care centers for children or adults, and similar uses but excludes public and private primary and secondary educational facilities. Day Care Services must be legally operated per the Code of Iowa.
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-6
j. Detention Facilities
A publicly operated or contracted use providing housing and care for individuals legally confined, designed to isolate those individuals from the community.
l. Elder Group Home
A single-family residence that is the residence of a person who is providing room, board, and personal care to three through five elders who are not related to the person providing the service within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity.
m. Emergency Residential Services
A facility or use of a building to provide a protective sanctuary for victims of crime or abuse, including emergency housing during crisis intervention for victims of rape, abuse, or physical beatings.
n. Family Home
A community-based residential home or a child foster care facility to provide room and board, personal care, habitation services, and supervision in a family environment exclusively for not more than eight (8) developmentally, disabled persons and any necessary support personnel is permitted by and as limited by section 412.22, Code of Iowa.
o. Group Care Facility
A government-licensed or approved facility which provides for resident care and short or long-term, continuous multi-day occupancy of more than 8 but not more than 30 unrelated persons, not including resident staff. Group Care Facilities include facilities which provide services in accordance with individual needs for the:
1. Adaptation of living with, or rehabilitation from, the handicaps of physical disability.
2. Adaption to living with, or rehabilitation form, the handicaps of emotional or mental disorder; or developmental disabilities.
3. Rehabilitation form the effects of drug or alcohol abuse.
4. Supervision while under a program alternative to imprisonment, including but not limited to pre-release, work-release, and probationary programs.
5. Others who require direct adult supervision.
p. Group Home
A facility licensed by the State of Iowa in which at least but no more than eight persons, not including resident managers or house parents, who are unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption, reside while receiving therapy, training, living assistance or counseling for the purpose of adaptation to living with or rehabilitation
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-7
from a physical or mental disability as defined by the relevant provisions of the Code of Iowa or by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.
q. Guidance Services
A use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative or similar services to persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental illness, alcoholism, detention, drug addiction, or similar condition on a daytime care basis.
r. Health Care
A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons exclusively on an outpatient basis including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration and services to outpatients, employees, or visitors.
s. Hospital
A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons primarily on an inpatient basis, including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration, and services to patients, employees, or visitors.
t. Maintenance Facilities
A public facility supporting maintenance, repair, vehicular or equipment servicing, material storage, and similar activities including street or sewer yards, equipment service centers, and similar uses having characteristics of commercial services or contracting or industrial activities.
u. Park and Recreation Services
Publicly-owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities including publicly-owned community centers, and open spaces.
v. Postal Services
Postal services, including, post offices, bulk mail processing or sorting centers operated by the United States Postal Service.
w. Primary Educational Facilities
A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary school level in the branches, if learning study required to be taught in schools within the State of Iowa.
x. Public Assembly
Facilities owned and operated by a public agency or a charitable non-profit organization accommodating major public assembly for recreation, sports, amusement, or entertainment purposes. Typical uses include civic or community auditoriums, sports stadiums, convention facilities, fairgrounds, incidental sales, and exhibition facilities.
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-8
y. Religious Assembly
A use located in a permanent building and providing regular organized religious worship and religious education incidental thereto (excluding private primary or private secondary educational facilities, community recreational facilities, day care facilities, and incidental parking facilities). A property tax exemption obtained pursuant to Property Tax Code of the State of Iowa shall constitute prima facie evidence of religious assembly use.
z. Safety Services
Facilities for conduct of public safety and emergency services including police and fire protection services and emergency medical and ambulance services.
aa. Secondary Educational Facilities
A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the junior high or high school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the schools of the State of Iowa.
bb. Utilities
Any above ground structures or facilities, other than lines, poles, and other incidental facilities, used for the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity, delivery, collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil, energy media, communications, electronic or electromagnetic signals, or other services which are precedent to development and/or use of land.
167.06 Office Use Types
Office use types include uses providing for administration, professional services, and allied activities. These uses often invite public clientele but are more limited in external effects than commercial uses.
a. Corporate Offices
Use of a site for administrative, processing, or research offices, which generally does not provide service to clientele from Glenwood and the surrounding region. Corporate offices are destinations for commuters drawn from a relatively wide region around Glenwood, as well as from the community itself. Typical uses include corporate headquarter offices, telemarketing, or information processing offices.
b. General Offices
Use of a site for business, professional, or administrative offices who may invite clients from both local and regional areas. Typical uses include real estate, insurance, management, travel, or other business offices; organizations and association offices; or professional offices.
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-9
c. Financial Services
Provision of financial and banking services to consumers or clients. Walk-in and drive-in services to consumers are provided on site. Typical uses include banks, savings, and loan associations, savings banks, and loan companies. An ATM (Automatic Teller Machine) which is not accompanied on-site by an office of a its primary financial institution is considered within the Personal Services Use Type.
d. Medical Offices
Use of a site for facilities which provide diagnoses and outpatient care on a routine basis, but which does not provide prolonged, in-house medical or surgical care. Medical offices are operated by doctors, dentists, or similar medical practitioners licensed for practice in the State of Iowa.
167.07 Commercial Use Types
Commercial uses include the sale, rental, service, and distribution of goods, and the provision of services other than those classified under other use types.
a. Agricultural Sales and Service
Establishments of places of business engaged in sale from the premises of feed, grain, fertilizers, farm equipment, pesticides and similar goods or in the provision of agriculturally related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. Typical uses include nurseries, hay, farm implement dealerships, feed and grain stores, and tree service firms.
b. Automotive and Equipment Services
Established or places of business primarily engaged in sale and/or service of automobiles, trucks, or heavy equipment. The following are considered automotive and equipment use types.
1. Automotive Rental and Sales: Sale of rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include new and used car dealerships; motorcycle dealerships, and boat, trailer, and recreational vehicle dealerships.
2. Auto Services: Provisions of fuel, lubricants, parts and accessories, and incidental services to motor vehicles; and washing and cleaning and/or repair of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale, installation, and servicing of equipment and parts. Typical uses include service stations, car washes, muffler shops, auto repair garages, tire sales and installation, wheel and brake shops, and similar repair and service activities but exclude dismantling, salvage, or body and fender repair services.
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-10
3. Body Repair: Repair, painting, or refinishing of the body, fender or frame of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, boats, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, mobile homes, and similar heavy equipment. Typical uses include body and fender shops, painting shops, and other similar repair or refinishing garages.
4. Equipment Rental and Sales: Sale or rental of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, mobile homes, and similar heavy equipment, including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include truck dealerships, construction equipment dealerships, and mobile home sales establishments.
5. Equipment Repair Services: Repair of truck, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar heavy equipment. Typical uses include truck repair garages, tractor and farm implement repair services, and machine shop, but exclude dismantling, salvage, or body and finder repair services.
c. Bed and Breakfast
A lodging service that provides overnight or short-term, accommodations to guests or visitors, usually including provision of breakfast are usually located in large residential structures that have been adapted for this use. For the purpose of this definition, bed and breakfasts are always owned and operated by the resident owner or resident manager of the structure, include no more that eight units, and accommodate each guest or visitor for not more that 7 consecutive days during any one-month period.
d. Business Support Services
Establishment or places of business primarily engaged in the sale, rental or repair of equipment, supplies and materials or the provision of services used by office, professional and service establishments to the firms themselves by excluding automotive, construction and farm equipment. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops or hotel equipment and supply firms, messenger and delivery services, custodial or maintenance services, and convenience printing and copying.
e. Business or Trade Schools
A use providing education or training in business, commerce, language, or other similar activity or occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college or university, or public or private educational facility.
f. Campground
Facilities providing camping or parking areas and incidental services for travelers in recreational vehicles or tents, which accommodate each guest or visitor for not more than 7 consecutive days during any one-month period.
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-11
g. Cocktail Lounge
A use engages in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, and similar uses other than a restaurant as that term is defined in this section.
h. Commercial Recreation
Private businesses, or other organizations which may or may not be commercial by structure or by nature, which are primarily engaged in the provision or sponsorship of sports, entertainment, or recreation for participants or spectators. Typical uses include theaters, private dance halls, billiard or bowling centers, game arcades, or private skating facilities.
i. Communications Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but excludes those classified as Utilities. Typical uses include television studios, telecommunication service centers, telegraph service offices, or film and sound recording facilities. Broadcast towers, and their minor ancillary ground structures are classified as “Miscellaneous Use Types.”
j. Construction Sales and Services
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail or wholesale, from the premises, of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures other than retail sale of paint, fixtures and hardware. This use type excludes those uses classified under Automotive and Equipment Services. Typical uses include building materials sales, or tool and equipment rental or sales.
k. Consumer Services
Establishments which provide services, primarily to individuals and households, but excluding Automotive Use Types. Typical uses include automated banking machines, appliance repair shops, watch or jewelry repair shops, or musical instrument repair shops.
l. Convenience Storage
Storage services primarily for personal effects and household goods within enclosed storage areas having individual access but excluding use of such areas as workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing, or commercial activity. Typical uses include mini-warehousing.
m. Food Sales
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of good or household products for home consumption. Food Sales establishments may include the sale of non-food items may account for not more than the lesser of 25% of the
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-12
sales area or 10,000 square feet of the Food Sales establishment. Typical uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy shops.
1. Convenient Food Sales: Establishments occupying facilities of less than 10,000 square feet; and characterized by sales of specialty foods of a limited variety of general items, and by the sales of fuel for motor vehicles.
2. Limited Food Sales: Establishments occupying facilities of less than 10,000 square feet; and characterized by sales of specialty foods of a limited variety of general items but excluding the accessory sales of fuel for motor vehicles. Typical uses include delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, candy shops, small grocery stores.
3. General Food Sales: Establishments selling a wide variety of food commodities and related items, using facilities larger than 10,000 but less than 40,000 square feet. Typical uses include grocery stores and locker plants.
4. Supermarkets: Establishments selling a wide variety of food commodities, related items, and often providing a variety of non-food goods and services, using facilities larger than 40,000 square feet. Typical uses include large grocery stores.
n. Funeral Services
Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as preparing for the human dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include funeral homes or mortuaries.
o. Kennels
Boarding and care services for dogs, cats and similar small mammals or large birds; or any premises on which three or more animals included under this definition over four months of age are kept and maintained. Typical uses include boarding kennels, ostrich raising facilities; pet motes, or dog training centers.
p. Laundry Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, cleaning or dyeing services other than those classified as Personal Services. Typical uses include bulk laundry and cleaning plans. diaper services, or linen supply services.
q. Liquor Sales
Establishments of places of business engaged in retail sales for off-premise consumption of alcoholic beverages. Typical uses include liquor stores, bottle shops, or any licensed sales of liquor, beer or wine for off-site consumption.
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-13
r. Lodging
Lodging services involving the provision of room and/or board, but not meeting the classification criteria of Bed and Breakfasts. Typical uses include hotels, apartment hotels, and motels.
s. Personal Improvement Services
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvements and similar services of a nonprofessional nature. Typical uses include driving schools, health or physical fitness studios, music schools, reducing salons, dance studios, handicraft and hobby instructions.
t. Personal Services
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of services of a personal nature. Typical uses include beauty and barber shops; seamstress, tailor, or shoe repair shops; photography studios; television or electronics repair; or dry-cleaning stations serving individuals and households. Personal Services include establishments providing for the administration of massage or massage therapy carried out by persons licensed by the State of Iowa under the provisions of chapters 148, 148A, 148B, 150, 150A, 151, 152, 157, or 158 of the Code of Iowa when performing massage services as a part of the profession or trade for which licensed or persons preforming massage services under the direction of a person so licensed; or persons performing massage services or therapy pursuant to the written direction of a licensed physician.
u. Pet Services
Retail Sales, incidental pet health services, and grooming and boarding, when totally within a building, of dogs, cats, birds, fish, and similar small animals customarily used as household pets. Typical uses include pet stores, small animal clinics, dog bathing and clipping salons, and pet grooming shops, but exclude uses for livestock and large animals.
v. Research Services
Establishments primarily engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature. Typical uses include electronics research laboratories, space research and development firms, testing laboratories, or pharmaceutical research lads.
w. Restaurants
A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages; including the sale of alcoholic beverages when conducted as a secondary feature of the use, producing less than 50n per cent of the establishment’s gross income.
1. Restaurant (Drive-in or Fast Food): An establishment which principally supplies food and beverages in disposable containers and is characterized by high
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-14
automobile accessibility and on-site accommodations, self-service, and short stays by customers.
2. Restaurant (General): An establishment characterized by table service to customers and/or accommodation to walk-in clientele, as opposed to Drive-In or Fast Food Restaurants. Typical uses include cafes, coffee shops, and restaurants.
x. Restricted (or Adult) Businesses
Any business activity which offers the opportunity to view sexual activities or view or touch anatomical area for entertainment purposes on a manner that offends contemporary standards in the community of Glenwood, depicts of describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, and lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific callus. This category includes that sale or viewing of visual or print materials that meet these criteria. Typical uses include retail services or stores which are distinguished by an emphasis on activities or materials that emphasize sexual content; businesses which offer lice performances characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas; and adult theaters.
y. Retail Services
Sale or rental with incidental service of commonly used goods and merchandise for personal or household use but excludes those classified more specifically by these use type classifications. Typical uses include department stores, apparel stores, furniture stores, or establishments providing the following products or services:
Household cleaning and maintenance products; drugs, cards, stationery, notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetics, and specialty items; flowers, plants, hobby materials, toys, and handcrafted items; apparel jewelry, fabrics and like items; cameras, photograph services, household electronic equipment, records, sporting equipment, kitchen utensils, home furnishing and appliances, art supplies and framing, arts and antiques, paint and wallpaper, hardware, carpeting and floor covering; interior decorating services; office supplies; mail order or catalog sales; bicycles; and automotive parts and accessories (excluding service and installation). General Retail Services include:
1. Limited Retail Services: Establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities of 3,000 square feet or less. Typical establishments provide for specialty retailing or retailing oriented to Glenwood and its surrounding vicinity.
2. Medium Retail Services: Establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities between 3,001 and 10,000 square feet in a single establishment or multi-tenant facility. Typical establishments provide for specialty retailing or general-purpose retailing oriented to Glenwood and its surrounding vicinity.
3. Large Retail Services: Establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities between 10,001 and 40,000 square feet in a single establishment or multi-tenant
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-15
facility. Typical establishments provide for specialty retailing or general-purpose retailing oriented to Glenwood and its surrounding vicinity.
4. Mass Retail Services: Establishments providing retail services, occupying facilities over 40,000 square feet in a single establishment or multi-tenant facility. Typical establishments provide for general purpose retailing oriented to Glenwood and the surrounding region.
z. Stables and/or Riding Academies
The buildings, pens and pasture areas used for the boarding and feeding of horses, llama, or other equine not owned by the occupants of the premises. This use includes instruction in riding, jumping, and showing or the riding of horses/equine for hire.
aa. Surplus Sales
Businesses engaged in the sale, including sale by auction, of used items or new items which are primarily composed of factory surplus or discontinued items. Surplus sales use sometimes include regular outdoor display of merchandise. Typical uses include flea markets, auction houses, factory outlets, or merchandise liquidators.
bb. Trade Services
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the provision of services that are not retail or primarily dedicated to walk-in clientele. These services often involve services to construction or building trades and may involve a small amount of screened, outdoor storage in appropriate zoning districts. Typical uses include shops or operating bases for plumbers, electricians, or HVAC (heating, ventilating, and air conditioning) contractors.
cc. Vehicle Storage (Short-term)
Short-term storage of operating or nonoperating vehicles for a period of no more than 21 days. Typical uses include storage of private parking tow-aways or impound yards but exclude dismantling or salvage. Long-term storage beyond 21 days constitutes an Industrial Use Type.
dd. Veterinary Services
Veterinary services and hospitals for animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals, pet cemeteries and crematoria, and veterinary hospitals for livestock and large animals.
167.08 Parking Use Types
a. Off-Street Parking
Parking use types include surface parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis within a privately or publicly owned off-street parking facility.
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-16
b. Parking Structure
The use of a site for a multilevel building which provides for the parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis, other than as an accessory to a principal use of the same site.
167.09 Industrial Use Types
Industrial use types include the on-site extraction or production of goods by nonagricultural methods, and the storage and distribution of products.
a. Construction Yards
Establishments housing facilities of businesses primarily engaged in construction activities, including incidental storage of materials and equipment on lots other than construction sites. Typical uses are building contractor’s yards.
b. Custom Manufacturing
Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing, within enclosed structures, involving:
1. The use of hand tools, or
2. The use of domestic mechanical equipment not exceeding 2 horsepower, or
3. A single kiln not exceeding 8 KW or equivalent.
This category also includes the incidental direct sale to consumers of only those goods produced on site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, custom jewelry manufacturing, candle making shops.
c. Light Industry
Establishments engaged in the manufacture of processing of finished products from previously prepared materials, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution, these establishments shall have no major external environmental effects across property lines and include no unscreened or unenclosed outdoor storage. Typical uses include commercial bakeries, dressed beef processing plants, soft drink bottling, apparel assembly from fabrics, electronics, manufacturing, print shops and publishing houses.
d. General Industry
Enterprises engaged in the processing, manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or fabrication of materials and products from prepared materials or from raw materials without noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects across property lines.
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-17
e. Heavy Industry
Enterprises involved in the basic processing and manufacturing of products, predominately from raw materials, with noticeable noise, odor, vibration, or air pollution effects across property lines; or a use or process engaged in the storage of or processes involving potentially of actually hazardous, explosive, flammable, radioactive, or other commonly recognized hazardous material.
f. Recycling Collection
Any site which is used for the processing of any post-consumer, nondurable goods including, but not limited to glass, plastic, paper, cardboard, aluminum, tin, or other recycle commodities.
g. Recycling Processing
Any site which is used for the processing of any post-consumer, nondurable goods including, but not limited to glass, plastic, paper, cardboard, aluminum, tin, other recyclable commodities.
h. Resource Extraction
A use involving on-site extraction of surface or substance mineral products of natural resources, excluding the grading and removal of dirt. Typical uses are quarried, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, mining.
i. Salvage Services
Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling or other processing of used or waste materials which are not intended for reuse in their original forms. Typical uses include automotive wrecking yards, junk yards, or paper salvage yards.
j. Vehicle Storage (Long Term)
Long-term storage of operation or nonoperating vehicles for a period exceeding 21-days. Typical uses include storage of private parking tow-away(s) or impound yards but exclude dismantling or salvage uses. Long-term storage of 21-days or less constitutes a Commercial Use Type.
k. Warehousing (Enclosed)
Uses including storage, distribution, and handling of goods and materials. Typical uses include monument yards, grain elevators, and open storage.
l. Warehousing (Open)
Uses including open air storage, distribution, and handling of goods and materials. Typical uses include monument yards, grain elevators, and open storage.
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-18
167.10 Transportation Use Types
Transportation use types include the use of land for the purpose of providing facilities supporting the movement of passengers and freight from one point to another.
a. Aviation Facilities
Landing fields, aircraft parking and service facilities, and related facilities for operation, service, fueling, repair, storage, charter, sales, and rental of aircraft, and including activities directly associated with the operation and maintenance of airport facilities and the provision of safety and security.
b. Railroad Facility
Railroad yards, equipment servicing facilities, and terminal facilities.
c. Transportation Terminal
Facility for loading, unloading, and interchange of passengers, baggage, and incidental freight or package express, including bus terminals, railroad stations, public transit facilities.
d. Truck Terminal
A facility for the receipt, transfer, short term storage, and dispatching of goods transported by truck.
167.11 Miscellaneous Type Uses
The use of a site for the production of energy utilizing methods that do not involve the oxidation, combustion, of fission of primary materials. Typical uses include solar collector fields, geothermal energy installations, or water-powered mills or generating facilities.
a. Amateur Radio Tower
A Structure(s) for the transmission of broadcasting of electromagnetic signals by FCC licensed Amateur Radio operators.
b. Communications Tower
A structure(s) for the transmission of broadcasting of radio, television, radar, or microwaves, ordinarily exceeding the maximum height permitted in its zoning district. Typical use includes broadcasting towers and cellular communications towers.
c. Construction Batch Plant
A temporary demountable facility used for the manufacturing of cement, concrete, asphalt, or other paving materials intended for specific construction projects.
USE TYPES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 167-19
d. Landfill (Non-putrescible Solid Waste Disposal)
The use of a site as a depository for solid wastes that do not readily undergo chemical or biological breakdown under conditions normally associated with land disposal operations. Typical disposal material would include ashes, concrete, paving wastes, rock, brick, lumber, roofing materials and ceramic tile.
e. Landfill (Putrescible and Non-putrescible Solid Waste Disposal)
The use of a site as a depository for any solid waste except hazardous and toxic waste as defined by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency and/or the State of Iowa. Typical disposal material would include non-putrescible wastes; and putrescible wastes such as vegetation, tree parts, agricultural wastes (garbage) and manure.
f. Wind Energy Conservation System (WECS)
Any device which converts wind energy to a form of usable energy, including wind charges, windmills, or wind turbines.
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-1
SECTION 168
Zoning District Regulations
168.01 Purpose
Article Four presents the Zoning District Regulations/ Zoning Districts are established in the Zoning Regulations to promote compatible land use patterns and to establish site development regulations appropriate to the purposes and specific nature of each district.
168.02 Establishment of Districts
The following base districts and overlay districts are hereby established. Table 168-1 displays the purposes of these districts.
BASE ZONING DISTRICTS DISTRICT NAMES
AR Agricultural Reserve District
RR Rural Residential District
R-1 Single-Family Residential District (8,400 square foot lots)
R-2 Single-Family Residential District (6,000 square foot lots)
R-3 Urban Family Residential District
R-4 Multi-Family Residential District
MH Mobile Home Residential District
UC Mixed Use Urban Corridor District
CC Community Commercial District
DC Downtown Commercial District
GC General Commercial District
HC Highway Gateway Commercial District
BP Business Park District
LI Limited Industrial District
GI General Industrial District
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
MU Mixed Use District
PD Planned Unit Development District
NC Neighborhood Conservation District
RC Rural Conservation Development Overlay District
FP/FW Floodplain/Floodway Overlay District
168.03 Application of Districts
A base district designation shall apply to each lot or site within the city and its planning jurisdiction. A site must be in one base district.
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-2
Overlay districts may be applied to any lot or site or any portion thereof, in addition to a base district designation. The Mixed-Use District may stand alone as a base district.
168.04 Hierarchy
References in the Zoning Ordinance to less intensive or more intensive districts shall be deemed to refer to those agricultural, residential, commercial, and industrial base zoning districts established in Section 168.02, and shall represent a progression from the AR agricultural Reserve District as the least intensive to the GI General Industrial District as the most intensive. The Overlay Districts shall not be included in this reference.
168.05 Development Regulations
For each Zoning District: Purposes are set forth in Table 168*1; Uses permitted are set forth in Table 168-2; and Site Development Regulations are presented in Table 168-3.
168.06 Zoning Map
a. Adoption of Zoning Map
Boundaries of zoning districts established by this Zoning Regulations shall be shown on the Zoning Map maintained by the City Clerk. This map shall bear the signature of the Mayor attested by the City Clerk under the certification that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to by this Ordinance. This map, together with all legends, references, symbols, boundaries, and other information, shall be adopted as a part of, and concurrent with these Regulations. Said Zoning map shall be on file with the City Clerk and shall be readily accessible to the public at Glenwood City Hall.
b. Changes to the Zoning Map
The city council may from time to time adopt a new official zooming map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map, in the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged or destroyed; or for purposes of clarity die to a number of boundary changes, or to correct drafting errors or omissions; provided, however, that any such adoption shall not have the effect of amending the original zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof.
168.07 Interpretation of District Boundaries
The following rules shall apply in determining the boundaries of any zoning district shown on the Zoning Map.
a. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be considered the district boundaries.
b. Where district boundaries are indicated as within street or alley, railroad, streams or creeks, or other identifiable rights-of-way, the centerline of such rights-of-way shall be deemed the district bounds.
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-3
c. Where a district boundary decides a property, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the Zoning Map.
d. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following corporate limits, such corporate limits shall be considered the district boundaries.
e. Where district boundaries are indicated a approximately following section lines, quarter section lines, or quarter-quarter section lines, such lines shall be considered the district boundaries.
f. Boundaries not capable of being determined as set forth in 168.07a through 168.07e shall be as dimensioned on the official Zoning Map or if not dimensioned shall be determined by the scale shown on the map.
168.08 Vacation of Streets and Alleys
Whenever a public street or alley is vacated, the zoning district adjoining each side of such right-of-way shall be extended out to the former centerline.
168.09 Annexation of Territory
All unimproved or agricultural territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City shall be considered as lying in the AR Agricultural Reserve District until such classification shall be changed as provided by this ordinance. Any improved property that is annexed into the city hall be zoned according to the zoning district that most nearly describes either its present use or the use proposed by Glenwood’s Comprehensive Plan. This zoning shall be established by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council at the time of annexation.
168.10 Required Conformance
Except as specified in this chapter, no building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used, which does not comply with all of the district regulations established by this title for the district on which the building or land is located.
168.11 Required Frontage
Except as provided in Article Seven of this title, no lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for residence purposes unless such lot abuts for a least twenty feet on at least one public street, or unless it has an exclusive unobstructed private easement of
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-4
access of right-of-way of at least twenty feet wide to a street; and there shall be not more than one single-family dwelling for such frontage or easement, except that a common easement of access at least fifty feet wide may be provided for two or more such single-family dwellings or for one or more two-family or multiple dwellings.
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-5
Table 168-1: Purposes of Zoning Districts
SYMBOL TITLE
PURPOSE
AR Agricultural Reserve
The AR District provides for and preserves the agricultural and rural use of land, while accommodating very low-density residential development generally associated with agricultural uses. This district is designed to maintain complete agricultural uses within the Glenwood jurisdiction. In addition, land included in the Urban Reserve in the Comprehensive Plan should be retained in the AR district to prevent premature or inappropriate development.
RR Rural Residential
The district provides for the rural residential use of land, accommodating very low density residential environments. The district’s regulations assure that density is developed consistent with land use policies of the Glenwood Comprehensive Plan regarding rural subdivisions; levels of infrastructure; and environmentally sensitive development practices. The RR District is appropriate for development that is unlikely to receive urban water and sewer services. The district also accommodates developments that merge urban living with rural life.
R-1 Single-Family Residential (8,400 SF Lots)
This district is intended to provide for residential development, characterized by single-family dwellings on lots with an area of 8,400 square feet and above. Development is this district will generally be provided with urban infrastructure services.
R-2 Single-Family Residential (6,000 SF Lots)
This district is intended to provide for residential development characterized by single-family dwellings on relatively small lots with an area of 6,000 to 8,400 square feet. Development in this district will generally be provided with urban infrastructure services.
R-3 Urban Family Residential
This district is intended to provide for medium density residential development, characterized by single-family dwellings on small lots along with low-density multi-unit residential structures such as duplexes and townhouses. It provides regulations to encourage innovative forms of housing development. It adapts to both established and developing neighborhoods, as well as transitions between single-family and multi-family areas. Its regulations are intended to minimize traffic congestion and to assure that density is consistent with the carrying capacity of infrastructure.
R-4 Multi-Family Residential
This district is intended to provide locations primarily for multiple-family housing, with supporting and appropriate community facilities. It also permits some nom-residential uses such as offices through a special permit procedure to permit a mixing of uses that have relatively similar operating and development effects.
MH Mobile Home Residential
This district recognizes that mobile home development, properly planned, can provide important opportunities for affordable housing. It provides opportunities for mobile home development within planned parks or subdivisions, along with the supporting services necessary to create quality residential neighborhoods.
UC Mixed Use Urban Corridor
This district recognizes the mixed use character of major urban corridors, most notably Locust Street. These corridors sometimes accommodate a combination of residential, commercial, and office uses. Design standards maintain their character as important urban streets.
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-6
Table 168-1: Purposes of Zoning Districts (Continued)
SYMBOL TITLE
PURPOSE
CC Community Commercial
This district is intended for commercial facilities which serve the needs of markets ranging from several neighborhoods to the overall region. Permitted commercial and office uses are generally compatible with nearby residential areas, with development standards designed to minimize the effects of traffic and operating characteristics. CC Districts are appropriate at major intersections, at the junction of several neighborhoods, or at substantial commercial subcenters.
DC Downtown Commercial
This district is intended to provide appropriate development regulations for Downtown Glenwood. Mixed uses are encouraged within the DC District. The grouping of uses is designed to strengthen the town center’s role as a center for trade, service, and civic life.
GC General Commercial
This district accommodates a variety of commercial uses, some of which have significant traffic or visual effect. These districts may include commercial uses which are oriented to services, including automotive services, rather than retail activities. These uses may create land use conflicts with adjacent residential areas, requiring provision of adequate buffering. This district is most appropriately located along major arterial streets or in areas that can be adequately buffered from residential districts.
HC Highway Gateway Commercial
This district is designed to provide high quality commercial development at major community gateways and highway environments, specifically relating to interchanges or intersections of major community arterials such as Locust Street and Highway 34. The design of projects at these gateways should provide a positive first impression to Glenwood.
BP Business Park
This district is designed to promote the development of planned business parks that accommodate corporate offices, research facilities, and structures which can combine office, distribution, and limited industrial uses. These facilities serve a more regional audience but, may provide services to local residents. They are characterized by extensive landscaping, abundant parking facilities, and good visual and pedestrian relationships among buildings.
BP Business Park
This district is designed to promote the development of planned business parks that accommodate corporate offices, research facilities, and structures which can combine office, distribution, and limited industrial uses. These facilities serve a more regional audience but, may provide services to local residents. They are characterized by extensive landscaping, abundant parking facilities, and good visual and pedestrian relationships among buildings.
LI Limited Industrial
This district is intended to reserve sites appropriate for the location of industrial uses with relatively limited environmental effects. The district is designed to provide appropriate space and regulations to encourage good quality industrial development, while assuring that facilities are served with adequate parking and loading facilities.
GI General Industrial
This district is intended to accommodate a wide variety of industrial uses, some of which may have significant external effects. These uses may have operating characteristics that create conflicts with lower-intensity surrounding land uses. The district provides the reservation of land for these activities and includes buffering requirements to reduce incompatibility.
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-7
168.12 Use Matrix: Levels of Permitted Uses
Within zoning districts in Glenwood, different uses are permitted with different conditions. These are displayed in Table 168-2, the Matrix of Permitted Uses. Levels of permission include.:
a. Uses which are Permitted by right: These uses are permitted subject to issuance of a building permit by Building Official, subject only to compliance with all regulations of this Ordinance. Uses permitted by right might be subject to supplemental regulations contained in this Ordinance. These uses are indicated in the Use Matrix by a “P” in the applicable cell.
b. Conditional Uses: These uses are subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission, following the procedure set forth in Section 177.03. These uses are indicated in the Use Matrix by a “C” in the applicable cell. Conditional uses with intensity ratings of M (moderate), H (high), or I (intensive) require attainment of a requisite number of Performance Points. These uses require special site of development features and amenities in excess of the minimum requirements in certain zoning district, because of their scale, neighborhood impact, or other potential external effects. The procedure for determination of Performance Points is set forth in Section 169.
c. Site Plan Approval: Some use types require a site plan approval by the Building Official, based on specific criteria for review. This procedure is set forth in Section 177.02. These uses are indicated in the Use Matrix by an asterisk (*) following the citing of a specific use type.
168.13 Guide to Site Development Regulators
The regulators set forth in Table 168-3 establish the limits and requirements for most development in the City of Glenwood. This section is intended to provide guidance for applying the regulators contained in these tables.
a. Site are per housing unit: This indicates the gross land area per unit within a residential development. For example, a 40 lot subdivision on a 10 acre (435,600 square foot tract) will have a site area per unit of 10,890 square feet. Site area per unit, which measures gross density, may differ from minimum lot size. In conservation development the site area per unit will be larger than minimum lot size, permitting the clustering of lots in exchange for common open space. In multi-family development, the site area per unit will usually be smaller that minimum lot size, because the lot is the legal parcel on which a multiple-unit building is built.
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-8
b. Minimum lot area: This indicates the minimum size of a legally described and recorded parcel upon which development can take place. As noted above, minimum lot area and site area per unit may not be the same.
c. Minimum lot width: This is the required minimum distance connecting at points along opposite side lot lines, measured at the required front yard setback. For example, the lot width of an irregular lot in a district requiring a 25-foot front yard setback is determined by:
1. Locating the points along each side lot line at a distance of 25-feet back from the front property line.
2. Drawing a line connecting these two (2) points.
3. Measuring the length of this line and the length is the lot width.
d. Minimum yards: These define the required setbacks of buildings from front, side, and near property lines. While the yard requirements apply to a majority of development, the Ordinance provides for a number of exceptions. Some of these include:
1. Planned Developments: Front yard setbacks can be varied within Planned Developments, which are reviewed and approved by the City Council after a recommendation from the Planning Commission.
2. Flexibility provided by Supplemental Development Regulations: Section 171 establishes supplement regulations, many of which provide flexibility or variations in setback regulations for specific contexts.
3. Maximum setbacks: Some specific zoning districts provide maximum as well as minimum setbacks. These setbacks establish “build-to” lines which may be necessary to protect the appearance and character of special urban districts.
e. Maximum height: Height normally measures the vertical distance from the established grade to the highest point of a building. However, as established by the definition of height, the point of measurement may vary for different types of buildings and roof slopes.
f. Maximum building coverage: This measures the percentage of a site that many be covered by the footprint of buildings. Thus, a 20,000 square foot building on a 40,000 square foot site has a building coverage of 50%. This is a method of regulating the scale of buildings in an area.
g. Maximum Impervious Coverage: This measures the percentage of a site that may be covered by buildings and other surfaces and development features which prevent the penetration of water into the ground (such as driveways, porches, parking lots,
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-9
and other features). Limits on impervious coverage help control the velocity and quantity of stormwater runoff and provide for groundwater recharge.
h. Floor area ratio: Just as site area per unit controls the density of residential development, floor area ratio (FAR) controls the density of non-residential development. FAR is the ratio of gross floor area of a building to total site area. Thus, in an area with a maximum permitted FAR of 1.0, a 40,000 square foot building may be located on a 40,000 square foot sire. Naturally, because of coverage ratios, landscaping, and parking requirements, such a building will be multi-story.
i. Maximum amount of total parking in street yard: This controls the maximum amount of parking that can be located in the area between a building façade and the street. When applied in certain zoning districts, it is intended to reduce the number of cars seen from the street, encourage site planning which locates parking in rear and side yards, and produce a stronger relationship between buildings and streets. For example, a project with 100 parking stalls and a 50% limit on the amount of parking located in street yards must locate 50 of its stalls in rear or side yards without street exposure.
j. Minimum Width of Residential Structures: This controls the minimum width for any residential building structure elevations, which shall be not les than twenty (20) feet in width, in all residential zones.
k. Minimum Floor Area for Residential Structures. This controls the minimum floor area for each residential structure. Any residential structure shall contain not less than seven hundred-fifty (750) square feet of enclosed living space.
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-10
Table 168-2: Matrix of Permitted Uses by Zoning Districts
USE TYPES IR
AR RR
R-1 R-2
R-3 R-4
MH UC
CC DC
GC HC
BP LI
GI Add. Regs. Agricultural Uses
Horticulture L
P P
C C
C C
C
P C
C C
Crop Production L
P P
Animal Production M
P P
Commercial Feedlots I
Livestock Sales I
Residential Uses
Single-Family Detached L
P P
P P
P P
P P
Single-Family Attached L
C
C C
P P
P P
Duplex L
P P
P
Two-Family L
C
C
P P
P
P
Townhouse (up to 4 attached units) L
P P
P
P
Townhouse (over 4 attached units)* M
C P
P
P
Multiple -Family* H
P
C
C P
C
Downtown Residential M
P
Group Residential* M
C
P
C
Manufactured Housing Residential L
P P
P P
P P
P
Mobile Home Park H
C
Mobile Home Subdivision M
P
Retirement Residential* M
C C
C C
P P
C P
C P
C
P = Uses Permitted by Right C = Uses Permitted by Conditional Use Permit Blank = Use Not Permitted
Intensity Rating (IR Column): L = Low M=Moderate H = High I = Intensive *Requires Site Plan Approval
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-11
Table 168-2: Matrix of Permitted Uses by Zoning Districts (continued)
USE TYPES IR
AR RR
R-1 R-2
R-3 R-4
MH UC
CC DC
GC HC
BP LI
GI Add. Regs. Civic Uses
Administration L
C
C C
C C
C P
P P
P P
P P
P
Assisted Living M
C
C P
Cemetery L
C C
P P
P C
P
Clubs (Recreational)* M
C C
C C
C P
C P
C
P P
C P
P
Clubs (Social)* M
C C
C C
C P
C P
P P
P P
C P
P
College/Univ* H
C C
C C
C P
C P
P P
P P
P P
Convalescent Services L
C
C
C P
C P
P C
Cultural Services* M
C C
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
Day Care (Limited) L
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
C C
C C
C
Day Care (General)* M
C C
C C
C P
C P
P P
P P
P C
C
Detention Facilities* I
C C
C
C
Elder Home L
P P
P P
P P
P P
Emergency Residential L
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
Family Home L
P P
P P
P P
P P
Group Care Facility* M
C
P
P
P P
P P
Group Home L
C
C
C P
P
P P
P P
Guidance Services L
P
P
P P
P P
P P
P
Health Care* M
P
P
P P
P P
P P
P
Hospitals* H
C
C
C P
P P
P C
C
Maintenance Facility* H
C
C
C
P P
P
P
Park and Recreation L
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P
Postal Facilities* M
C
P P
P P
P P
P
Primary Education* H
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
C C
Public Assembly* H
C
C P
P P
C
Religious Assembly* M
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
C
Safety Services* M
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P
Secondary Educ* H
C C
C C
C P
C P
C C
C C
Utilities* H
P C
C C
C C
C C
C C
P P
P
P
P = Uses Permitted by Right C = Uses Permitted by Conditional Use Permit Blank = Use Not Permitted
Intensity Rating (IR Column): L = Low M=Moderate H = High I = Intensive *Requires Site Plan Approval
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-12
Table 168-2: Matrix of Permitted Uses by Zoning Districts (continued)
Use Types IR
AR RR
R-1 R-2
R-3 R-4
MH UC
CC DC
GC HC
BP LI
GI Add. Reg. Office Uses
Corporate Offices* M
C
P
P P
P P
P P
P
General Offices M
C
P
P P
P P
P P
P
Financial Offices* M
P
P P
P P
P P
P
Medical Offices M
P
P P
P P
P P
C Commercial Uses
Ag Sales/Service* H
C C
P P
P
P
Auto Rental/Sales* H
C
C P
P P
P
Auto Services* H
C
P P
P P
P
P
Body Repair* I
C C
P P
P
P
Equip Rental/ Sales* H
C
P P
P
P
Equipment Repair* H
P P
P
P
Bed and Breakfast* L
C C
C C
C C
P
P P
P P
Business Support Services M
C C
C C
C C
P
P P
P P
P P
P
Business/Trade School* H
P P
P P
P P
P
Campground* M
C
C
C C
Cocktail Lounge* H
C
C C
P P
C P
P
Commercial Rec (Indoor)* H
C
P P
P P
P P
P
Commercial Rec (Outdoor)* H
C
P P
P
P
Communication Service* M
P
P P
P P
P P
P
Construction Sale/Service* H
C
C C
P P
P
P
Consumer Service M
P
P P
P P
P P
Convenience Storage* H
C
C C
P
P
Food Sales (Convenience)* H
P
P P
P P
P P
P
Food Sales (Limited) L
P
P P
P P
P P
Food Sales (General)* M
C
P P
P P
Food Sales (Supermarkets)* H
P P
C C
P = Uses Permitted by Right C = Uses Permitted by Conditional Use Permit Blank = Use Not Permitted
Intensity Rating (IR Column): L = Low M=Moderate H = High I = Intensive *Requires Site Plan Approval
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-13
Table 168-2: Matrix of Permitted Uses by Zoning Districts (continued)
USE TYPES IR
AR RR
R-1 R-2
R-3 R-4
MH UC
CC DC
GC HC
BP LI
GI Addl. Reg. Commercial Uses
Funeral Service* M
C
P
P P
P P
P P
P
Kennels* M
P C
C C
P
P
Laundry Services* H
C
P P
P
P
Liquor Sales* H
C
P P
P P
C
Lodging* H
P
P P
P P
C
Personal Improvement M
P
P P
P P
P C
Personal Services M
C C
C C
C C
P
P P
P P
P P
P
Pet Services M
C
P
P P
P P
P P
Research Services* M
P
P P
P P
P P
P
Restaurants (Drive-in)* H
C
P C
P P
C
C
Restaurants (General)* H
P
P P
P P
P C
C
Restricted Business* I
C
P
Retail Services (Limited) (Medium) M
P
P P
P P
C
Retail Services (Large)* H
C
P C
P P
Retail Services (Mass)* I
C C
P P
Stables* M
C C
Surplus Sales* I
C
P
P
P
Trade Services M
C
C C
P P
P P
P
Vehicle Storage (Short-term)* M
C
P
P
P
Veterinary Services M
C C
P
C C
P P
P
P Parking Uses
Off-Street Parking* H
C
C P
P P
C P
P
Parking Structure* H
C P
C C
C P
P
P = Uses Permitted by Right C = Uses Permitted by Conditional Use Permit Blank = Use Not Permitted
Intensity Rating (IR Column): L = Low M=Moderate H = High I = Intensive *Requires Site Plan Approval
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-14
Table 168-2: Matrix of Permitted Uses by Zoning Districts (continued)
Use Types IR
AR RR
R-1 R-2
R-3 R-4
MH UC
CC DC
GC HC
BP LI
GI Add. Reg. Industrial Uses
Agricultural Industry* I
C
P
Construction Yards* H
P
P
Custom Manufacturing M
C
C P
P P
P P
P
Light Industry* H
C P
P
General Industry* I
C
P
P
Heavy Industry* I
C
Recycling Collection* M
C C
P
P
P
Recycling Processing* I
P
P
Resource Extraction* I
C
Salvage Services* I
P
Vehicle Storage (Long-term)* H
C
P
P
Warehousing (Enclosed)* H
C
C C
P P
P
Warehousing (Open)* I
C
P Transportation Uses
Aviation* I
C C
P
Railroad Facilities* I
C
C
C P
P
Truck Terminal* I
C
C
P
Transportation Terminal* H
P P
P P
P
P Miscellaneous Uses
Alternative Energy Production Devices M
C C
C C
C C
C C
C
C C
P P
P
Amateur Radio Tower L
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P
Communications Tower H
C
C
C
C
C C
P P
P
Construction Batch Plant* I
P P
C
P
Landfill (Non-Putrescible)* I
C
Landfill (Putrescible)* I
P = Uses Permitted by Right C = Uses Permitted by Conditional Use Permit Blank = Use Not Permitted
Intensity Rating (IR Column): L = Low M=Moderate H = High I = Intensive *Requires Site Plan Approval
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-15
Table 168-3: Summary of Site Development Regulations
REGULATOR AR
RR R-1
R-2 R-3
R-4* Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
One-Family 10 acres
1 acre 8,400
6,000 5,000
4,000
Duplex, Two-Family NA
---
--- 10,000
7,000
Townhouses NA
---
--- 9,000
7,000
Multi-Family NA
---
--- ---
7,000
Other Permitted Uses NA
1 acre 8,400
6,000 6,000
6,000 Minimum Lot Width (feet)
One-Family 150
100 70
60 50
40
Duplex
80
70
Townhouses
25
25
Multi-Family
70
Other Permitted Uses 150
100 70
60 60
70 Minimum Site Area per Housing Unit (square feet) by type of Residential Use
Single-Family 10 Acres
2 Acres 8,400
6,000 5,000
5,000
Two-Family
5,000
4,000
Duplex
5,000
3,500
Townhouse
3,000
2,500
Multi-family
1,250 Minimum Yards (feet)
Front Yard 35
35 25
25 25
25
Street Side Yard 25
25 25
20 15
10
Interior Side Yards
? 1 to 1.5 stories 20
20 > of 7 or 10% of lot width
5 5
5
? 2-3 stories 20
20
10 10
7
? More than 3 stories NA
NA NA
NA NA
NA
? Non-Residential Uses 30
30 30
20 20
15
Rear Yard 35
35 25
25 25
10
Maximum Height (feet) 35
35 35
35 35
75
Maximum Building Coverage 10%
20% 25%
40% 50%
60%
Maximum Impervious Coverage 20%
30% 40%
60% 70%
80%
Floor Ratio NA
NA NA
NA NA
NA
Minimum Width for any building 20
20 20
20 20
20
Elevation
Minimum Floor Area 750
750 750
750 750
750
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-16
Table 168-3: Summary of Site Development Regulations (continued)
REGULATOR MH
UC CC*
DC GC*
HC* Minimum Lot Area (square feet)
None 5,000
10,000
One-family 5,000
5,000
Duplex, Townhouses
7,000
Multi-Family
8,000 8,000
Mobile Home Park 2 acres
Other Permitted Uses
5,000 5,000
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
None 50
100
One-Family 60
50
Duplex
70
Townhouses
25
Multi-Family
80 80
Other Permitted Uses 80
50 50
Mobile Home Park 150
Site Area per Housing Unit
(square feet) by type of residential
Single-Family 5,000
5,000
Two-Family
4,000
Duplex
3,500
Townhouse
2,500
2,000
Multi-Family
1,250 1,250
600
Mobile Home Park 4,000
Minimum Yards (feet)
Front Yard
Note 3
? Mobile Home Park 35
? Other Permitted Uses 25
20
0 10
25
Street Side Yard (Note 2) 15
15 20
0 10
15
Interior Side Yard (Note 2)
? 1 to 1.5 stories 5
5 Note 4
0 0
0
? 2-3 stories
7
0 0
0
? More than 3 stories
10
0 0
0
Rear Yard (Note 2) 25
15 10
0 10
20
Maximum Height (feet) 35
45 45
No limit 55
55
Maximum Building Coverage
50% 60%
100% 70%
60%
Maximum Impervious Coverage
70% 80%
100% 90%
80%
Floor Area Ratio
0.50 1.0
No limit 1.0
1.0
Maximum Amount of Total Parking
50% 80%
20% 80%
100%
Located in Street Yard
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 168-17
Table 168-3: Summary of Site Development Regulations (continued)
REGULATOR BP
LI* GI*
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 10,000
5,000 5,000
Minimum Lot Width (feet) 100
50 50 Minimum Yards (feet)
Front Yard 25
20 20
Street Side Yard 25
20 20
Interior Side Yard 10
0 0
Rear Yard 25 (Note 5)
10 10
Maximum Height (feet) 45
45 No Limit
Maximum Building Coverage 60%
70% 70%
Maximum Impervious Coverage 80%
90% 90%
Floor Area Ratio 2.0
1.0 No limit
Maximum Amount of Total Parking 50%
No limit No limit
Located in Street Yard
Note 1: See Section 603 for supplemental regulations governing single-family attached and townhouse
residential use types.
Note 2: Mobile Home Parks require a 35-foot setback on all property lines.
Note 3: Normal minimum setback is 25 feet. Front yard setback may be reduced to 15 feet if:
1. No parking is placed within the street yard.
2. The entire street yard area is landscaped, with the exception of driveways to parking areas of pedestrian accesses to the principal building on the site.
Note 4: No requirements for non-residential uses. Conditional use permit for residential uses should establish required setbacks as part of the approval process.
Note 5: Required rear yard may be reduced one foot for every one foot of front yard provided in excess of the minimum requirement. No rear yard may be less than 10 feet.
* Uses in the R-4, CC, GC, HC, LI, and GI Districts are subject to landscape and screening provisions contained in Section 173.
PERFORMANCE POINT EVALUATION SYSTEM
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 169-1
SECTION 169
Performance Point Evaluation System
169.01 Purpose
The Performance Point Evaluation System is designed to ensure that projects which are permitted in zoning districts subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit because of especially significant scale, design or operating effects on their environments provide enhancements and design features which compensate for these effects. the system requires attainment of a specified number of Performance Points to qualify for issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. It further provides a variety of design features and enhancements to permit a developer considerable flexibility in choosing appropriate enhancements.
169.02 Application
The Performance Point Evaluation System applies to all uses which require a Conditional Use Permit in a given zoning district, as set forth by Table 168-2.
169.03 Performance Point Requirements
In order to receive a permit to proceed with development, projects must attain the number of Performance Points set forth in the following table, Intensity Rating references are indicated in the Use Matrix. Attainment of these points is a prerequisite for approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission. However, such attainment shall not limit the ability of the Planning Commission to make other appropriate requirements of a specific project.
Intensity Rating Performance Point Requirement
L (Light)
10 M (Moderate) 20
H (High)
40 I (Intensive) 60
169.04 Project Evaluation
a. Projects shall be evaluated by the Planning Commission, which shall maintain a written record of the evaluation.
PERFORMANCE POINT EVALUATION SYSTEM
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 169-2
169.05 Evaluation Standards
a. Landscaped Areas
1. Base Standard: All projects must provide landscaping constituent with the Minimum Depth and Bufferyard Standards established by Section 173.
2. Performance Points: Projects earn one point for each foot of landscaping provided in addition to the minimum required standards.
b. Parking Lot Landscaping
1. Base Standard: All parking lots accommodating 20 or more cars shall provide interior landscaping equal to 5% of the paved area of the parking lot.
2. Performance Points: Projects earn points based on the following table:
Points Action
0 Project meets minimum standards.
5 Project provides 1.25 times the base standard for interior landscaping.
10 Project provides 1.50 times the base standard for interior landscaping.
15 Project provides 2.00 times the base standard for interior landscaping.
c. Trees
1. Base Standard: All projects must provide one tree of a species approved by the Planning Director for each 500 square foot of landscaping provided by the Landscaped Area Standards.
2. Performance Points: Projects earn points based on the following table:
Points Action
0 Project meets minimum standards.
5 Project provides 1.25 times the base standard for tree planting.
10 Project provides 1.5 times the base standard for tree planting.
15 Project provides 1.75 times the base standard for tree planting.
20 Project provides 2 times the base standard for tree planting.
d. Signage
1. Base Standard: Projects must meet the sign requirement set forth in Section 175.
2. Performance Points: Projects earn points based on the following table:
Points Action
0 Total sign area = 80% to 100% of permitted sign area.
5 Total sign area = 70% to 80% of permitted sign area.
10 Total sign area = 60% to 70% of permitted sign area.
15 Total sign area = 50% to 60% of permitted sign area.
20 Total sign area = Less than 50% of permitted sign area.
PERFORMANCE POINT EVALUATION SYSTEM
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 169-3
3. Projects which provide all signage as monument or ground signs earn an additional ten points. All such signs must be located outside of vision clearance zones.
e. Parking in Street Yard Facing Corridors
1. Base Standard: Projects must meet requirements indicated in the Development Regulations for individual districts.
2. Performance Points: Projects earn points based on the following table:
Points Action
0 Meet minimum standards.
5 Reduces the amount of street yard parking by 10% below district requirements.
10 Reduces the amount of street yard parking by 20% below district requirements.
15 Reduces the amount of street yard parking by 30% below district requirements.
20 Reduces the amount of street yard parking by 40% below district requirements.
f. Impervious Coverage
1. Base Standard: Projects must meet requirements indicated in the Development Regulations for individual districts.
2. Performance Points: Projects earn points based on the following table:
Points Action
0 Meet minimum standards.
5 Reduces impervious coverage by 10% below district requirements.
10 Reduces impervious coverage by 20% below district requirements.
15 Reduces impervious coverage by 30% below district requirements.
20 Reduces impervious coverage by 40% below district requirements.
g. Building Articulation
1. Base Standard: No requirement.
2. Performance Points: Projects earn points based on the following table:
Points Action
5 Building provides a minimum offset of 5 feet for every 100 feet of length of the façade parallel to the corridor’s major street.
10 Building provides a minimum offset of 5 feet for every 75 feet of length of the façade parallel to the corridor’s major street.
15 Building provides a minimum offset of 5 feet for every 50 feet of length of the façade parallel to the corridor’s major street.
h. Building Materials
1. Base Standard: No requirement, except that any metal building proposed in a UC, CC, or DC district requites specific approval by the Planning Commission.
PERFORMANCE POINT EVALUATION SYSTEM
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 169-4
2. Performance Points: Projects earn points based on the following table:
Points Action
0-15 Use of brick or building stone in the façade of buildings. Scores vary according to the amount of these materials and their integration with other building materials.
i. Use of Pitched or Gabled Roofs
Points Action
0-10 Highest score is provided if 75% to 100% of the roof area of the building is accounted for by roofs with a minimum roof pitch of 1:5.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-1
SECTION 170
Special and Overlay Districts
170.01 General Purpose
Special and Overlay Districts recognize the presence of special community characteristics that traditional zoning districts do not adequately address. Special Districts provide for base districts that allow multiple land uses and flexible development, with the requirement that a specific plan for the area be submitted by applicants. Overlay Districts are used in combination with base districts to modify or expand base district regulations. Overlay Districts are adopted to special needs of different parts of the City of Glenwood.
The Overlay Districts are designed to achieve the following objectives:
a. To Recognize special conditions in specific parts of the City which require specific regulation.
b. To provide flexibility in development and to encourage innovative design through comprehensively planned projects.
170.10 MU MIXED USE DISTRICT
170.101 Purpose
The MU Mixed Use District is intended to accommodate projects which combine several compatible land uses into an integrated development. The MU District may also be used to pre-designate parts of the city which are appropriate for a mixture of residential, commercial, office, and accessory uses. The District permits mixing residential areas with workplaces and services. Development in the MU District must accommodate transportation systems, pedestrian and bicycle movement, and surrounding environments.
170.102 Permitted Uses
Each ordinance establishing an MU District establishes the use types permitted within its boundaries.
170.103 Site Development Regulations
a. The minimum area of any MU District is one acre.
b. Prior to the issuance of any building permits or other authorization, all projects in the MU District shall receive approval by the City Council, following a recommendation by the Planning Commission. This approval may be grateful for a specific plan for the development of an MU District in lieu of a plan for individual
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-2
projects, provided that any subsequent developments are consistent with the specific plan.
c. Applications for approval must contain at a minimum the following information:
1. A detailed site map, including:
(a) A boundary survey,
(b) site dimensions,
(c) contour lines at no greater than five (5) foot intervals,
(d) adjacent public rights of way, transportation routes, and pedestrian or bicycle systems,
(e) description of adjacent land uses,
(f) utility service to the site and easements through the other considerations that may affect development, and
(g) description of other sire features, including drainage, soils, of other considerations that may affect development.
2. A development plan, including:
(a) A site layout, including the location of proposed buildings, parking, open space, and other facilities,
(b) location, capacity, and conceptual design of parking facilities,
(c) description of the use of individual buildings,
(d) description of all use types to be included in the project or area, and maximum floor area devoted to each general use,
(e) maximum height of buildings,
(f) schematic location and design of open space in the site, including a landscaping plan,
(g) vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan, including relationship to external transportation systems,
(h) schematic building elevations and sections if required to describe the project,
(i) grading plans,
(j) proposed sewer and utility improvements, and
(k) location, sizes, and types of all proposed signage.
3. Specific proposed development regulations for the project, including:
(a) The specific use types permitted within he proposed district,
(b) maximum floor area ratios,
(c) front, side, and rear yard setbacks,
(d) maximum height,
(e) maximum building and impervious coverage, and
(f) design standards applicable to the projects.
4. A traffic impact analysis, if required by the City.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-3
170.104 Adoption of District
a. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate each Mixed-Use District application. The City may impose reasonable conditions, as deemed necessary to ensure that a Mixed-Use Development shall be compatible with adjacent land uses, will not overburden public services and facilities and will not be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
b. The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon each application.
c. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to MU district applications.
d. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council for final action.
e. The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon any Ordinance establishing a MU Mixed-Use District. Proper notice shall mean the same notice established for any other zoning amendment.
f. An Ordinance adopting a Mixed-Use District shall require a favorable simple majority of the City Council for approval.
g. Upon approval by the City Council, the Development Plan shall become a part of the Ordinance creating or amending the MU District. All Approved plans shall be filed with the City Clerk.
170.105 Amendments
The Zoning Administrator is authorized at his/her discretion to approve amendments to an approved development plan, provided that:
a. A written request is filed with the Zoning Administrator, along with information specifying the exact nature of the proposed amendment.
b. The amendment is consistent with the provisions of this section.
c. The amendment does not alter the approved site regulations of the development plan and does not materially alter other aspects of the plan, including traffic circulation, mixture of use types, and physical design.
d. Any amendment not conforming to these provisions shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for action.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-4
170.20 PD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
170.201 Purpose
The PD Planned Development Overlay District is intended to provide flexibility in the design i=of planned projects, to permit innovation in project design that incorporates open space and other amenities; and to insure compatibility of developments with the surrounding urban environment. Planned developments often involve groupings of buildings or sites that are designed as an integrated unit om land under unified control or ownership at the time of grant of development permission. The requirements of a PD run with the land regardless of the subsequent sale of conveyance of property. The PD District may be used in combination with any base district specified in this Ordinance. The PD District, which is adopted by the City Council with the recommendation of the Planning Commission, assures specific development standards for each designated project.
170.202 Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in a PD Overlay District are those permitted in the underlying base district. A PD also may be combined with an MU Mixed Use District to allow a combination of use types not anticipated by conventional base districts.
170.203 Objectives of Planned Development Districts
In evaluating applications for PD Planned Development Overlay Districts, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the following general objectives.
a. Residential PD Districts
Residential PD Planned Districts should be designed to produce more usable open space, provide better recreation opportunities, enhance pedestrian scale, protect or create neighborhood amenities and environmental features, and produce more attractive neighborhoods than those produced by conventional development techniques.
b. Commercial PD Districts
Commercial PD Districts should be designed to produce more attractive and functional clusters and commercial centers than the strip development that is frequently produced by the application of conventional zoning regulations. Techniques encouraged by PD Districts include consolidated access, shard parking, consistent architectural quality, improved pedestrian and trail access to commercial facilities, public space, and integrated landscaping and signage programs.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-5
c. Industrial PD Districts
Industrial PD Districts should promote the establishment of industrial parks and to encourage groups of industrial buildings with integrated sire design and architectural and landscaping themes.
d. PD Districts in Sensitive Contexts
PD Districts may be utilized to provide a high level of detail and define the requirements of project approval for developments proposed within settings that are so sensitive that normal zoning requirements, including landscaping and buffering requirements, do not provide sufficient protection for neighboring properties.
170.204 Site Development Regulations
Site Development Regulations are developed individually for each Planned Development District, but must comply with the minimum or maximum standards established for the base district, with the following exceptions:
a. Lot area and lot width are not restricted, provided that the maximum density allowed for each base district is not exceeded.
b. Maximum building coverage shall be the smaller of the allowed building coverage in the base district, or 60 percent.
c. Setback requirements may be varied according to the specific Planned Development plan.
170.205 Access to Public Streets
Each PD District must abut a public street for at least 100 feet and gain access from that street.
170.206 Application Process
a. Development Plan
The application for a Planned Development District shall include a Development Plan containing the following information:
b. Application Requirements
An application for approval must contain at a minimum the following information:
1. A detailed site map, including:
(a) A boundary survey,
(b) site dimensions,
(c) contour limes at nom greater than two (2) foot intervals,
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-6
(d) adjacent public rights of way, transportation routes, and pedestrian or bicycle systems,
(e) description of adjacent land uses,
(f) utility service to the site and easements through the site, and
(g) description of other sire features, including drainage, soils, or other considerations that may affect development.
2. A development plan, including:
(a) A land use plan designating specific uses for that site and establishing sire development regulations, including setback, height, building coverage, impervious coverage, density, and floor area ratio requirements,
(b) a site layout, including the location of proposed buildings, parking, open space, and other facilities,
(c) location, capacity, and conceptual design of parking facilities,
(d) description of the use of individual buildings,
(e) schematic architectural plans and elevations sufficient to indicate a building height, bulk, materials, and general architectural design,
(f) a site development and landscaping plan, showing building locations, or building envelopes, site improvements; public or common open spaces; community facilities; significant visual features; and typical landscape plans,
(g) vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan, including relationship to external transportation systems,
(h) schematic building elevations and sections if required to describe the project,
(i) grading plans,
(j) proposed sewer and utility improvements, and
(k) location, sizes, and types of all proposed signage.
3. A statistical summary of the project, including gross site area, net site area, number of housing units by type, gross floor area of other uses, total amount of parking, and building and impervious surface percentages.
170.207 Adoption of District
a. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate each Planned Unit Development application. The City may impose reasonable conditions, as deemed necessary to ensure that a PD shall be compatible with adjacent land uses, will not overburden public services and facilities and will not be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-7
b. The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon each application.
c. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to PD district application.
d. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council for final action.
e. The City Council, after proper notice shall hold a public hearing and act upon any Ordinance establishing a PD Planned Unit Development Overlay District. Proper notice shall mean the same notice established for any other zoning amendment.
f. An Ordinance adopting a Planned Development Overlay Zoning District shall require a favorable simple majority of the City Council for approval.
g. Upon approval by the City Council, the Development Plan shall become a part o the Ordinance creating or amending the PD District. All approved plans shall be filed with the City Clerk.
170.208 Amendment Procedure
Major amendments to the Development Plan must be approved according to the sale procedure set forth in Section 170.207.
170.209 Building Permits
The City shall not issue a building permit, certificate or occupancy, or other permit for a building, structure, or use within a PD District unless it is in compliance with the approval Development Plan or any approved amendments.
170.210 Termination of PD District
If no substantial development has taken place in a Planned Development District for three years following approval of the District, the Planning Commission shall reconsider the zoning of the property and may, on its own motion, initiate an application for rezoning the property.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-8
170.30 NC HISTORIC NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
170.301 Purpose
The NC Historic Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District enables the adoption of special performance and development standards in combination with site development regulations of a base district for areas of special historical or architectural significance within the City of Glenwood. The District recognizes the importance of historically and architecturally significant districts to the character of Glenwood and provides for their conservation.
170.302 Application and Use
The NC Overlay District provides an opportunity to establish and apply special development controls and standards for areas in Glenwood with special physical or design characteristics. Examples of these standards may include, but not limited to:
a. Variations or substitutions of development regulations, including revised minimum and maximum setbacks, lot sizes, heights, and other regulations, based on the unique characteristics of the neighborhood.
b. Requirements for building design, materials, features, and orientation.
c. Special requirements or permission for signage.
d. Limitations on maximum size and scale of buildings.
e. Limitations of location of parking, driveways, and other features that have an impact on the fabric of a traditional neighborhood.
170.303 Procedure for Adoption
a. Proposal
The creation of an NC Overlay District may be initiated by the Planning Commissions, the City Council, or by petition of the owner or owners of 51% of the property area within the proposed district.
b. Requirements for Application
An application for the creation of an NC Overlay District must include:
1. A statement describing the proposed district’s special historical or architectural characteristics and stating the reasons for proposal of the district.
2. A map indicating the boundaries of the proposed NC Overlay District, specifying the base district(s) included within these boundaries.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-9
3. An inventory of the buildings or historically important sites located within the boundaries of the proposed district.
4. Supplemental site development regulations, design criteria, and performance standards that apply to the proposed district.
170.304 Adoption of District
a. The Planning Commission, and City Council shall review and evaluate each NC Overlay District application.
b. The Planning Commission, after proper notice, shall hold public hearings and act upon each application.
c. The Planning Commission may recommend amendments to NC district applications.
d. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be transmitted to the City Council for final action.
e. The City Council, after proper notice, shall hold a public hearing and act upon any Ordinance establishing an NC Historic Overlay District.
f. The Ordinance adopting the NC District shall include a statement of purpose, a description of district boundaries, and a list of supplemental site development regulations and performance standards.
g. An Ordinance adopting an NC Overlay District shall require a favorable vote of a simple majority of the City Council for approval.
h. Upon approval by the City Council, each NC Overlay District shall be shown on the Zoning Map, identified sequentially by order of enactment and referenced to the enacting Ordinance.
i. Any protest against an NC Overlay District shall be made and filed as provided by the Code of Iowa, and amendments thereto.
170.305 Building Permits
Building or other development permits issued by the City in an NC District shall be consistent with the adopted NC District Ordinance and shall follow all procedures for review that are established by the City.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-10
170.40 RC CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
170.401 Purpose
The RC Conservation Development Overlay District is intended to require development design standards and techniques in sensitive environmental areas in and around Glenwood that preserve unique landforms and the character of land. Glenwood’s location in the Loess Hills produces special environments, which include the rolling hills north of the city. The techniques of the RC district require that the natural landforms determine the design and character of new residential development in these sensitive areas. Areas of environmental sensitivity and potential application of the RC Overlay District are established in the city’s comprehensive development plan.
170.402 Process
Subdivisions in an RC Overlay district generally follow the approval procedures outlined in Section 179, establishing the process for preliminary and final plat approval. Projects which do not require subdivision follow approval procedures appropriate to the specific project, including conditional use permits, zoning amendments, site plan review, or other applicable measures. The requirements and standards included in this section are in addition to those established procedures.
170.403 Permitted Land Uses
Land uses permitted in an RC District are the same as those permitted in the underlying base district.
170.404 Permitted Yield
Developments in RC Overlay districts are permitted the same density on developable area as would be allowed to conventional residential development in the underlying zoning district. Yield in housing units (Y) is calculated by the formula:
Y= .90(TA-UA)
SA
Where:
TA = Total parcel area.
UA = Undevelopable areas, defined as the sum of wetlands designated by the National Wetlands Survey, Water of the United States, slopes exceeding 20%, floodways, and soils subject to slumping, as indicated on the medium intensity maps contained in the county soil survey published be the USDA Soil Conservation Service, is subtracted from the total parcel area.
.90 = An allowance for the typical percentage of land available after deducting the area of public streets and rights-of-way(s) serving a low-density residential development.
SA = Minimum site area per unit required by the underlying zoning district.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-11
170.405 Minimum Percentage of Open Space
a. The minimum percentage of land that shall be designated as permanent open space, not to be further subdivided, and protected through a conservation easement held by the City of Glenwood, Mills County, or by a recognized land trust or conservancy, shall be a minimum of 35% of the Net Developable Area, defined as .90 (TA-UA).
b. The above areas shall generally be designated as undivided open space, to facilitate easement monitoring and enforcement, and to promote appropriate management by a single entity according to approved land management standards.
c. All undivided open space and any lot capable of further subdivision shall be restricted from further subdivision through a permanent conservation easement, in a form acceptable to the City and duly recorded in the Mills County Recorder’s Office.
d. The undivided open space bay be used, without restriction, for underground drainage fields for individual or community septic systems, and for “spray fields” for spray irrigation purposed in a “land treatment” sewage disposal system. However, “mound” systems protruding above grade and aerated sewage treatment ponds shall be limited to not more than ten percent of the required minimum open space.
e. Stormwater management ponds or basins may be included as part of the minimum required open space, as may land within the rights-of-way for underground pipelines. However, land within the rights-of-way of high tension power lines shall not be included as comprising part of the minimum required open space.
170.406 Conservation Areas as Open Space
a. The location of open space shall be consistent with the policies contained in the City of Glenwood’s Comprehensive Development Plan, and with the recommendations contained in this section and the following section (“Evaluation Criteria”).
b. Open space shall be composed of two types of land; “Primary Conservation Areas” and “Secondary Conservation Areas.” All lands within both Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas shall be protected by a permanent conservation easement prohibiting future development, and setting other standards safeguarding the site’s special resources from negative changes.
1. Primary Conservation Areas: This category consists of wetlands designated by the National Wetlands Survey. Water of the United States, slopes exceeding 20%, floodways, and soils subject to slumping, as indicated on the medium
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-12
intensity maps contained in the county soil survey published by the USDA Soil Conservation Services.
2. Secondary Conservation Areas: Secondary Conservation Areas comprise at least 35 percent of the Net Developable Area and shall be designated and permanently protected. Full density credit shall be allowed for land in this category that would otherwise be buildable under local, state, and federal regulations, so that their development potential us bit reduced by this designation. Such density credit may be applied to other unconstrained parts of the site. Secondary Conservation Areas are determined by specific project design and typically include all or some of the following kinds of resources.
(a) A 100-foot deep greenway buffer along all waterbodies and watercourses, and a 50-foot greenway buffer alongside wetlands soils classified as “very poorly drained” in the medium intensity county soil survey of the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service. These areas must be considered as Secondary Conservation Areas but are considered as Developable Areas for the purpose of calculating yield.
(b) 100-year floodplains.
(c) Woodlands, individual specimen trees, or small stands of significant trees.
(d) Aquifer recharge areas and areas with highly permeable (“excessively drained”) soil.
(e) Significant wildlife habitat areas.
(f) Class I and Class II farmlands.
(g) Historic, archaeological or cultural features listed (or eligible to be listed) on the National Register of Historic Places.
(h) Slopes in excess of 15%.
(i) Ridgelines and view corridors.
(j) Land with soils that do not support residential development.
170.407 Location Standards for Open Space
a. Access to Residential Lots
Undivided open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within a conservation subdivision. To achieve this, the majority of house lots should abut undivided open space in order to provide direct views and access. Safe and convenient pedestrian access to the open space from all lots not adjoining the open space shall be provided (except in the case of farmland, or other resource areas vulnerable to trampling damage or human disturbance). Where the undivided open space is designated as separate, noncontiguous parcels, no parcel shall consist of less than three (3) acres in area not have a length-to-width ratio in excess of 4:1,
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-13
except such areas that are specifically designed as village greens, ballfields, upland buffers to wetlands waterbodies or watercourses, or trail links.
b. Interconnection of Open Spaces
Protected open spaces in each new subdivision are encouraged to adjoin each other, ultimately forming an interconnected network of Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas across the county. The only elements of the network that would necessarily be open to the public are those lands that have been required to be dedicated for public use and typically configured in a linear fashion as an element of Glenwood’s long-range open space network through the Comprehensive Development Plan.
170.408 Special Processes for Conservation Development
The review and approval process for subdivisions in the RC Overlay District is the same as that for conventional subdivisions, as set forth in Section 178. Additional provisions and approval processes are set forth in this section.
a. Existing Features Plan
1. Plans analyzing each site’s special features are required for all proposed subdivisions. The Existing Features Plan shall include at a minimum; (1) a contour map based at least upon topographical maps published by the U.S. Geological Survey; (2) the location of severely constraining elements such as steep slopes (over 25%), wetlands, watercourses, intermittent streams and 100 year floodplains, and all rights-of-way and easements; (3) soil boundaries as shown on USDA natural Resources Conservation Service medium- intensity maps; and (4) the location of significant features such as woodlands, treelined, open fields or meadows, scenic views into or out from property, watershed divides and drainage ways, fences or stone walls, rock outcrops, and existing structures, roads, tracks and trails.
2. The Existing Features Plan shall identify both Primary Conservation Areas and Secondary Conservation Areas, as described in Section 170.406.b.1 and 170.406.b.2 of this ordinance. The Existing Features Plan shall form the basis for the Conceptual Preliminary Plan, which shall show the tentative location if houses, streets, lot lines, and greenway lands in new subdivisions, according to the four-step design process described below.
b. Conceptual Preliminary Plan
A sketch plan or a Conceptual Preliminary Plan shall be submitted for all proposed subdivision to the Building Official before submission of a formal preliminary plat application. A Conceptual Preliminary Plan presents a conceptual layout for greenway and open lands, house sites, and street alignments. Each Conceptual
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-14
Preliminary Plan shall follow a four-step design process, as described below. Applicants shall be prepared to demonstrate to the City Planner that these four design steps were followed in the preparation of the plan.
1. Step One: Designating the Open Space. During the first step, all potential conservation areas (both primary and secondary as defined above) are identified, using the Existing Features Plan.
2. Step Two: Location of House Sites. During the second step, potential house sites are located. Subdivision applicants shall identify tentative house sites on the Conceptual Preliminary Plan and proposed house sites on the detailed Final Plan. House sites should generally be located cot closer than 100-feet from Primary Conservation Areas; but may be situated within 50-feet of Secondary Conservation Areas, in order to enjoy views of the latter without negatively affecting the former.
3. Step Three: Street and Lot Layout. The third step consists of aligning proposed streets to provide vehicular access to each house in the most reasonable and economical way. When lots and access streets are laid out, they shall be located in a way that avoids or at least minimizes adverse impacts on loth the Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas. To the greatest extent practicable, wetland crossings and streets traversing existing slopes over 15% shall be strongly discouraged. Street connections shall generally be encouraged to minimize the number of new cul-de-sacs to be maintained by the city and to facilitate easy access to and from homes in different parts of the property (and on adjoining parcels). Where cul-de-sacs are necessary, those serving six or fewer homes may be designed with “hammerheads” facilitating three-point turns.
170.409 Ownership and Maintenance of Common Open Space
Developments in the RC Overlay District shall provide for ownership and ownership and maintenance of common open space. Common open space within a development shall be owned, administered, and maintained by any of the following methods, either individually or in combination, and subject to approval by the City.
a. Offer of Dedication
The City of Glenwood or Mills County shall have the first and last offer of dedication of undivided open space in the event said land is to be conveyed. Dedication shall take the form of a fee simple ownership. The City or other public agency may, but shall not be required to accept undivided open space provided: (1) such land is accessible to the residents of the city/county; (2) there is no cost of acquisition other than any costs incidental to the transfer of ownership such as title insurance; and (3) the city/county agrees to and has access to maintain such
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-15
lands. Alternatively, a public agency may accept an easement, subject to the above conditions.
b. Homeowners Association
The undivided open space and associated facilities may be held in common ownership by a homeowners’ association. The association shall be formed and operated under the following provisions:
1. The developer shall provide a description of the association, including its bylaws and methods for maintaining the open space.
2. The association shall be organized by the developer and shall be operated with financial assistance from the developer, before the sale of any lots within the development.
3. Membership in the association is automatic (mandatory) for all purchases of homes therein and their successors. The conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from developer to homeowners shall be identified.
4. The association shall be responsible for maintenance of insurance and taxes on undivided open space, enforceable by liens placed by the city/county on the association. The association may place liens on the homes or house lots of its members who fail to pay their association dues in a timely manner. Such liens may require the imposition of penalty interest charges.
5. The members of the association shall share equitably the costs of maintaining and developing such undivided open space. Shares shall be defined within the association bylaws.
6. In the event of a proposed transfer, within the methods here permitted, of undivided open space land by the homeowners’ association, or of the assumption of maintenance of undivided open space land by a public agency, notice of such action shall be given to all property owners within the development.
7. The homeowners’ association may lease open space lands to any other qualified person, or corporation, for operation and maintenance of open space lands.
c. Condominiums
The undivided open space and associated facilities may be controlled through the use of condominium agreements. Such agreements shall be in conformance with the state statute. All undivided open space land shall be held as a “common element.”
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-16
1. The organization is acceptable to the City, and is a bona fide conservation organization with perpetual existence;
2. The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper reverted of retransfer in the event that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its functions; and
3. A maintenance agreement acceptable to the commission is entered into by the developer and the organization.
170.410 Maintenance Standards
a. Financial Responsibility
The ultimate owner of the open space (typically a homeowners’ association) shall be responsible for raising all monies required for operations, maintenance, or physical improvements to the open space through annual dues, special assessments, etc. The homeowners’ association shall be authorized under its bylaws to place liens on the property of residents who fall delinquent in payment of such dues or assessments.
b. Maintenance Enforcement
1. In the event that the association or any successor organization shall, at any time after establishment of a development containing undivided open space, fail to maintain the undivided open space in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the development plan, the City may serve written notice upon the owner of record, setting forth the manner in which the owner of record has failed to maintain the undivided open space in reasonable condition.
2. Failure to adequately maintain the undivided open space in reasonable order and condition constitutes a violation of this ordinance.
3. Should any bill or bills for maintenance of undivided open space by the City or County be unpaid, a late fee of fifteen percent shall be added to such bills and a lien shall be filed against the premises in the same manner as other municipal claims.
170.411 Evaluation Criteria
In evaluating the layout of lots and open space, the following criteria will be considered by the Planning Commission and City Council as indicating design appropriate to the site’s natural, historic, and cultural features, and meeting the purposed of this ordinance:
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-17
a. Protection of floodplains, wetlands, and steep slopes from clearing, grading, filling, or construction except as may be approved for essential infrastructure or active or passive recreation amenities.
b. Preservation and maintenance of woodlands, existing fields pastures, meadows, and orchards, and sufficient buffer areas to minimize conflicts between residential and agricultural uses.
c. Maintenance of buffers at least 100 feet in depth adjacent to wetlands and surface waters, including creeks, streams, springs, lakes and ponds.
d. Design around existing tree lines between fields or meadows, and minimal impacts on large woodlands (greater than five acres), especially this containing many mature trees or a significant wildlife habitat.
e. Maintenance of scenic views.
f. Avoidance of new construction on prominent hilltops or ridges, by taking advantage of lower topographic features.
g. Protection of wildlife habitat areas of species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
h. Design around and preserves sites of historic, archaeological, or cultural value, including stone walls, barn foundations. cellar holes, earthworks, and burial grounds.
i. Protection of rural character and improves public safety and vehicular carrying capacity by avoiding development fronting directly into existing public roads.
j. Landscaping of common areas if appropriate.
k. Provision if active or passive recreational areas in suitable locations that offer convenient access by residents and adequate screening from nearby house lots.
l. Inclusion of a pedestrian circulation system providing access between properties, activities, or special features within the neighborhood open space system. All roadside footpaths should connect with off-road trails.
m. Provision of open space that is reasonably contiguous, avoiding fragmented open spaces.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-18
170.500 FP FLOODPLAIN/FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT
170.501 Purpose
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize losses to property by applying the provisions if this ordinance to:
a. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities.
b. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction.
c. Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for intended purposes because of flood hazard.
d. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance in the National Flood Insurance Program when identified by the Federal Insurance Administration as a flood prone community.
170.502 Floodplain and Floodway Overlay District: Findings of Fact
a. Flood Losses Resulting from Periodic Inundation
Flood hazard areas of the City of Glenwood, Iowa, are subject to inundation which results in loss of life or property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
1. General Causes of These Flood Losses:
These flood losses are caused by (a) the cumulative effect of obstruction in floodways causing increases in flood heights and velocities, (b) the occupancy of flood areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other which are inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flood damages.
2. Methods Used to Analyze Flood Hazards:
This ordinance uses a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which consists of a series of interrelated steps.
(a) Selection of a base flood which is based upon engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated and the depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this ordinance is representative of large floods which are reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this ordinance. It is
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-19
in the general order of a flood which could be expected to have a one (1%) percent chance of occurrence in any one year, ad delineated by applicable Flood Insurance Studies and the Federal Emergency Management Administration’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, or any subsequent effective Flood Insurance Studies, Rate Maps, and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps issued after the effective date of this ordinance and adopted by the City of Glenwood.
(b) Calculation of water surface profiles based upon a hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the base flood.
(c) Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than 1 foot at any point.
(d) Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no obstruction is permitted which would cause any increase in flood height.
(e) Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e., that area outside the floodway encroachment lines but which still is subject to inundation by the base flood.
b. Land to Which Ordinance Applies
This ordinance shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Glenwood identified on the Flood Insurance Rate may (FIRM) as numbered and unnumbered A zone and/or within the Overlay Districts FP and FW established in this ordinance. In all areas covered by this ordinance, no development shall be permitted except upon a permit to develop granted by the City Council or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the City Council may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community as contained in the City Code.
c. Enforcement Officer
The Zoning Administrator of the City of Glenwood is hereby designated as the City Council’s duly designated Enforcement Officer under this ordinance.
d. Rules of Interpretation of District Boundaries
The boundaries of the floodway and floodway fringe overlay districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map. Where interpretation is needed to the exact location of the boundaries of the districts as shown on the official zoning map, as for example where there appears to be conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the Enforcement Officer shall make the necessary interpretation. The base flood elevation for the point in question shall be the governing factor in locating the district boundary on the land. The person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be give a reasonable
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-20
opportunity to present his case to the Board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires.
e. Compliance
No development located within known flood hazard areas of the community shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
f. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
g. Interpretation
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally constructed in favor of the City of Glenwood and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statute.
h. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This ordinance does not imply that areas outside floodway and floodway fringe district boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding and flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Glenwood or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
i. Severability
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
j. Application for Appeal
Where a request for a permit to develop is develop is denied by the Zoning Administrator, the applicant may apply for such permit or variance directly to the
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-21
Board of Adjustment. Procedures for appeals to the Board of Adjustment shall proceed as set forth by Section177.08 of this Ordinance.
170.503 Floodplain and Floodway Permits and Administration
a. Permit Required
No person, firm, or corporation shall initiate any development or substantial improvement or cause thee same to be done without first obtaining a separate permit for development as defined in this section.
b. Administration
1. The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance.
2. Duties of the Zoning Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Review of all development permits to assure that sites are reasonable, safe from flooding and that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
(b) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or Local Governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(c) Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and shall submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration when participating in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(d) Notify the Department of Natural Resources of any proposed construction and development activity in floodplain areas, and/or upon land situated within the Floodplain/Floodway Overlay Zoning District.
(e) When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the Zoning Administrator shall be presented certification from a registered professional engineer or architect.
c. Application for Permit
To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such application shall:
1. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit.
2. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.
3. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the intended.
4. Be accomplished by detailed mans for the proposed construction.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-22
5. Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
6. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the Zoning Administrator or City Engineer.
170.504 Establishment of Zoning Districts
The mapped flood plain area within the jurisdiction of this ordinance are hereby divided into the two following districts: A Floodway Overlay District (FW) and a Floodplain Overlay District (FP) as identified in the official Flood Plain Study. Within these districts, all uses not meeting the standards of this ordinance and hose standards of the underlying zoning district shall be prohibited. These zones shall be consistent with the numbered and unnumbered A Zones as prohibited. These zones shall be consistent with the numbered and unnumbered A Zones as identified on the official FIRM when identified in the Flood Insurance Study provided by the Federal Insurance Administration.
170.505 Standards for Floodways Overlay District and Floodplain Overlay District
a. No permit for development shall be granted for new construction, substantial improvement or other improvements including the placement of placement of manufactured homes within the identified flood plain unless the conditions of this section are satisfied.
b. All areas identified as unnumbered A Zones by the Federal Insurance Administration are subject to inundation of the 100-year flood; however, the water surface elevation was not provided. The unnumbered A Zones shall be subject to all development provisions of this ordinance. If Flood Insurance Study Data is not available, the community shall utilize any base flood elevation data currently available within its area of jurisdiction. Further, in cases of proposed development within unnumbered “A” zones, the developer’s engineer shall be required to conduct the necessary studies to determine the 100-year flood elevation and its extent in relation to such development.
c. New construction, subdivision proposals, substantial improvement, prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured homes and other development shall require:
1. Design or anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads including the effect of buoyancy.
2. New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-23
and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination.
3. Construction with materials resistant to flood damage, utilizing methods and practices that minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters int the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination.
4. All utility and sanitary facilities be elevated or floodproofed one foot above the regulatory flood elevation. Such floodproofing is permitted only for non-residential properties.
5. That until a floodway has been designated, no development including landfill, may be permitted within the identified flood plain unless the applicant for the land use has demonstrated that the proposed use, when combined with all other exiting and reasonably anticipated uses, will not increase the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood mare than one (1’) foot in the average cross-section of the reach in which the development of landfill is located as shown in the official flood plain study incorporated by reference herein.
6. Storage of Materials and Equipment:
(a) The storage or processing of materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or plan life is prohibited.
(b) Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removed from the area within the time available after flood warning.
7. Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, be required to assure that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(b) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and waste systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(d) Proposals for development (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is less, include within such proposals the regulatory flood elevation.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-24
170.506 Floodplain Overlay District Regulations
a. Permitted Uses
Any use permitted in the underlying base district shall be permitted in the Floodplain Overlay District. No use shall be permitted in the district unless the standards of this section are met.
b. Standards for the Floodplain Overlay District
1. Any new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement elevated one foot above the base flood elevation.
2. Any new construction or substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall be floodproofed so that below such a level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydro-dynamic loads and effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Enforcement Official. Such floodproofing is permitted only for non-residential properties.
3. All new construction and substantial improvements that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designated to automatically equalize hydro-static flood forces or exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by the registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
4. Within AH zones, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
5. Manufactured Homes:
(a) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse. or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored in accordance with local building codes of FEMA guidelines. In the event that over-the-
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-25
top frame ties to ground anchors are used, the following specific requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met:
i. Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side.
ii. Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, and manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side.
iii. All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of a carrying a force of 4800 lbs.
iv. Any additions to manufactured homes shall be similarly anchored.
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed within Zones AL-30, AH and AE on the Community’s FIRM shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code.
c. AO Zones: Special Regulations
Located within the areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as AO Zones. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. Therefore, the following provisions apply with AO Zones:
1. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as 1 foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as 1 foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community’s FIRM; or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effect of buoyancy. Such
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-26
certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section 170.503.
(c) Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
170.507 Floodway Overlay Districts
a. Permitted Uses
Only uses having a low flood-damaged potential and not obstructing flood flows shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided that they do not require structures fill or storage of materials or equipment. No use shall increase the flood levels of the vase flood elevation. These uses are subject to the standards of Sections 170.506 and other applicable sections.
1. Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, nurseries, forestry.
2. Accessory residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and play areas.
3. Nonresidential areas such as loading areas, parking, and airport landing strips.
4. Public and private recreational uses such as golf courses, archery ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves. New placement of residential structures including manufactured homes is prohibited with the identified floodway (FW) area.
5. In Zone A unnumbered, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any floodway data available through Federal, Sate or Local sources in meeting the standards of this section.
170.508 Request For Variances From District Requirements
a. The Board of Adjustment, as established by the City of Glenwood, shall hear and decide appeal and requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance.
b. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of administration of this ordinance.
c. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court as provided by the Code of Iowa.
d. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluation, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and:
1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-27
2. The danger of life and property dur to flooding or erosion damage.
3. The susceptibility of proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
6. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for that area.
9. The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinance and emergency vehicles.
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effect of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site.
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
e. Conditions for Variance
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one half acre of less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level providing terms 2. through 6. below have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical jurisdiction required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-28
5. In addition to the criteria for variances set forth in Section 177.09 of this Ordinance, variances shall only be issued upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given a written notice that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
170.509 Zoning Regulations For Nonconforming Uses
a. Continuance of Nonconforming Uses
A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of the ordinance, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance may be continued subject to the following conditions:
1. No such use is substantial improvement of that use shall be expended, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity.
2. Is such use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, and future use of the building premises shall conform to this ordinance. The Water Department shall notify the Building Inspector in writing of instances of Nonconforming uses where utility services have been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months.
3. Uses of adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue a nonconforming use.
b. Replacement of Residential Uses
If any residential nonconforming use of structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred except that if it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanity, building, or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a Sate Inventory of Historic Places.
c. Replacement of Non-Residential Uses
If any non-residential nonconforming use if structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it should no t be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-29
of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred except that if it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
170.510 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
a. Actuarial Rates
Or “risk premium rates” are those rates established by the Federal Insurance Administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 4014 and the accepted actuarial principles. Actuarial rates include provisions for operation costs and allowances.
b. Appeal
A request for a review of the Zoning Administrator’s Interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.
c. Area of Shallow Flooding
A designated AO or AH zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate May (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
d. Area of Special Flood Hazard
The land in the flood plain within a community subject as the elevation of the 100-year flood.
e. Base Flood Elevation
Elevation indicated in the official flood plain study as the elevation of the 100-year flood.
f. Base Flood Protection Elevation
An elevation one foot higher than the water surface elevation of the base flood.
g. Channel
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-30
A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with a definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. Channel flow, thus, is that water which is flowing within the limits of a defined channel.
h. Community
Any state or area of political subdivision thereof which has authority to adopt and enforce flood plain management regulations for the area within its jurisdiction.
i. Development
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
j. Existing Construction (For the purposes of determining rates)
Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM’s effective before the date. “Existing Construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures”.
k. Flood or Flooding
A general and temporary condition of partial of complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters; (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
l. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
An official map of a community, on which the Flood Insurance Study has delineated the Flood Hazard Boundaries and the zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the community.
m. Flood Insurance Study
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
n. Flood Plain Management
The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to, emergency preparedness plan, flood control works and flood plain management regulations.
o. Flood Protection System
Those physical structural works constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a “special flood
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-31
hazard”. Such a system typically includes levees or dikes. These specialized modifying works ae those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
p. Floodproofing
Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities, which would preclude the entry of water. Structural components shall have the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effect of buoyancy.
q. Floodplain (FP)
That area of the flood plain, outside of the floodway, that on an average is likely to be flooded once 100 years (i.e. that has a one percent chance of flood occurrence in any one year.)
r. Floodway (FW)
The channel of a ricer or other watercourse and the adjacent portion of the flood plain that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point assuming equal conveyance reduction outside the channel form the two sides of the flood plain.
s. Freeboard
A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of flood plain management. “Freeboard” tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the heights calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, clogged bridge openings, and the hydrological effect if urbanization of the watershed.
t. Highest Adjacent Grade
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
u. Lowest Floor
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-32
v. Manufactured Home
A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For flood plain management purposes, the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term “manufactured home” does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.
w. Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
x. New Construction
Structures for which the “start of construction of substantial improvement” is commenced on or after the effective date of the FIRM.
y. 100-Year Flood
The base flood having a one percent chance of annual occurrence.
z. Overlay District
A district which acts in conjunction with the underlying zoning district or districts.
aa. Start of Construction
For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. Law 97-348) includes substantial improvement, and means the ate the building permit was issued, providing the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start of other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure in a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of a structure on a site, or ant work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, not does it include the installation of the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
bb. Structure
A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground as well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SPECIAL AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 170-33
cc. Substantial Improvement
Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
dd. Variance
A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-1
SECTION 171
Supplemental Use Regulations
171.01 Purpose
The Supplemental Use Regulations set forth additional standards for certain uses located within the carious zoning districts. These regulations recognize that certain types have characteristics that require additional controls in order to protect public health, safety, and welfare. These regulations complement the use regulations contained in Section 168 of this Ordinance. The regulations contained in this Article pertain both to uses allowed by right within various zoning districts, and to uses that require approval as conditional uses by the Planning Commission or City Council in appeal to impose additional conditions on developments seeking Conditional Use Permit approval.
171.02 Supplemental Use Regulation Agricultural Uses
Nothing in those provisions shall relieve any property owner or user from satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a precious approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit issued under any local, State, or Federal ordinance or statute.
a. Horticultural and Crop Production Retail Sales
Retail operations of garden centers or roadside stands associated with a primary agricultural use may be permitted in the AR and RR District, subject to the following requirements:
1. Garden Centers:
(a) A garden center is a building or premises used for the retail sale of plant materials or items useful in the growing or display of lawns, gardens, and plants.
(b) Garden centers must conform to all site development regulations for the zoning district.
(c) Any garden center adjacent to a residential district must maintain a 20-foot landscaped bufferyard, consistent with the standards established in Section 804.
2. Roadside Stands:
(a) A roadside stand is a facility used in a temporary or seasonal basis for the retail sale of produce grown largely on adjacent or surrounding agricultural lands.
(b) A roadside stand may be located within a required front yard but no closer than 40 feet to the edge of a traveled roadway.
(c) A roadside stand may operate for a maximum of 180 days in any one year.
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-2
a. Animal Production
1. No commercial poultry or livestock operation shall be located within 100 feet of any residential or commercial zoning district.
2. Breeding and raising of small animals and fowl, such as birds, rabbits, chinchilla, and hamsters is permitted in the AR and RR District, provided that any building housing such animals shall be at least 200 feet from any other residential zooming district, 100 feet from any property line and 25 feet from any dwelling unit on the site. Any site accommodation these uses shall be no less than 2.5 acres. No animals with measurable odors shall be raised for commercial purposes within the city limits.
3. Within the RR or AR Districts, any lots of 2 acres and over may maintain one horse, llama, or other equine and/or hoofed animal and its immature offspring. Such a lot may have one additional animal for each additional two acres of lot area, up to a maximum total of three animals. No stable shall be located closer than 300 feet from any other residential zoning district, 100 feet from any property line and 50 feet from any dwelling unit on the site.
b. Commercial Feedlots
Commercial Feedlots are not permitted within the jurisdiction of the City of Glenwood.
171.03 Supplemental Use Regulations: Residential Uses
a. Zero-Lot Line Single-Family Detached Residential
Within a common development, one interior side yard may be equal to zero for single-family detached residential use, subject to the following additional regulations:
1. The side yard opposite to the zero yard must equal at least twice the normal required minimum side yard and must taken by itself comply with all side yard requirements for the zoning district.
2. The normal side yard setback requirement must be maintained adjacent to any lot with an existing structure not within the common development; or not otherwise designated for zero lot line use.
3. An easement for maintenance of the zero lit line façade is filed with the Mills County Recorder and the City Clerk at the time of application for the building permit.
b. Single-Family Attached
When permitted without requirement for conditional use approval, the minimum side yard opposite the common wall shall be equal to twice the normal required side
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-3
yard. A reduced setback may be permitted as part of a Conditional Use Permit approved by the Planning Commission.
c. Townhouse Residential
Where permitted, townhouse residential is subject to the following regulations:
1. The minimum width for any townhouse lot sold individually shall be 25 feet, except within an approved creative subdivision.
2. Coverage percentages are computed for the site of the entire townhouse common development.
d. Two-Family Residential
1. The second dwelling unit shall be located to the rear of the site and shall be separated from the front dwelling unit by a minimum of 25 feet.
2. The second dwelling unit shall be served by a driveway at least ten feet in width, leading from a public street adjacent to the lot.
3. A minimum lot size of 5,000 sq. Ft. Per unit must be maintained.
e. Supplemental Design Standards for Residential Uses in the RR, R1, R2, R3 and R4 Districts
Exterior materials shall be non-reflective and shall be of a color, material, and scale comparable to existing residential structures in the immediate area. Permanent siding shall be, or simulate, wood, wood shingles, brick, masonry, or tile. Roof construction shall be of non-reflective materials which are or simulate the appearance of asphalt, wood shingles, tile, rock or standing metal with concealed fasteners. Any standing scam metal roof shall be stamped by a licensed engineer, must be installed by a certified installer in accord with the regulations provided in the International Residential Code Book, as from time to time may be amended.
f. Downtown Residential and Group Residential uses in the DC District
Downtown Residential and Group Residential uses are permitted in the DC District subject to the following conditions:
1. Downtown and Group Residential uses ae permitted in the DC District only on levels above street level except that a unit specifically designed for occupancy by disabled residents or senior citizens may be developed at street level. subject to approval by the Planning Commission.
2. Residents of units must be informed by the owner of the building that lawful commercial uses have priority over residential uses.
3. All upper level apartments must have two separate means of egress.
4. One parking space must be provided for each unit.
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-4
g. Boarders and Non-related Individuals
1. Within the AR, RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, and MH districts, no more than two persons in addition to the family of the owner shall be permitted to reside in an owner-occupied dwelling unit. No more than five persons shall be permitted to reside in a non-owner-occupied dwelling unit.
2. Within the R-4 districts, no more than ten persons in addition to the family of the owner shall be permitted to reside in an owner-occupied dwelling unit. No more than five persons shall be permitted to reside in a non-owner-occupied dwelling unit.
3. A minimum of 250 square feet must be provided in the dwelling unit for each resident.
h. Mobile Home Parks
In the MH Mobile Home Residential District, which permits mobile home residential use, such use may be configures in a Mobile Home Park or Mobile Home Subdivision. Following the effective date of this Ordinance, no mobile home shall be located outside of a Mobile Home Park or Mobile Home Subdivision. A Mobile Home Park is subject to approval as a Conditional Use by the Planning Commissions and compliance with the following regulations:
1. Certification: A certification of compliance with all ordinances and regulations regarding mobile home licensing, zoning, health, plumbing, electrical, building, fire protection and any other applicable requirements shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator prior to the occupancy of any new Mobile Home Park or any expansion of an existing Mobile Home Park.
2. Minimum and Maximum Area: A Mobile Home Park shall be considered to be one zoned lot. The contiguous area of a Mobile Home Park shall have a minimum of 2.0 acres and a maximum of 15 acres.
3. Density Requirements:
(a) The minimum gross site area per dwelling unit shall be 4,000 square feet.
(b) The minimum size of an individual mobile home space shall be 4,500 square feet for single-wide mobile home units and 5,000 square feet for double-wide mobile home units.
(c) Each mobile home space shall have a width of at least 50 feet with and a length of at least 80 feet.
4. Site Development Standards:
(a) Setbacks: Each Mobile Home Park shall have a minimum perimeter setback of 35 feet from each property line. No space for a dwelling unit or any other structure shall be permitted in the required setback.
(b) Setback landscaping: All area contained within the required setbacks except sidewalks and private drives shall be landscaped and screening in conformance with Section 173 of this Ordinance. Screening shall be
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-5
provided in conformance with Section 173.06 for any common property line with another non-residential use.
(c) Impervious Coverage: Impervious coverage for a Mobile Home Park shall not exceed 50 percent of the total site area.
(d) Open Space: Each Mobile Home Park shall provide a minimum of 400 square feet of open recreational space per unit. Such space shall be provided at a central location accessible from all parts of the park of pedestrians. Required perimeter setbacks or buffers shall not be credited toward the fulfillment of this requirement.
(e) Separation Between Mobile Home Units: The minimum separation between a mobile home unit and attached accessory structure and any other mobile home units and/or accessory structure shall be 15 feet.
(f) Separation and Setbacks for Accessory Buildings: An accessory building on a mobile home space must maintain a minimum rear and side yard setback of five feet. A minimum distance of ten feet shall be provided between any mobile home and an unattached accessory building.
5. Street Access and Circulation Requirements
(a) Access to Public Street: Each Mobile Home Park must abut and have access to a dedicated public street with a right-of-way of at least 60 feet. Direct access to a mobile home space from a public street us prohibited.
(b) Vehicular Circulation: The Mobile Home Park must provide interior vehicular circulation on a private internal street system. Interior streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of 60 feet and a paved width of 27 feet. The street system shall be continuous and connected with other internal public streets; or shall have a cul-de-sac with a minimum radius of 60 feet. No such cul-de-sacs may exceed 300 feet in length.
(c) Separation between Units and Circulation Areas: The minimum distance between a mobile home unit and any attached accessory structure and the pavement of an internal street or parking area shall be ten feet.
(d) Sidewalks: Each Mobile Home Park shall provide a sidewalk systems to connect each mobile home space to common buildings or community facilities constructed for the use of its residents; and to the fronting public right of way. Sidewalk width shall be at least four feet.
(e) Street and Sidewalk Standards: All internal streets and sidewalks shall be hard-surfaced. Electric street lighting is required along all internal streets.
(f) Parking Requirements: Each Mobile Home Park must provide at least two off-street parking stalls for each mobile home space.
6. Tornado Shelters: Tornado shelters shall be provided in the Mobile Home Park. Such shelter or shelters shall be built according to the recommendations of the Civil Defense authority and be large enough to meet the specific needs of the park and its residents.
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-6
7. Utilities:
(a) All Mobile Home Parks shall provide individual units and common facilities with an adequate, piped supply of water for both drinking and domestic purposes; and standard electrical service, providing at least one 120-volt electrical service outlet to each mobile home space.
(b) Complete sanitary and sewer service shall be provided within each Mobile Home Park in accordance with the Subdivision Chapter of the Land Development Ordinance.
(c) Properly spaced and operating fire hydrants shall be provided for proper fire protection within each Mobile Home Park in accordance with the Subdivision Chapter of the Land Development Ordinance and other applicable city codes and public improvement design standards.
(d) All electric, telephone, gas, and other utility lines shall be installed underground.
8. Financial Responsibility: Each application for a Mobile Home Park shall include a demonstration by the developer of financial capability to complete the project; and a construction schedule.
9. Completion Schedule: Construction must begin on any approved Mobile Home Park within one year of the date of approval by the Planning Commission. Such construction shall be completed within two years of approval, unless otherwise extended by the Commission.
10. All other uses and provisions of the Glenwood Mobile Home Park regulations are incorporated herein by reference. These provisions include tie-down and other structural requirements included in the Glenwood Municipal Codes.
i. Mobile Home Subdivisions
1. Mobile Home Subdivisions shall be developed in accordance with all standards and requirements set forth in the Subdivision Chapter of the Land Development Ordinance of Glenwood. Site development regulations shall be the same as those required in the R-2 Zoning District. Each mobile home shall be considered a single-family detached residential unit for the purpose of determining applicable development regulations.
2. Mobile home units within Mobile home Subdivisions shall be built in accordance with the minimum design standards of the US Department of Housing and Urban Development and display a certification of such compliance.
3. Mobile Home Subdivisions shall provide tornado shelter facilities as required by Section 171.03g.6.
4. The minimum size of a mobile home subdivision shall be ten (10) acres.
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-7
j. Earth-Sheltered Residences
No subterranean or basement structure shall be occupied for residential purposes, except for those that meet the following requirements as earth-sheltered residences.
1. The living area shall be provided with exterior windows and/or skylights with a total glassed area of at least 10% of the gross floor area of the residence. Such windows or skylights shall give direct access to natural light and open space.
2. All earth sheltered residences shall conform to the development regulations for their respective zoning districts.
3. An outdoor space shall be provided immediately outside one wall of the residence that has:
(a) A minimum size of 500 square feet.
(b) A minimum width of 200 feet.
(c) An average grade elevation no more than 2 feet above or below the finished floor elevation of the residence.
4. All earth-sheltered residences shall have structural systems designed by a professional structural engineer and shall have plans signed and approved by such engineer.
171.04 Supplemental Use Regulations: Civic Uses
a. Community Centers and Clubs
Clubs located adjacent to residential uses shall maintain a bufferyard of not less than 40 feet along the common boundary with such residential use.
b. Day Care
1. Limited Day Care uses are permitted on residential lots an may be operated by the occupant of a dwelling unit on the site.
2. Day care facilities are permitted by Conditional use Permit in the GI General Industrial Zoning District only if incidental to a permitted primary use.
3. Day care centers accommodation more than four children or adults shall:
(a) Provide at least 100 square feet of open space per child, entirely enclosed by a building fence, or wall with a height of at least six feet.
(b) Conform with all requirements and licensures of the State of Iowa.
c. Group Care Facilities and Group Homes
1. Each group care facility or group home must be validly licensed by either the State of Iowa or the appropriate governmental subdivision.
2. Group homes are permitted in the DC District only on levels above street level except that a facility specifically designed for occupancy by disabled residents
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-8
may be developed at street level, subject to approval of a special permit by the City Council with the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
171.05 Supplemental Use Regulations: Commercial Uses
a. Auto Repair, Equipment Repair, and Body Repair
1. Where permitted in commercial districts, all repair activities must take place within a completely enclosed building. Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to Auto Repair and Body Repair, provided that such storage is completely screened so as not to be visible from residential areas or public rights-of-ways. Screening is subject to provisions of Section 173 of this ordinance.
2. Any spray painting must take place within structures designed for that purpose and approved by the Building Official.
b. Auto Washing Facilities
1. Each conveyor operated auto washing facility shall provide 100 feet of stacking capacity per washing lane on the approach side of the washing structure and stacking space for two vehicles on the exit side.
2. Each self-service auto washing facility shall provide stacking space for three automobiles per bay on the approach side and one space per bay on the exit side of the building.
c. Automobile and Equipment Rental and Sales
1. All outdoor display areas for rental and sales facilities shall be hard-surfaced.
2. Body repair services are permitted as an accessory use to automobile rental and sales facilities, provided that such repair services shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of the building.
d. Bed and Breakfasts
Bed and Breakfasts permitted in the DC District must provide any sleeping facility only on levels above street level except that units specifically designed and reserved for occupancy by handicapped people may be located on the street level.
e. Campgrounds
1. Minimum Size: Each campground established after the effective date of this Ordinance shall have a minimum size of one acre.
2. Setbacks: All campgrounds shall maintain a 50-foot front yard setback and a 25-foot bufferyard from all other property lines.
3. Each campground must maintain water supply, sewage disposal, and water and toilet facilities in compliance with all City ordinances; or, alternately, be limited
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-9
to use by self-contained campers, providing their own on-board water and disposal systems.
f. Convenience Storage
When permitted in the CC, GC, HC, LI and R4 Districts, convenience storage facilities shall be subject to the following additional requirements:
1. The minimum size of a convenience storage facility shall be one acre.
2. Activities within the facility shall be limited to the rental of storage cubicles and the administration and maintenance of the facility.
3. All driveways within the facility shall provide a paved surface with a minimum width of 25 feet.
4. All storage must be within enclosed buildings and shall not include the storage of hazardous materials.
5. No storage buildings may open into required front yards.
6. Facilities must maintain landscaped bufferyards of 35 feet adjacent to any public right-of-way and 20 feet adjacent to other property lines, unless greater setbacks are required by Section 173.
g. Kennels
1. The minimum lot size shall be two acres.
2. No building or dog runs shall be located nearer than 100 feet from any property line and 300 feet to the property line of any residential use or district.
3. All kennel facilities shall be screened around such facilities or at property lines to prevent distracting or exciting animals. Screening shall be of a type provided by Section 173, establishing landscape and screening standards.
h. Restricted Businesses
Restricted (or adult entertainment businesses) shall be subject to the following restrictions, and no person shall cause or permit the establishment of any adult entertainment business contrary to said restrictions.
1. No adult entertainment business shall be open for business between the hours of twelve (12) midnight and six (6) a.m.
2. An adult entertainment business shall not be allowed within 1,000 feet of another existing adult entertainment business.
3. An adult entertainment business shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any residentially zoned district or a preexisting school, public park, or place of worship.
4. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any adult entertainment businesses in existence at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter take effect. All nonconformances shall come into compliance on or before January 1, 2005, and
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-10
no such nonconforming use shall be permitted to expand in size or scope, and the rights granted in this chapter shall terminate upon cessation of business, sale, or transfer of ownership of the adult entertainment business.
5. Measurement of distances. For the purpose of this chapter, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structure or objects, from the main entrance of such adult entertainment business to the point on the property line of such other business, school, church, public park or areas zoned for residential use which is closest to the said main entrance of such adult entertainment business.
6. No adult entertainment business shall employ any person under 21 years of age.
7. No adult entertainment business shall furnish any merchandise or services to any person who is under eighteen years of age.
8. No adult entertainment business shall be conducted int any manner that permits the observation of models or any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or anatomical areas whose exhibition is not normally tolerated in public by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening from any public way or from any property not licensed as an adult use. No operator of an adult entertainment business or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent, owner, or employee of such business shall engage in any activity or conduct or permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct in or about the premises which is prohibited by this code or any laws of the state or the United States.
9. No part of the interior of the adult entertainment business shall be visible from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street, or other public or semipublic area.
10. An adult entertainment business shall post a sign at the entrance of the premises which shall state the nature of the business and shall state that no one under the age of eighteen years is allowed on the premises. The sign shall comply with the city’s sign regulations. This section shall be not be construed to prohibit the owner form establishing an older age limitation for coming on the premises.
11. Nuisance Operation: Any adult entertainment business operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this chapter, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner prescribed by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment business contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-11
171.06 Supplemental Design Standards for Office and Commercial Uses in the UC, CC, GC, HC and DC Districts
Intent: In the interest of promoting the general welfare of the community and to protect the value of buildings and property, the image and character of a community is vitally important. The quality of architecture and building construction is important to the preservation and enhancement of building and property values, prevention of the physical deterioration of buildings and the promotion of the image of the community and the general welfare of its citizens. The intent of this section is to promote better architectural design and site planning, to create visual interest by requiring minimum design treatments for commercial buildings and projects, and to maintain and enhance the attractiveness and efficiency of the streetscapes of the community.
Applicability: The requirements, guidelines, and standards set forth in this section shall apply to all new development and redevelopment of property within the GC, UC, CC, and DC zoning districts.
a. Fenestration
A street façade having a continuous length of 50 feet more shall have an offset in building elevations equal to a dimension of at least three feet or niches and alcoves with significant architectural delineation and definition to suggest window and entrance elements.
b. Façade
The total area of all windows and doors on each primary façade shall be equal to at least 20% of the area of that façade. Windows and doors on each primary façade shall have awnings or other treatments that provide shade, shelter and a break in the vertical plane. All primary facades shall have architectural style, detail, trim features, and roof treatments that are consistent with each other. Secondary facades shall be consistent and architecturally harmonious with the primary facades and have similar style, detail and trim features.
c. Exterior Treatment
Exterior materials shall be brick, stone, masonry, wood clapboard; vinyl siding shall simulate the appearance of wood, stone, brick or masonry. Corrugated metal panels, used as a finish material, shall be prohibited in most zoning districts. Architectural metal panels are acceptable, subject to consultation and a determination by the administrative official that the treatment meets the intent of this section. Smooth concrete panels or blocks shall have a decorative finish. A maximum of three (3) colors may be used on the exterior of any building; plus, one additional color for trim or cornice work. Fluorescent or neon colors are prohibited. These limitations exclude any unpainted natural stone or roof material.
d. Separate Ancillary Structures
Separate ancillary structures (Carwashes, cashier booths, canopies over gas pumps, etc.) shall have comparable pitch or parapets for roofs and shall otherwise have the
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-12
sane architectural detail, design elements and roof design as the primary structure, including the same cornice treatment, the same materials and colors, etcetera.
e. Roofing
Within the UC and CC districts, the dominant roof form shall be a pitched or gabled roof with a minimum slope equal to one foot of vertical height to every three feet of horizontal distance. Permitted roof materials may include asphalt shingles, slate or simulated stale shingles or standing seam metal with concealed fasteners, which shall be stamped by a licensed engineer, shall be installed by a certified installer in accord with regulations provided in the International Residential Code Book as from time may be amended.
f. Orientation
Mid-block commercial buildings shall be oriented to face the right-of-way/roadway, unless it can be shown that compelling site conditions necessitate a different orientation. If compelling site conditions necessitate that the building not face the right-of-way/roadway, then the building is considered to have two (2) primary facades, the façade that faces the right-of-way/roadway and the façade that incorporates the primary customer entrance. Corner lot commercial buildings shall be oriented to face a right-of-way/roadway, unless it can be shown that there are compelling site conditions that necessitate a different orientation. If compelling site conditions necessitate that the building not ace such right-of-way/roadway, then the building is considered to have three (3) primary facades the two facades that face the right-of-way/roadway and the façade that incorporates the primary customer entrance.
g. Downtown Commercial (DC) Standards
The Downtown Commercial Zoning District is recognized as unique ad historic district within Glenwood that is vital to the image and economic vitality of the community. Development in this district should recognize the historic fabric and architectural traditions of surrounding structures and attempt to complement and be harmonious with adjacent buildings.
In addition to the other standards and requirements set forth in this section, the following requirements apply to construction in the DC (Downtown Commercial) zone. (1) Awnings or other similar window and door treatments are required on no less than 50% of the length of all primary facades. This requirement applies to ground floor facades only. (2) Display windows a minimum of 6 feet in height shall exist along at least 50% of the length of all primary facades. (3) Exterior materials, for roofs and exterior walls, shall be historically accurate and architecturally harmonious with the existing adjacent structures. Permitted materials may include or should simulate brick, wood clapboard, board and batten, or architectural masonry (marble, slate, granite) or any other material, which in the determination of the administrative official, is consistent with the intent of this regulation. Vertical corrugated metal is not allowed as an exterior material. Wood is not allowed as a
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-13
structural building material within the DC zone; however it may be used as facing material if deemed by the administrative official to be consistent with the intent on this section. For renovations or reconstructions the aforementioned permitted exterior materials are not allowed to cover existing brick, masonry or any other historic exterior architectural elements unless the exiting elements can be proved to be structurally unsound.
h. Highway Gateway Commercial (HC) Standards
The Gateway Commercial Zoning District is designed to provide high quality commercial development at major community gateways and highway environments. The design of projects at these gateways should provide a first impression of Glenwood that is pleasant and visually appealing. Specific design standards for this zoning district recognize the need for high quality architecture and special site development characteristics due to proximity to high-traffic roadway intersections.
In addition to the other standards and requirements set forth in this section, the following requirements apply to new construction in the Highway Gateway Commercial Zoning District. (1) Awnings or other similar window and door treatments are required on no less than 50% of the entire length of all primary facades. (2) Windows, including those incorporated into doors, shall exist on at least 50% of the area of all primary facades. (3) Exterior materials, for roofs and exterior walls shall be of high quality and aesthetically appealing. Exposed fasteners on metal buildings are not permitted; metal roofs shall be constructed of standing seam, concealed fastener, or some other similar roof type. Vertical corrugated metal shall not be used as a siding material on any structure located in the HC zoning district. (4) Traffic circulation for development in the HC zoning district should be directed towards frontage roads and shall connect to other the existing and planned street network of the City of Glenwood (The Comprehensive Plan of the City of Glenwood further specifies the proposed location of road infrastructure in the HC zoning district).
i. Mixed Use Urban Corridor (UC) Standards
The Mixed-Use Urban Corridor zoning district is designed to recognize the Mixed Use character of major urban corridors, most notable, Locust Street. These corridors support a variety of uses including commercial, residential and office uses. Design standards are meant to maintain this character. Buildings should resemble residential development, incorporating elements such as a primary entrance with a porch or awning, windows and doors with trim and parking lots in rear or side yards maintaining an attractive, landscaped front yard. The dominant building form should be low-profile, one or two-story building with gabled roofs.
In addition to the other standards and requirements set forth in this section, the following requirements apply to construction in the Mixed Use Urban Corridor zoning district. (1) Awnings, porches or other similar window and door treatments are required on the primary entrance. (2) Windows, including those incorporated into doors, shall exist on at least 30% of the total area of all primary facades. (3)
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-14
Exterior materials, for roofs and exterior walls shall be consistent with other surrounding structures in the UC zoning district. Exposed fasteners on metal buildings are not permitted: metal roofs shall be constructed on standing seam, concealed fastener or some other similar roof type. Vertical corrugated metal shall not be used as a siding material. Vinyl siding is allowed, as are materials which, in the determination of the administrative official, are consistent with the intent of this section.
j. Community Commercial (CC) Standards
The intent of the Community Commercial zoning district is to provide areas for the development of businesses serving or operating in neighborhoods. Generally located at major intersections or within neighborhoods, the CC zoning district design standards are designed to reduce the effect of traffic and operating characteristics on surrounding residential areas. Buildings should resemble residential development, incorporating elements such as a primary entrance with a porch or awning, windows and doors with trim and parking lots in rear or side yards maintaining an attractive, landscaped front yard. The dominant building form should be low=profile, one or two-story buildings with gabled roofs.
In addition to the standards and requirements set forth in this section the following requirements apply to construction within the CC zoning district. (1) Awnings, porches or other similar window and door treatments are required on the primary entrance. (2) Windows, including those incorporated into doors, shall exist on at least 30% of the total area of all primary facades. (3) Exterior materials, for roofs and exterior walls shall be consistent with other surrounding structures in the CC zoning district. Exposed fasteners on metal buildings are not permitted; metal roofs shall be constructed of standing seam, concealed fastener or some other similar roof type, Vertical corrugated metal shall not be used as a siding material. Vinyl siding is allowed, as are materials which, in the determination of the administrative official, are consistent with the intent of this section.
k. General Commercial (GC) Standards
The general commercial zoning district accommodates a variety of commercial uses. These districts may include commercial uses that are oriented toward services rather than retail activities. These uses may create land use conflicts with adjacent residential development that require adequate buffering. Design standards in the GC zoning district ae intended to allow more flexibility and variety.
In addition to the standards and requirements set forth in this section the following requirements apply to construction within the GC zoning district. (1) Windows, including those incorporated into doors, shall exist on at least 20% of the total area of all primary facades. (2) Permitted exterior materials, for roofs and exterior walls include exposed fastened metal, standing seam, concealed fastener, vinyl siding and concrete clocks or panels. Vertical corrugated metal is allowed as a siding material. For renovations or reconstructions, the aforementioned permitted exterior materials are not allowed to cover existing brick, masonry, r any other historic
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-15
exterior architectural elements unless the existing elements can be proved to be structurally unsound.
l. Landscaping and Screening
In addition to the architectural and design standards and requirements set forth in this section all new development within the City of Glenwood shall abide by the Landscaping and Screening standards set forth in Section 173 of the Land Development Ordinance.
m. Parking
In addition to the architectural and design standards and requirements set forth in this section, all new development within the City if Glenwood shall abide by the sign regulations set forth in Section 174 of the Land Development Ordinance.
n. Signage
In additional to the architectural and design standards and requirements set forth in this section, all new development within the City of Glenwood shall abide by the sign regulations set forth in Section 175 of the And Development Ordinance.
o. Site Development Regulations
In addition to the architectural and design standards and requirements set forth in this section, all new development within the City of Glenwood shall abide by the site development regulations and supplemental site development regulations set forth in Sections 168 and 172, respectively, of the Land Development Ordinance.
171.07 Supplemental Use Regulations: Industrial Uses
a. Resource Extraction
Resource extraction, where permitted, is subject to the following additional requirements:
1. Erosion Control: A resource extraction use may not increase the amount of storm run-off onto adjacent properties. Erosion control facilities, including retention and sediment basins, are required of each facility, if necessary, to meet this standard.
2. Surface Drainage: The surface of the use may not result in the collection or ponding of water, unless specifically permitted by the City Council.
3. Storage of Topsoil: Topsoil shall be collected and stored for redistribution following the end of the operation.
4. Elimination of Hazards: Excavation shall not result in a hazard to any person or property. The following measures are required.
(a) Restoration of slopes to a gradient not exceeding 33% as soon as possible.
(b) Installation of perimeter safety screening.
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-16
(c) Installation of visual screening adjacent to any property within a residential or public use district.
5. Restoration of Landscape: The topography and soil of the resource extraction site shall be restored and stabilized within nine months of completion of the operation. The site shall be seeded, planted, and contoured in a way that prevents erosion. Alternately, the site may be used as a lake or body of water, subject to approval by the City Council with the recommendation of the Planning Commission and the Department of Natural Resources.
b. Salvage Services
1. Screening:
(a) The perimeter of each new facility shall be fully enclosed by opaque, freestanding fencing, or screening walls. Minimum height of this enclosure shall be ten feet. Any such enclosure shall be constructed behind required landscaped bufferyards.
(b) Each existing salvage services facility shall be screened as provided above within one year of the effective date of this Ordinance.
(c) All enclosures shall be of uniform height, texture, and color, and shall be maintained by the proprietor to ensure maximum public safety and to completely obscure the public view of materials stored in the facility.
2. Storage of materials within any salvage services facility nay not be higher than the height of the surrounding screen fence or wall.
3. No loading, unloading or any other operational activity including salvage materials may take place outside the boundaries of the enclosure. Burning of any materials shall be prohibited.
4. No Salvage Services use may be established within 1,000 feet of the nearest property line of a residential zoning district or any civic use.
171.08 Performance Standards for Industrial Uses
a. Industrial Uses in the LI District: Performance Standards
The following performance standards apply to all industrial uses permitted within an LI Limited Industrial zoning district:
1. Physical Appearance: All operations shall be carried on within an enclosed building except that new materials or equipment in operable conditions may be stored outside. Normal daily inorganic washes may be stored outside in containers, provided that such containers are not visible from the street.
2. Fore Hazard: No operation shall involve the use of highly flammable gases, acid, liquids, or other inherent fire hazards. This prohibition shall not apply to the normal use of heating or motor fuels and welding gases when handled in accordance with the regulations of Mills County and the City of Glenwood.
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-17
3. Maximum Permitted Sound Levels Adjacent to Residential Zoning Districts: No operation in the LI district shall generate sound levels in excess of those specified in Table 6-1 at the boundary of a residential district. All noises shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable because of intermittence, beat frequency, or shrillness.
4. Sewage and Wastes: No operation shall discharge into a sewer, drainage way, or the ground and material which is radioactive, poisonous, detrimental to normal sewer plant operation, or corrosive to sewer pipes and installations.
5. Air Contaminants: No material may be discharged into the air from any source in such quantity as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any considerable number of people or to the public in general; or to endanger the health, comfort, or safety of any considerable number of people or to the public in general; or to damage other businesses, vegetation, or property.
6. Odor: The emission of odors determined by the Planning Commission to the obnoxious t most people shall be prohibited. Such odors shall be measured at the property line of the operation. As a guide to classification, strong odors associated with putrefaction, organic decay, or fermentation will generally be considered obnoxious to most people, while odors of equal intensity associated with the roasting of coffee or nuts are generally considered acceptable.
7. Gases: No release of noxious or poisonous gases shall be permitted except as provided in this section. Measurements of sulfur dioxide, hydrogen sulfide or carbon monoxide shall not exceed 5 parts per million taken at the property line of the operation.
8. Vibration: All machines shall be mounted to minimize vibration. No measurable vibration shall occur at the property line of the operation which exceeds a displacement of 0.003 inch.
9. Glare and Heat: All glare generated by a use shall be shielded or directed so as not to be visible at the property line of the operation. No heat may be generated from an operation that raises the air temperature at the property line of the operation by more than five degrees Fahrenheit above the ambient air temperature.
10. Storage of Chemical Products: IF allowed by Conditional Use Permit, any above or below ground storage of liquid petroleum products or chemicals of a flammable or noxious nature shall not exceed 150,000 gallons when stored on one lot less than one acre. Such storage shall not exceed 25,000 gallons in any one tank. Storage of liquid petroleum products or chemicals of a flammable or noxious nature in excess of 25,000 gallons shall be located at least 50 feet from any structure intended for human habitation and at least 200 feet from any Residential, Office, or Commercial zoning district.
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-18
171.09 Maximum Permitted Sound Levels Adjacent to Residential Zoning Districts
Table 171-1 displays the maximum permitted sound levels that may be generated by uses in the CC, GC, HC, BP, LI, or GI zooming districts where adjacent to residential zoning districts. All measurements shall be taken at or within the boundary between the originating district and the adjacent residential zooming district with a sound level meter meeting ANSI specification for a Type II or better general purposes sound level meter. The A-weighted response shall be used.
Table 171-1: Maximum Permitted Sound Levels at Residential Boundaries
Originating Zoning District Time Maximum One Hour *Leq (dbA)
CC, GC, HC, LI, BP 7:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m. 60
10:00 p.m. – 7:00 a.m. 55
GI 7:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m. 65
*Leq is the constant sound level that, in a given situation and time period, conveys the same sound energy as the actual time-varying A-weighted sound. It is the average sound level and accurately portrays the sound the human ear actually hears.
171.10 Supplemental Use Regulations: Miscellaneous Uses
a. Communications Towers
Communications towers, where permitted, are subject to the following additional requirements:
1. Co-Location: It is the policy of the City of Glenwood to encourage the co-location of new communication towers with existing towers or as part of suitable existing structures. All applications for approval of a communications tower location shall include evidence that all potential alternatives for location on existing towers or suitable buildings has been explored and exhausted. Applicants may not be denied space on an existing tower within the City of Glenwood unless mechanical, structural, or regulatory factors prevent co-location.
2. Towers shall be located so that the distance from the base of the tower to any adjoining property line or the supporting structure of another separate tower is minimum of 110% of the tower height.
3. The tower facility shall be designed to be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the built environment of the City of Glenwood. Associated support buildings shall be designed with materials that are consistent with those in the surrounding neighborhood.
4. All tower facilities shall provide landscaped peripheral yards with a minimum depth of 35 feet. One tree consistent with the provisions of Section 173 shall be planted for every 500 square feet of required peripheral yard area.
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-19
b. Landfills
1. Compliance with Codes: Each landfill must comply with all relevant city, county, State, or Federal codes and statutes.
2. Prevention of Hazards: No facility shall present a hazard to surrounding residents or properties.
3. Drainage and Water Supply: No landfill may modify or prevent the flow of major natural drainage ways within the jurisdiction of the City of Glenwood. Landfills shall not produce a measurable increase in pollutions in any public water-based recreational facility or any waterway if well that is a part of a public or private water supply.
4. Minimum Separation from Residential Uses: No non-putrescible landfill may be established within 300 feet of a developed residential or public use. No landfill involving the disposal of putrescible or septic wastes shall be established within one-fourth mile of any residential. public, or commercial zoning district; or any State of Federal Highway.
5. Restoration of Site: The sire of any landfill must ne restored, stabilized, planted, and seeded within six months after the end of the operation. Dissipation of waste products must be accomplished in a manner approved by the State of Iowa’s Department of Natural Resources.
6. Toxic Waste: The disposal of hazardous, toxic, or radioactive wastes as defined by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency shall be prohibited within the City of Glenwood and its extra-territorial jurisdiction.
c. Wind Energy Conservations Systems (WECS)
1. The distance from all lot lines or any building or power line to any tower support base of a WECS shall be equal to the sum of the tower height and the diameter of the rotor. A reduction of this requirement may be granted as part of a Conditional Use Permit approval if the Planning Commission finds that the reduction is consistent with public health, safety, and welfare.
2. The distance between the tower support bases of any two WECS shall be the minimum of five rotor lengths, determined by the size or the largest rotor. A reduction of this requirement may be granted as part of a Conditional Use Permit approval if the Planning Commission finds that the reduction does not impeded the operation of either WECS.
3. The WECS operation shall not interfere with radio, television, computer or other electronic operations on adjacent properties.
4. A fence six feet high with a locking gate shall be placed around any WECS tower base; or the tower climbing apparatus shall begin no lower than twelve feet above ground.
5. The WECS is exempt from the height restrictions of the base district.
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-20
171.11 Supplemental Use Regulations: Accessory Uses
a. Home-Based Businesses/Home Occupations
Home-based businesses and home occupations are permitted as an accessory use in residential units subject to the following conditions:
1. External Effects:
(a) There shall be no change in the exterior appearance of the building or premises housing the home occupation other than signage permitted within this section.
(b) No noise, odors, bright lights, electronic interference, storage or other external effects attributable to the home occupation shall be noticeable from any adjacent property or public right of way.
(c) The home occupation shall be carried on entirely within the principal residential structure and/or within a detached accessory building approved by the City in accordance with these zoning regulations. All “External Effects” criteria in items a.1.(a), (b), (d), (e) and (f) of this subsection are applicable for the detached accessory building Signage is not allowed upon the detached accessory building.
(d) Mechanical or electrical equipment supporting the home occupation shall be limited to that which is self-contained within the structure and normally used for office, domestic or household purposes.
(e) No outdoor storage of materials or equipment used in the home occupation shall be permitted, other than motor vehicles used by the owner to conduct the occupation. Parking or storage of heavy commercial vehicles to conduct the home occupation is prohibited.
(f) No home occupation shall discharge into any sewer, drainageway, or the ground any material which is radioactive, poisonous, detrimental to normal sewer plant operation, or corrosive to sewer pipes and installations.
2. Employees: The home occupation shall employ no more than one full time or part time employee on sire other than the residents of the dwelling unit, provided that one off-street parking space is made available and used by that non-resident employee.
3. Extent of Use: For all residential and agricultural zoning districts, the lesser of 25% of the floor area of the dwelling or 400 square feet may be devoted to the home occupation, inclusive of any detached accessory buildings used by that non-resident employee.
4. Signage: Each home-based business shall be permitted to have one wall sign not to exceed four square feet in area.
5. Traffic Generation and Parking
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-21
(a) Hone-based businesses may generate no more than 10 vehicle trips per day, corresponding to amount of traffic normally generated by a dwelling unit.
(b) Deliveries or service by commercial vehicles or trucks rated at ten tons grow empty weight is prohibited for any home-based business located on a local street.
(c) Parking needs generated by a home-based business shall be satisfied with off-street parking. No more than one vehicle used in connection with any home occupation shall be parked on the property. Such parking shall not e located in a required front yard. No more than two in-street parking spaces shall be used by the home occupation at any one time.
6. Prohibited Home-Based Businesses/ Home Occupations: The following activities are prohibited as home-based businesses, even if they meet the other requirements set forth in this section.
(a) Animal hospitals.
(b) Beauty and Barber Shops, except with a Conditional Use Permit.
(c) General retail sales.
(d) Mortuaries.
(e) Repair shops or service establishments including major electrical appliance repair, motorized vehicle repair, and related uses.
(f) Repair and service establishments including electronics repair and small engine repair, except with a Conditional Use Permit.
(g) Stables or kennels.
(h) Welding, vehicle body repair, or rebuilding or dismantling of vehicles.
b. Permitted Accessory Uses: Residential Uses
Residential uses may include the following accessory uses, activities, and structures on the same lot.
1. Private garages and parking for the residential use.
2. Recreational activities and uses by residents.
3. Home occupations, subject to Section 171.11 of these regulations.
4. Residential convenience services for multi-family uses or mobile home parks.
5. Garage sales, provided that the frequency of such sales at any one location shall not exceed one during a continuous, two (2) month period or four sales during any twelve (12) month period.
6. Maintenance of no more than four household pets over the age of six months. Permitted household pets do not include animals who present hazards to members of the household or the general public, including venomous animals, constrictors, or other exotic animals, or animals who have an undue impact on their neighborhood environment.
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-22
c. Permitted Accessory Uses: Civic Use Types
Guidance Services and Health Care use types are permitted in the LI Limited Industrial zoning districts only as accessory uses to a primary industrial use.
d. Permitted Accessory Uses: Other Use Types
Other use types may include the following accessory uses, activities , and structures on the same lot:
1. Parking for the principal use.
2. Manufacturing or fabrication of products made for sale in a principal commercial use, provided such manufacturing is totally contained within the structure housing the principal use.
3. Services operated for the sole benefit of employees of the principal use.
e. Permitted Accessory Uses: Agricultural Use Types
1. Garden centers and roadside stands, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 171.02.
2. Other uses and activities necessarily and customarily associated with the purpose and functions of agricultural uses.
171.12 Supplemental Use Regulations: Outdoor Storage outside of the LI and GI Zoning Districts
Outdoor storage is prohibited in all zoning districts expect the GI General Industrial zoning district, except as provided in this section.
a. Agricultural Use Types
Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to agricultural uses.
b. Civic Use Types
Outdoor storage is permitted only where incidental to Maintenance Facilities.
c. Commercial Use Types
1. Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to Agricultural Sales and Service; Auto Rentals and Sales; Construction Sales; Equipment Sales and Service; Sables and Kennels; and Surplus Sales.
2. Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to Auto Services, Equipment Repair, and Body Repair, provide that such storage is completely screened at property lines by an opaque barrier, as set forth in Section 173. This provision shall apply to any Auto Services, Equipment Repair, or Body Repair use established after the effective date of this Ordinance.
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-23
d. Industrial and Miscellaneous Use Types
1. Outdoor storage is permitted where it is incidental to industrial uses within the AR and LI zoning districts. Any such outdoor storage is subject to screening requirements set forth in Section 173.
2. Outdoor storage is permitted where incidental to landfills.
171.13 Supplemental Use Regulations: Temporary Uses
a. Purpose
These provisions are intended to permit occasional, temporary uses and activities, when consistent with the objective of the Zoning Ordinance and compatible with surrounding uses. They are further intended to prevent temporary uses from assuming the character of permanent uses.
b. Temporary Use Types
The following temporary uses are permitted, subject to the regulations contained within these sections:
1. Model homes or apartments, if contained within the development to which they pertain.
2. Development sales offices. Such offices may remain in place until 90% of the lots or units within the development are sold and may not be located within a mobile home or manufactured home/structure.
3. Public assemblies, displays, and exhibits.
4. Commercial circuses, carnivals, fairs, festivals, or other transient events, provided that events are located on property owned by the sponsoring non-profit organization or are located within a DC or more intensive zoning district.
5. Outdoor are shows and exhibits.
6. Christmas tree or other holiday-related merchandise sales lots, provided that such facilities are not located in a residential zoning district.
7. Construction site offices, if located om the construction site itself.
8. Outdoor special sales, provided that such sales operate no more than three days in the sane week and five days in the same month; and are located in commercial or industrial zoning districts.
9. Construction Batch Plants in the LI District provided that:
(a) No plant may be located within 600 feet of a developed residential use, park, or school.
(b) The facility is located no more than one mile from its job site. The Zoning Administrator may extend this distance to two miles, if such extension avoids use of local streets by plant-related vehicles.
(c) Hours of operation do not exceed 16 hours per day.
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 171-24
(d) The duration of the plan’s operation does not exceed 180 days.
10. Additional temporary uses that the Zoning Administrator determines to be similar to the previously described uses in this section.
c. Required Conditions of All Temporary Uses
1. An application to conduct a temporary use shall be made to the Zoning Administrator and shall include at a minimum a description of the proposed use; a diagram of its locations; information regarding hours and duration of operation; and other information necessary to evaluate the application.
2. The Zoning Administrator may authorize a temporary use only if he/she determines that:
(a) The use will not impair the normal operation of a present of future permanent use of the site.
(b) The use will be compatible with surrounding uses and will not adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare.
3. The duration of the permit shall be explicitly stated on the permit.
4. Decisions of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 172-1
SECTION 172
Supplemental Site Development Regulations
172.01 Purpose
The Supplemental Site Development Regulations establish basic requirements for all lots, including frontage requirements. These regulations recognized the existence of special conditions that cannot comply literally with the site development regulations set out for each zoning district. Therefore, these regulations qualify of modify the district regulations of this Ordinance and provide for specific areas of exception.
172.02 Required Street Frontage
Except as permitted below, any lot used in whole or part for residential purposes shall provide a minimum frontage of 20 feet along at least one public street, or shall possess an exclusive, uninterrupted private easement of access or right of way of at least 20 feet wide to a public street. There shall not be more than one single-family housing unit for such frontage or easement. A common easement of access at least fifty feet in width may be provided for two or more single-family units or for one or more duplex, two-family, townhouse, or multiple-family housing units.
172.03 Lot Size Exceptions-Replacement Housing
In any district permitting residential use types, a single-family or duplex use type which is replacing a preexisting structure of the same use type may be located on any lot or plot of official record as of the effective date of this Ordinance, regardless of its area or width, but subject to the following requirements:
a. The sum of the widths of the side yards of such lot shall be the lesser of those required by the district regulations or 25% of the width of the lot. No single side yard shall be less than 10% of the width of the lot.
b. The depth of the rear yard of such lot need not exceed 20% of the depth of the lot, but not be less than 15 feet.
c. If two or more such adjacent lots are combined under single ownership, the resulting combined lots shall be treated as a single lot for purposes of applying these setback requirements.
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 172-2
172.04 Setback Adjustments
a. Lots Adjoining Alleys
In calculating the depth of a required side or rear yard setback for a lot adjoining a dedicated public alley, one-half of the alley may be credited as a portion of the yard. However, no residential structure may be nearer than four feet to the near side of the alley and setback requirements for accessory buildings shall not be decreased.
b. Encroachments on Required Yards
Every part of a required yard shall be open and unobstructed from finished grade upward, except as specified herein.
1. Architectural projections, including roofs which cover porches, enclosed porches, window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, flues and chimneys, stoops and ornamental features may project four feet in to a required yard.
2. Terraces, patios, uncovered decks, retaining walls, and ornamental features which have no structural element more than three feet above or below the adjacent ground level may project ten feet into a required yard. However, all such projections must be set back at least three feet from an adjacent side lot line or rear lot line; or twenty feet from any street property line.
3. In Residential Districts, paved and prepared parking areas must be set back at least two (2) feet from an adjacent side lot line.
4. Fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies opening to fire towers may project a maximum of 3 feet into required yards, provided that they do not obstruct the light and ventilation of adjacent buildings.
5. For buildings constructed upon a front property line, a cornice may project into public right-of-way. Maximum projection is the smaller of four feet or five percent of the right-of-way width.
6. In commercial districts only, a canopy or awning may extend into a required front yard, provided that the canopy or awning is set back at least five feet from the front property line, covers less than fifteen percent of the total area of the required front yard, and has a vertical clearance of at least 7.5 feet. In the DC zone, canopies and awning may exceed fifteen percent of the area of the required front yard. Awnings and canopies in the DC zone are subject to the following general regulations:
(a) Maximum projection of any Awning or Canopy shall be as follows:
i. In the DC zone, and awning may extend from the façade of a building to a distance of 6 feet from the inside edge of the curb. Canopies shall not be constructed in the DC zone.
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 172-3
ii. In all other commercial zones, exclusive of the DC zone, awnings and canopies are subject to the same regulations set forth in section 175.04(e).
(b) Each awning in the DC zone must maintain a minimum vertical clearance of 7.5 feet.
(c) Awnings must minimize visible support structures and may not expose guy wires, cables, turnbuckles, angle iron or any other similar external support structure.
(d) Awnings may project int an dover a public right of way or sidewalk in the DC zone so long as no posts or other devices are used to support the awning in such manner as to obstruct the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians.
7. Accessory buildings are subject to all site development regulations of its zoning district, except as provided below.
(a) Side Yards: An accessory building may be located a minimum of five (5) feet from the side lot line of the property is it is located between the rear building line of the principal building and the rear property line and is under 15 feet in height. An additional one (1) foot setback is required for every two (2) feet above 15 feet in height, up to the minimum requirements of the zoning district.
(b) Front Yards: No accessory building may be located between the front building line of the principal building and the front property line.
(c) Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard setback for accessory buildings shall be 5 feet. This minimum rear yard setback shall be increased to 15 feet if the accessory building is a garage with a vehicular entrance door that is directly oriented toward an alley. Double-frontage los shall require front-yard setbacks along both street frontages as set forth in Table 168-3. Easements may be incorporated into these required setbacks. No accessory building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way along the rear property line.
(d) Street Yards: No accessory building shall be located within 20 feet from any street right-of-way line.
(e) Maximum Size: No accessory building other than a garage shall exceed 150 square feet, or 1.5% of total lot area, whichever is larger, within an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or MH residential district providing that the necessary building permit is obtained. The maximum size of a detached garage for a single-family detached, single-family attached, or duplex residential uses shall not exceed 720 square feet, or 25% of the building coverage of the main residential structure, whichever is larger. Residential lots with a minimum 12,500 square feet may be allowed to construct a garage larger
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 172-4
than 1,000 square feet with a conditional use permit. All accessory buildings on a site, taken together, must comply with the building coverage requirements for the zoning district and shall not occupy more than 30% of any required rear yard.
(f) Height: In residential districts, the maximum height shall be 16 feet for any accessory building. Maximum height for a detached garage and/or other accessory building in an AR District shall be 20 feet.
(g) Separation from Other Buildings: Any accessory building shall be placed within ten feet of any other building on its own property or any adjacent properties.
(h) Attached Accessory Buildings: Any accessory building physically attached to the principal building shall be considered part of the principal building om such adjacent lot. No accessory building shall be considered part of the principal building and subject to the development regulations of its zoning district.
(i) Effect on Adjacent Properties: If an adjacent lot is built upon, the accessory building must be entirely to the rear of the front wall of any principal building on such adjacent lot. No accessory building shall damage adjacent property by obstructing views, inhibiting solar access or hindering ventilation.
(j) Hazards: Any accessory use which creates a potential fire hazard shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any residential structure. Such uses include but are not limited to detached fireplaces, barbecue ovens, or storage of flammable materials.
(k) No accessory building shall be built upon any lot until construction of the principal building has begun.
8. Permanent swimming pools shall be subject to the same front yard, side yard, rear yard, and street side yard setback as accessory buildings.
9. Lamp posts with a maximum height of ten (10) feet, and flag poles up to maximum height of base district may be located within required yards, provided they are set back at least five (5) feet from property lines.
10. Garage Setbacks: Any garage that fronts on a public street must be set back at least 20 feet from such street, regardless of the setback requirement within the zoning district. This shall not be interpreted t waive a larger required minimum setback required by the zoning district.
c. Architectural Requirements for Detached Garages and Carports
1. Exterior building materials and architectural designs used for single-family detached, single-family attached or duplex residential structures shall be
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 172-5
comparable to, or similar to, or architecturally harmonious with, the existing main residential structure.
2. Exterior materials shall be non-reflective and shall be of a color, material, and scale comparable to existing residential structures in the immediate area. Permanent siding shall be, or simulate, wood, wood shingles, brick, masonry, or tile. The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of 2.5 inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run, Roof construction shall be of non-reflective materials which are or simulate the appearance of asphalt, wood shingles, tile, rock, or standing seam metal with concealed fasteners. Any standing seam metal roof shall be stamped by a licensed engineer, shall be installed by a certified installer of standing seam metal roofs in accord with the regulations provided in the International Residential Code Book, as from time to time may be amended.
3. Unless made an integral part of the part of the primary structure or residence, all carports are subject to the setback requirements as set forth in this chapter for detached garages. It shall be unlawful for a person to erect, utilize, or maintain a carport unless:
(a) It is soundly constructed or lumber, steel, or other suitable materials to be approved by the Administrative Officer;
(b) It is similar to or architecturally harmonious with the existing primary structure in the discretion of the Administrative officer;
(c) It is affixed to the ground by concrete footings; and
(d) It has a permanent and impervious ground cover of gravel, concrete, or asphalt for which vehicles may be allowed to rest.
d. Setback Adjustment
1. Setbacks on Built-Up City Blockface(s):
These provisions apply if thirty percent or more of the buildings on that blockface have front yard setbacks different from those required for the specific district.
(a) If a building is to be built on a parcel of land within 100 feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be the mean setbacks of the adjacent buildings.
(b) If a building is to be built on a parcel of land within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, the minimum front yard shall be the setback of the adjacent building.
(c) If a building is to be built on a parcel of land not within 100 feet of an existing building on either side, then the minimum front yard shall be the mean setback of all existing buildings on the blockface.
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 172-6
(d) No setback adjustment pursuant to this section shall create a required front yard setback more than five feet greater than that otherwise required by the applicable zoning district.
2. Corner Lots: Required setbacks shall not reduce the buildable width of any corer lot to less than 24 feet. Appropriate setback adjustments shall be allowed to maintain this minimum width.
e. Rear Yard Exceptions – Residential Uses
When an irregular lot is sized for residential purposes, the rear yard may be measured as the average horizontal distance between the building and rear lot line, provided that the minimum setback shall not be less than sixty percent (60%) o the rear yard required by the zoning district.
f. Double Frontage Lots
Residentially zoned double frontage lots on a major street, and with no access to that street may have a 25-foot minimum front yard setback along said street. All other double frontage lots must provide full front yard setbacks from each adjacent street.
g. Satellite Antennas
1. Each lot shall have no more than one satellite antenna.
2. Antennas with a surface area of over 6.3 square feet which are accessory to a primary use and are designed to receive and transmit electromagnetic signals, or to receive signals from satellites, shall not be located within any front yard of the primary use.
3. Antennas with a surface area of over 6.3 square feet are subject to the following additional regulations:
(a) Such antennas shall be located no less than ten (10) feet from the property line of an adjacent property line.
(b) The maximum height shall be 15 feet from the maximum diameter shall be 11 feet.
(c) Each antenna shall be screening by a six (6) foot high wood or masonry fence, or by natural plants or trees of equal minimum height.
h. Vision Clearance Zones
Except in the DC District, no structure, including a fence, shall be built to a height of more than three feet above the established curb grade on the part of the lot within a vision clearance zone. The vision clearance zone shall be a triangle measures from the point of intersection of the centerline of the streets to a point 90 feet in each direction from the intersection along such centerlines. At the intersection of major
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 172-7
streets, the 90-foot distance shall be increased to 120 feet. No landscaping shall be planted in such area which will materially obstruct the view of drivers approaching the street intersection.
172.05 Height Exceptions
These provisions allow exceptions to the height limit of any zoning district in certain situations.
a. Vertical Projections
Chimneys, cooling towers, building mechanical equipment, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, grain elevators, non-parabolic receiving antennas, tanks, solariums, steeples, penthouses not exceeding 25 percent of total roof area, flag poles, stage towers or scenery lofts, and water towers may be built to any height in accordance with existing and future ordinances.
b. Amateur Radio Towers and Federal communication Commission Pronouncements
1. Radio towers, antennas and other appurtenances operated by licenses amateur radio operators, where permitted and when, may not exceed 75 feet in height. This height has been determined by the City to reasonably accommodate amateur service communications, and further represents the minimum practicable regulations to accomplish legitimate municipal land use regulation purpose, as recognized under published guidelines of the Federal Communications Commissions.
2. Special instances may require that amateur radio tower heights exceed 75 feet to achieve effective and reliable communications. In such cases the Board of Adjustment may grant a Conditional Use Permit to a licensed amateur radio operator for a specific tower height that exceeds 75 feet. In determining whether to grant such permission, the City Council shall consider the federal guidelines contained in PRB-1 (Amateur Radio Preemption, 101 FCC 2d (1985); codified at C.F.R Section 97.15(e).
3. Such radio towers shall not be located within any front yard of the primary use.
c. Civic Buildings
Buildings housing civic use types may be built to a maximum height of 60 feet. Such buildings located in residential districts shall be set back one foot in addition to required setbacks from each property line for each foot of height over the maximum height of the zoning district.
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 172-8
d. Communications Towers
Communications towers, when operated by a federally-licensed commercial or non-profit organization, may be built to any height in accordance with existing and future ordinances. This exception does not apply to radio towers, antennas and other appurtenances operated by licensed amateur radio operators. Such towers are subject to the requirements of Section 10.610b.
e. Wind Energy Conservation Systems (WECS)
Wind Energy Conservation Systems are exempt from the height restrictions of the base district but are subject to the regulations of Section 171.
f. Conditional Use Approvals
The Planning Commission may grant an exception form the height limit for a zoning district for a Conditional Use as part of its approval of that use. The limit of extent of this exception shall be a specific part of the Conditional Use Permit.
g. Federal Aviation Administration Rules
No structure may be built in any zoning district which exceeds the maximum height permitted under the rules of the Federal Aviation Administration. These rules describe the glide angles and operational patterns for any airport within the planning jurisdiction of the City of Glenwood.
172.06 Exceptions to Site Development Regulations for Conservation Subdivisions
a. Purpose
In the instance that the Subdivision Chapter of the Land Development Ordinance provides for Conservation Subdivisions, the city may authorize such subdivisions to allow for greater flexibility in the design and development of subdivisions, in order to produce innovative residential environments, to provide for more efficient use of land, to protect topographic and to encourage the preservation of common area and open space. These special regulations and design exceptions apply only to Conservation Subdivisions. For the purposes of these provisions, Conservation Subdivisions shall include subdivisions developed under the standards identified in Section 170.40 or subdivisions designed according to Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) techniques, set forth in Section 181.05.
b. Site Area Per Unit
Unless otherwise provided, the site area per unit for a creative subdivision as a whole shall be that of the zoning district in which such subdivision is located. For the purpose of computing site area per unit, the area of public streets and private ways within the subdivision must be excluded. Residential use types may be combined within the creative subdivision provided that the subdivision as a whole complies with the required maximum density of the zoning district.
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 172-9
c. Perimeter Yards
1. Structures must maintain normal street yard setbacks from any public streets that form the perimeter of the development.
2. Structures must maintain a 20 feet minimum side yard setback from any property line that forms the boundary of the development.
d. Area and yards for individual Lots
1. Individual lots within a Conservation Subdivision or TND are exempt from minimum lot area or yard setback requirements set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance, unless provided for by the regulations for a specific zoning district. Such a subdivision must be planned and developed as a common development. A minimum separation of twenty (20) feet shall be established for all residential structures not attached to one another, unless the City Council grants a specific exception for developments proposing unique circumstances, only in as much as said development can be demonstrated to avoid detriment to Glenwood’s efforts to protect public health, safety, welfare, community character, property values and aesthetics.
2. Any private garage oriented to or facing a public street or private way internal to the creative subdivision must be set back a minimum of 25 feet from that public street or private way.
e. Coverage and Landscaping Requirements
Individual lots in a creative subdivision are exempt from maximum building and impervious coverage limitations and street yard landscaping requirements established for the zoning district. However, the subdivision as a whole, including streets, walks, and access ways, must comply with the building and impervious coverage regulations for its zoning district.
172.07 Fence Regulations
a. Location Restriction
1. Unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance or other sections of the Glenwood Municipal Code, no fence shall be built on any lot or tract outside the surveyed lot lines.
2. No fence shall be built by a private party on public land without the specific prior approval of the City. Removal of any such fence shall be at the expense of its owner.
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 172-10
b. Applicability
The regulations contained in this section apply to all fences with a height above grade of 30 inches and over.
c. Required Openings
Unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance or other sections of the Glenwood Municipal Code, any fence built on residential property within required front or street side yards shall contain openings constituting no less than 50 percent of the surface area of the fence.
d. Sight Obstruction at Street Intersections
No fence or hedge permitted or required by this article or other sections of the Glenwood Municipal Code shall be built to a height of more than three feet above the established curb grade on the part of the lot within a vision clearance zone. The vision clearance zone shall for fence construction shall include:
1. At street intersections, a triangle measured from the point of intersection of the centerline of the streets to a point 90 feet in each direction from the intersection along such centerlines. At the intersection of major streets, the 90-foot distance shall be increased to 120 feet. No landscaping shall be planted in such area which will materially obstruct the view of drivers approaching the street intersection.
2. At intersections of a sidewalk and alley or non-residential driveway or parking lot access, a triangle whose legs extend 10 feet back from the sidewalk along the alley or driveway, and 20 feet parallel to and along the back of the sidewalk back from the intersecting alley or driveway. See diagram 172-1.
e. Facing
The finished surfaces of any fence shall face toward adjacent properties and street frontage.
f. Effect on Adjacent Properties and Drainage
1. No accessory building shall drainage adjacent property by obstruction views, inhibiting solar access, or hindering ventilation.
2. Fences shall be erected and maintained so as to avoid limiting or obstructing the flow of water in natural drainage courses, or drainageways created within easements.
g. Fence Construction on Utility Easements
Any fence erected on a tract of land subject to an easement for the construction, maintenance, operations, or replacement of any water, sanitary or storm sewer, gas line, electric power, telephone, or other utility poles, or other cables or lines shall be
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 172-11
designed and constructed to be readily removeable to permit the use of the easement. Such fences shall be subject to removal or replacement shall be the responsibility of the owner of the fence.
h. Protective Fences around Swimming Pools
A fence with a minimum height of six feet and compliant with the terms of this section shall be required around public or permanent private swimming pools.
i. Residential Fences
Fences constructed within residential districts or on land used for residential purposes are subject to the following provisions.
1. Height: The maximum height of a fence within a required front yard or street side yard setback shall be 42 inches. The maximum height for any fence outside of a required front yard shall be six feet.
2. Exception for Street Side Yards: ON corner lots, a fence built parallel to the street side yard line but set back in conformance with the required street yard setback may have a maximum height of six feet.
3. Exception to Openness Requirement: Fences built on residential property outside of required front of street side yards may exceed of 50 percent closed construction.
4. Exception to Front Yards of Double Frontage Lots: A fence built within the required front yard of a double frontage lot may be a maximum of six feet in height and may exceed 50 percent closed construction if such lot fronts and arterial street or expressway, as defined in the Comprehensive Development Plan of he City of Glenwood; and if such frontage does not provide primary access to the property.
5. Materials: Fences shall be constructed of wood, chain-link, PVC/ resin, stone or masonry materials, or ornamental metals only. Wood fences shall utilize standard building lumber only. Barbed wire and/or electrified fences are not permitted and are defined as any fence that includes in its material barbs, blades, razors, electric current or other features specifically designed to injure or abrade an individual or animal who attempts to negotiate the fence. Wire mesh fences may be permitted to enclose tennis courts and game and recreation areas on public land and residential lots.
j. Civic, Office, Commercial, and Industrial Fences
Fences constructed in commercial and industrial districts are subject to the following special provisions:
1. The maximum height of a fence for any permitted use in any non-residential zoning district shall be eight feet.
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 172-12
2. Civic Uses in Residential Districts: The maximum height of fences installed as part of Primary and Secondary Educational Facilities, Day Care, and Park and Recreation Use Types, or any other use that provides secured outdoor space for the use of children within Residential Zoning Districts shall be eight feet.
3. The Board of Adjustment may approve greater fence heights on a case-by-case basis if it concludes that such permission furthers the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Glenwood.
4. Barbed wire shall not be used in the construction of any fence outside of the AR Agricultural Reserve and GI General Industrial Zoning Districts. Within GI Districts, the bottom strand of barbed wire shall be at least six feet above ground level. Electrified fences are not permitted within the jurisdiction of the City of Glenwood, except for agricultural uses within the AR District.
172.08 Appeals
Denial, revocations, or cancellations of a building permit based on the provisions of this Section may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment, as set forth in Sections 177.08 through 177.10.
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 173-1
SECTION 173
Landscaping and Screening Standards
173.01 Purpose
The Landscaping and Screening Regulations provide additional guidance on the development of sites within Glenwood by addressing landscaping and screening requirements. They are designed to improve the appearance of the community; buffer potential incompatible land uses from one another; and conserve the value of properties within the City of Glenwood.
173.02 Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to all new development on each lot or site upon application for a building permit, except for the following:
a. Reconstruction or replacement of a lawfully existing use or structure following a casualty loss.
b. Remodeling, rehabilitation, or improvements to existing uses or structures which do not substantially change the location of structures, parking, or other site improvements.
c. Additions or enlargements of existing uses or structures which increase floor area or impervious coverage area by less than 20 percent. Where such additions or enlargements are 20 percent or greater, these provisions shall apply only to that portion where the new development occurs.
173.03 Landscaping Requirements
Landscaping shall be required adjacent to each street property line and within street yards as set forth in Table 173-1.
173.04 Landscaping List of Recommended and Prohibited Plant Materials
a. Official List of Recommended and Prohibited Plant Materials
Planting shall be used in required landscaped areas or bufferyards consistent with the Official List of Recommended and Prohibited Plant Materials, provided through the office of the Zoning Administrator. All plant materials shall conform in size, species and spacing with this section of the ordinance.
b. Use of Inorganic Landscaping Materials
No artificial trees, shrubs, plants or turf shall be used to fulfill the minimum requirements for landscaping. Inorganic materials, such as stone or decorative
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 173-2
pavers, may be used provided that such material does not comprise more than 35% of the minimum required landscaped area. Other concrete and/or asphalt pavement surfaces may not be used within the minimum required landscaped area, except for driveways and walkways.
Table 173-1: Required Landscape Depth Zoning District Depth of Landscaping Adjacent to Street Property Line
AR
35 feet
RR
25 feet
R-1
20 feet
R-2
20 feet
R-3
15 feet
R-4
15 feet
MH
35 feet
UC
10 feet
CC
10 feet
DC
No Requirement
GC
10 feet
HC
15 feet
BP
25 feet
LI
10 feet
GI
No Requirement
173.05 Bufferyard Provisions
These provisions apply when any use is established in a more intensive district (District A) which is adjacent to a les intensive zoning district (District B). The owner, developer, or operator of the use within District A shall install and maintain a landscaped bufferyard on his/her lot or site, as set forth in this section. Bufferyard requirements apply only to those districts indicated in Table 173-2. Bufferyards are not required of single-family, 2-family, duplex, or townhouse use types in the more intensive zoning district.
a. The bufferyard dimensions set forth in Table 173-2 apply to zoning districts which share a common lot line or are adjacent but separated by an intervening alley.
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 173-3
Table 173-2: Bufferyard Requirements (in feet)
District B (less intensive adjacent district)
District A
(more
intensive
district)
Note 3 AG, RR Note 1 R-1, R-2, R-3 Note 1 R-4 Note 1 MH Note 1
R-4
20
20
---
---
MH
35
35
35
---
UC
15
Note 2
15
Note 2
15
Note 2
15
Note 2
DC
---
---
---
---
LC
20
20
20
20
CC, GC
25
25
20
20
LI
40
40
30
40
GI
100
100
100
100
Notes to Table 8-2:
Note 1: Applies only to residential uses preciously established in the zoning district.
Note 2: Buffering requirement applies to adjacent between new commercial and office use types and pre-existing residential land uses in adjacent districts. Buffering requirement also applies to a commercial or office use type established in a UC district and adjacent to a pre-existing residential use in the UC District. Vertical screening may also be required as set forth in Section 173.06.
Note 3: Buffer requirements do not apply to single-family, duplex, r townhouse residential uses established in District A
b. When a street separates adjacent zoning districts requiring a bufferyard, the size of the bufferyard shall be one-half the required bufferyard set forth in Table 173-2.
c. Each required bufferyard must be entirely landscaped and free of paved areas, access ways, storage, or other disturbances.
173.06 Screening Standards
a. Application
Screening is required between adjacent zoning district indicated in Table 173-2 when one or more of the following conditions in the more intensive zoning district is
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 173-4
directly visible from and faces toward the boundary of the less intensive zoning district:
1. The rear elevation of buildings.
2. Outdoor storage areas or storage tanks, unless other otherwise screened.
3. Loading docks, refuse collection points, and other service areas.
4. Major machinery or areas housing a manufacturing process.
5. Major on-site traffic circulation areas or truck and/or trailer parking.
6. Sources of glare, noise, or other environmental effects.
b. Opaque Barrier
A six (6) foot opaque barrier shall be provided which visually screens the conditions listed in Section 173.06 (a) from less intensive uses as follows:
1. A solid wood and/or masonry fence or wall at least six feet in height.
2. A landscaping screen, using evergreen or deciduous materials, capable of providing a substantially opaque, hedge-like barrier and attaining a minimum height of six feet within three years of planting.
3. A landscaped earth berm with a maximum slope of three to one, rising no less than six feet above the existing grade of the lot line separating the zoning districts.
4. Any combination of these methods that achieves a cumulative height of six feet.
c. Location of Screening Wall
A screening wall or fence shall be installed no closer to the less intensive zoning district than one-half the width of the required bufferyard.
d. Screening: Effect on Drainage
Screening shall not adversely affect surface water drainage.
e. Permitted Interruptions of Screening
Screening may be interrupted to provide access drives to service areas of for loading purposes to buildings. Such breaks or interruptions shall not exceed 20% of the length of the required screened area.
173.07 Parking Lot Landscaping
a. Landscape and Screening Requirements
Unless otherwise noted, each unenclosed parking facility of over 6,000 square feet shall comply with the following regulations:
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 173-5
1. Each unenclosed parking facility shall provide a minimum landscaped buffer of ten feet along any street property line.
2. Each parking facility that abuts a residential district shall provide a ten (10) foot landscaped buffer along its common property line with the residential district.
3. Any parking facility which abuts property in a residential district shall provide a fence, wall, landscape screen, or earth berm not less than four feet in height for the length of the common boundary. A grade change, terrace, or other site feature which blocks the sight line of headlights into a residential property may satisfy this requirement, subject to the determination of the Zoning Administrator.
4. Each unenclosed parking facility of over 6,000 square feet within any street yard shall provide interior landscaped area equal to no less than 5 percent of the total paved area of the parking facility. Parking facilities within the LI and GI Districts shall be exempt from this requirement.
5. Interior landscaping shall be credited toward the satisfaction of overall landscaping requirements set forth in this section.
6. Landscaping or screening installed in any required landscaped area shall not obstruct the view from the off-street parking facility to any driveway approach, street, alley, or sidewalk. Landscaping shall further not obstruct any views among parking spaces and circulation ways, or visibility between vehicles and pedestrians.
173.08 Tree Planting
In any landscaped area for commercial uses only required by the Minimum Depth Requirements, the Bufferyard Requirements, or the Parking Lot Interior Landscaping Requirements, one tree of an approved species with a minimum caliper size of two inches shall be planted and maintained for each 500 square feet of required landscaped area. Existing trees approved for preservation shall be counted toward satisfaction of this requirement.
173.09 General Provisions
a. Time of Application
The provisions contained in this Section shall be applied for each individual lot or site when an application for a building permit on such lot is made. When required, a Landscape Plan shall be submitted with each application for a building permit. Such plan shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator for compliance with the provisions of this section.
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 173-6
b. Maintenance of Required Landscaping
Upon installation of required landscape materials, each owner shall take appropriate actions to ensure their continued health and maintenance. Required landscaping that does not remain healthy shall be replaced consistent with this Article.
c. Obstruction of View
Landscaping or screening installed in any landscaped area shall not obstruct the view from or to any driveway approach, street, alley, or sidewalk.
d. Earth Berm Locations
All earth berm locations shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee to determine how the berms shall relate to drainage and public utilities.
e. Exceptions
A development may continue to comply with the bufferyard and screening requirements in effect at the tie of issuance of its original permit, regardless of whether an adjacent lot or site is subsequently rezoned to a less intensive district which would otherwise require compliance with bufferyard or screening provisions.
OFF STREET PARKING
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 174-1
SECTION 174
Off-Street Parking
174.01 Purpose
The Off-Street Regulations require that developments provide parking in proportion to the need created by each use. The regulations further establish standards for the functional design of parking facilities. These regulations are intended to accommodate vehicles in a functionally satisfactory manner and to minimize external effects on neighboring properties.
174.02 General Applications
a. Applicability
Off-street parking shall be provided for any new building constructed, for new uses or conversations of existing buildings; or for enlargements of existing structures.
b. Exemptions
Any use within the DC Downtown Commercial District, with the exception of permitted ground kevel residential uses, is exempt from the off-street parking requirements. Any off-street parking facility constructed in the DC District after the effective date of this Ordinance must comply with the design standards set forth in this section.
174.03 Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements
Parking facilities for each use shall be provided in accord with the minimum requirements set forth in Table 174-1.
a. Computation
1. When a computation of required parking results in a fraction of 0.5 or greater, the requirement shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
2. Unless otherwise indicated, parking requirements are based on gross floor area. Gross floor areas for the purpose of this calculation exclude any interior space used for the parking or loading of vehicles.
3. When parking requirements are computed on the basis of capacity, capacity shall be determined by the building code or other official determinations of occupancy in effect for the City of Glenwood at the time the use is established.
OFF STREET PARKING
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 174-2
Table 174-1: Minimum Off-Street Requirements
Agricultural Use Types
Horticulture
1 space per 1,000 square feet of sales area.
Crop/ Animal Production
No requirement.
Residential Use Types
Single-Family Residential
2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Duplex Residential
2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Two-Family Residential
2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Multi-Family Residential
1.5 spaces per efficiency or 1-BR unit; 2 spaces per 2-BR unit;
2.5 spaces for 3 or more BR unit.
Downtown Residential
No requirement.
Group Residential
1 space for each resident.
Mobile Home Residential
2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Retirement Residence
1.5 spaces per independent living unit;
0.5 spaces per assisted living unit.
Civic Use Types
Administration
1 space for 300 square feet of gross floor area.
Assisted Living
1 space for 4 beds + 1 space per employee of largest shift.
Cemetery
No requirement
Clubs
1 space per 4 persons capacity.
College/University
1 space per three students.
Convalescent Services
1 space for 4 beds
Cultural Services
1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area.
Day Care Services
1 space per 5 persons capacity + 1 space per employee of largest shift.
Group Care Facility
1 space per 4 persons capacity + 1 space per employee of largest shift.
Group Home
1 space per 4 persons capacity + 1 space per employee of largest shift.
Guidance Services
1 space per 300 square feet.
Health Care
1 space per 300 square feet + 1 space per employee of largest shift.
Hospitals
1 space per 2 beds + 1 space per employee of largest shift.
Maintenance Facilities
See Schedule A.
Parks and Recreation
Establish by an approved site master plan.
Postal Facilities
See Schedule A.
Primary Education
1 space per employee of largest shift + 10 stalls for visitors.
Public Assembly
1 space per 4 persons capacity.
Religious Assembly
1 space per 4 persons capacity in largest assembly area.
Safety Services
1 space per employee of maximum shift + 1 stall per 1,000 sq. ft.
Secondary Education
1 space per employee of max shift + 1 space for each 3 of 11th
and 12th grade students.
Utilities
1 space per employee of maximum shift.
OFF STREET PARKING
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 174-3
Table 174-1: Minimum Off-Street Requirements (continued) Commercial Use Types
Agricultural Sales/Services
See Schedule A.
Auto Rental and Sales
See Schedule A.
Auto Services*
4 times service capacity.
Body Repair*
5 spaces per repair stall.
Business Support Services
1 space per 500 square feet.
Campground
1 space per camping site.
Cocktail Lounge
1 space per 200 square feet.
Commercial Recreation
1 space per 4 persons capacity. For bowling alleys,
4 spaces per lane.
Communication Services
1 space per 500 square feet.
Construction Sales
See Schedule A.
Consumer Services
1 space per 200 square feet.
Convenience Storage
1 space per 20 storage units. **
Equipment Sales/Services
See Schedule A.
Food Sales (All Types)
1 space per 200 square feet.
General Retail Services
1 space per 200 square feet.
Liquor Sales
1 space per 200 square feet.
Lodging, Bed and Breakfast
1 space per unit
Personal Improvement
1 space per 200 square feet.
Personal Services
1 space per 300 square feet.
Pet Services
1 space per 500 square feet.
Restaurants (Drive-in)
1 space per 50 square feet of customer service area.
Restaurants (General)
1 space per 3 persons capacity in dining area.
Stables/Kennels
1 space per employee + 1 stall per 5,000 sq. ft. of site area.
Surplus Sales
See Schedule A.
Trade Services
1 space per 500 square feet.
Veterinary Services
1 space per 500 square feet.
* Auto Service and Body Repair subject to other restrictions applicable under this ordinance:
? See Section 4: Use Types – “Vehicle Storage”; also,
? Sections 6: Supplemental Use Regulations, “Outdoor Storage.”
** This standard may be reduced`` by up to 20% at the discretion of the Building Official, if the site plan review demonstrates that circulation and loading patters accommodate adequate space for queuing and temporary parking by users during the peak hours of operation.
OFF STREET PARKING
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 174-4
Table 174-1: Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements (continued) Office Use Types
Corporate Offices
1 space per 300 square feet.
General Offices
1 space per 300 square feet.
Financial Services
1 space per 300 square feet.
Medical Offices
5 spaces per staff doctor or dentist.
Miscellaneous Use Types
Broadcasting Tower
See Schedule A.
Non-Putrescible Landfill
See Schedule A.
All Landfills
See Schedule A.
Industrial Use Types
Agricultural Industries
See Schedule A.
Light Industry
See Schedule A.
General Industry
See Schedule A.
Heavy Industry
See Schedule A.
Railroad Facilities
See Schedule A.
Resource Extraction
1 space per employee on largest shift.
Salvage Services
See Schedule A.
Warehousing
See Schedule A.
Construction Yards
See Schedule A.
Schedule A
This schedule sets forth minimum off-street parking requirements for uses
With elements that have different functions and operating characteristics
Function of Element Requirement
Office or Administration 1 space per 300 square feet.
Indoor Sales, Display or Service Area 1 space per 500 square feet.
Outdoor Sales, Display or Service Area 1 space per 2,000 square feet.
Equipment Servicing or Manufacturing 1 space per 1,000 square feet.
Indoor or Outdoor Storage or Warehousing 1 space per 5,000 square feet.
174.04 Parking Facility Location
a. Residential Parking
1. With the exception of Downtown Residential uses, off-street parking for residential uses shall be located on the same lot or site as the use.
2. Off-street parking areas for any multi-family residential uses shall be at least six feet from any main building; and shall not be located within a required front yard or street side yard.
3. For multi-family residential uses, separately leased, detached garages may not be used to satisfy parking requirements for such uses unless terms of the lease
OFF STREET PARKING
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 174-5
prevent their use as private storage. Parking incorporated into the design of multi-family buildings, or within parking structures, shall be counted toward fulfillment of parking requirements.
b. Non-residential Parking
Off-street parking for non-residential uses shall be located on the same lot or site as the use, or within 300 feet of that use if the parking site is within a zoning district that permits the Off-Street Parking use type. Control of ownership or use rights to the remote off-street parking must be demonstrated as a condition of permission.
174.05 Parking for People with Disabilities
a. Each off-street parking facility shall provide the number of parking spaces set forth in Table 174-2 designed and designated for use by people with disabilities. Every eighth parking space shall be van-accessible. Design criteria and dimensions shall be in accordance with Federal Register, Volume 56, No 144. Parking facilities for single-family, duplex, two-family, and mobile home residential uses are exempt from this requirement.
b. Spaces designated for people with disabilities shall have a minimum width of 12 feet. Each handicap space shall provide a barrier free route to an accessible building entrance, which shall not require users to walk or wheel behind parked cars. Such spaces shall be designated with an upright sign exhibiting the universal symbol for accessibility by the handicapped. All such spaces shall be designed in compliance with the standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Table 174-2: Accessible Parking Requirements
Number of Stalls Number of Required Accessible Spaces Number of Stalls Number of Required Accessible Spaces
1-25
1
201-300
7
26-50
2
301-400
8
51-75
3
401-500
9
76-100
4
501-1,000
2% of total
101-150
5
1,001 and over
20, plus 1 for each 100
151-200
6
stalls over 1,000
OFF STREET PARKING
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 174-6
174.06 Off-Street Parking Design Standards
a. Dimensions
1. Standard parking stalls shall be 9 feet wide and 18 feet long.
2. Where parking stalls are located adjacent to landscaped areas, the paved depth of such stalls may be decreased by two feet to provide for a vehicle overhang area. The vehicle overhang area may not encroach in to a required landscaped area or public sidewalk.
b. Pavement and Drainage
1. Off-street parking facilities shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt, or brick and shall be maintained with materials sufficient to prevent mud, dust, or loose material except as provided below:
(a) Sites within the AR and RR Districts are exempt from this requirement.
(b) In residential areas, all parking spaces and driveways used for parking shall be paved however, this requirement does not extend to driveways not used under any conditions for parking.
(c) In GI Districts, the paving requirement for certain parking and loading areas more than 50 feet back from any public right-of-way may be waived, following review and approval of a specific site plan by the Zoning Administrator.
2. Off-street parking facilities shall be designed and built to prevent the free flow of water onto adjacent properties. Parking lot design which discharges water onto public right-of-way is subject to review and approval by the City Engineer.
c. Landscape and Screening Requirements
Landscape requirements for off=street parking facilities are set forth in Section 173.07.
d. Entrances and Exits
1. Adequate access to each parking facility shall be provided by means of clearly defined and limited driveways or access points. Such driveways shall be designed to direct non-residential traffic away from residential areas.
2. Parking facilities other than driveways for single-family, duplex, two-family, or mobile home residential uses must permit vehicles to enter streets in a forward position.
3. Ninety (90%) degree head-in parking from any public right-of-way shall be permitted only in the DC District, or as part of a specific Planned Development design.
OFF STREET PARKING
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 174-7
e. Design and Pedestrian Access
1. Parking lots providing over 100 stalls should be divided into smaller parking fields not exceeding 50 stalls to reduce the visual impact of large parking expanses. Divisions should be made with landscape strips, peninsulas, or grade changes.
2. Commercial or office parking lots shall be designed to separate pedestrians from vehicles to the maximum degree possible and to provide protected pedestrian paths within parking areas which lead to store, building, r shopping center entrances.
3. Sidewalks and walkways in commercial developments should link to the city’s sidewalk and trail system where available and shall provide a safe pedestrian route from adjacent public sidewalks and trails.
f. Safety Features
1. Parking facilities shall be designed to provide visibility of a between pedestrians and vehicles when circulating within or entering or leaving the facility; and shall not create blind, hidden, or hazardous areas.
2. Circulation patterns shall be designed in accord with accepted standards of traffic engineering and safety.
g. Maintenance
All parking facilities shall be maintained to assure the continued usefulness and compatibility of the facility. Acceptable maintenance includes keeping the facility free of refuse, debris, and litter; maintaining parking surfaces in sound condition; and providing proper care of landscaped areas.
h. Adjustment for Conditional Uses and Planned Mixed Use Projects
1. For uses subject to a Conditional Use Permit approval, the Planning Commission may adjust the minimum requirements of this section, in order to provide design, usability, attractiveness, or protection to adjoining uses in a manner equal to or greater than the minimum requirements of this section.
2. In mixed use projects, different uses may have complementary parking requirements. This can result in a parking requirement that is less than the sum of parking required for each use and added separately. The Planning Commission may authorize an adjustment to the total parking requirement for separate uses located as part of a common development, or for separate uses located on adjacent sites and served by common parking facilities. All parking facilities subject to the mixed use adjustment must me located in a common facility, equally accessible and usable to all served uses.
OFF STREET PARKING
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 174-8
174.07 Bicycle Parking
a. Parking Requirements
1. Each parking facility providing 50 spaces, or more shall provide parking accommodations for bicycles as provided by the Table 174-3:
Table 174-3: Bicycle Parking Requirements
Number of Parking Stalls Required Bicycle Spaces
50-100
5
100-150
8
150-200
10
Over 200
2 additional spaces for each 50 parking stalls
2. Bicycle parking facilities shall include bicycle racks secured to prevent easy removal, bicycle lockers, or bicycle posts or bollards expressly designed for the secure storage.
3. The location of bicycle parking facilities shall be at least as convenient to the main entrance of the primary use as the most convenient automobile parking not reserved for use by disabled people.
4. Bicycle parking should be located to prevent hazards or obstructions to the normal flow of pedestrians into a use.
174.08 Off-Street Loading
a. Loading Requirement
In any district with every building or part thereof hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of ten thousand square feet or more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the same lot with such building, at least one off-street loading space plus one additional such loading space for each twenty thousand square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area, so used, in excess of ten thousand square feet.
b. Design Standards
1. Each loading space shall be at least 12 feet wide by 40 feet long, with a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
2. Loading spaces and access areas shall be paved.
3. Off-street loading areas are subject to the landscaping and buffering requirements for parking facilities set forth in this Section 173.
OFF STREET PARKING
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 174-9
c. Schedule of Loading Spaces
Loading spaces for each use requiring them shall be provided in accord with the minimum requirements set forth in Table 174-4.
Table 174-4: Off-Street Loading Requirements
Gross Floor Area of Use (square feet) Number of Required Loading Spaces
5,000 or less
None
5,001 – 25,000
1
25,001 – 75,000
2
Larger than 75,000
3
174.09 Stacking Requirements for Drive-Through Services
a. Commercial establishments providing drive-in or drive-through services shall provide minimum on-site stacking, distance as provided by Table 174-5.
b. The City Engineer may reduce these requirements for specific projects, provided that the applicant can present a traffic study prepared by a professional traffic engineer demonstrating that such reduction is appropriate to the function of the project. A reduction must be approved by the Public Works Director.
Table 174-5: Off-Street Stacking Requirements
Type of Operation Minimum Stacking Space
Financial Services with Drive-Up Tellers
3 vehicles per window or kiosk
Financial Services with Drive-Up ATM
3 vehicles per ATM station
Self-service or automatic car wash
Entrance: 3 vehicles per bay
Exit: 1 vehicle per bay
Fast food restaurant
Behind menu board: 3 vehicles
Behind first service window: 3 vehicles
Photo processing, dry cleaning, or other drive-up personal services
2 vehicles per services window
Gas stations
2 vehicles per pump
Gated parking lot, community entrance, or overhead door
1 vehicle per gate or door
Note: Minimum vehicle lane shall be 12 feet; Vehicle length = 20 feet.
174.10 Parking for Personal and Recreational Vehicles
a. Applicability
This section permits the parking of personal vehicles on a single lot in a residential district subject to specific conditions. Personal vehicles include: passenger cars; vans; pick-up trucks; camper shells, toppers, and other similar appurtenances
OFF STREET PARKING
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 174-10
intended for attachment to a personal vehicle; trailers under 25 feet in length, and boats under 25 feet in length. Measurement of boats shall include the boat trainer to which it is attached. The minimum height of any Personal Vehicle shall be eight feet from grade. Trucks, tractor cab nits, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats over 25 feet in length and vehicles over ten tons gross empty weight shall be defined as heavy commercial vehicles.
b. Location of Parking
1. Parking is permitted within any enclosed structure when such structure conforms to the regulations of its zoning district.
2. Parking of personal vehicles is permitted on a prepared driveway (outside of an enclosed structure) within the front yard setback but, shall in no case encroach upon the public right-of-way.
3. In Residential Districts, paved and prepared parking must be set back at least two (2) feet from an adjacent side lot line.
4. Parking of personal vehicles may occur in the rear yard setback (outside of an enclosed structure and not on the front yard paved driveway) if the Zoning Administrator determines that such parking conforms to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, meets the following conditions:
(a) The parking space is provided on a prepared surface and connected to a dedicated public right-of-way and/or alley.
(b) The paved parking does not exceed the maximum impervious coverage limit for the lot.
5. Heavy commercial vehicles, including tractor cab units that exceed 10 tons gross vehicle weight shall not be parked on any lot within a residential zoning district. Recreational vehicles shall not be parked within a residential zoning district, except as provided below.
c. Special Provisions for Recreational Vehicles and Boats
Parking and storage of recreational vehicles and boats within residential districts is subject to the following additional conditions. These conditions are in addition to those requirements for the parking of Personal Vehicles.
1. Recreational vehicles and boats must be maintained in a clean, well-kept state.
2. Recreational vehicles and boats equipped with liquefied petroleum gas containers must ensure that such containers must meet the current standards of the Interstate Commerce Commissions, the United States Department of Transportation, or the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Any valves must be closed at all times that the vehicle is not in preparation for immediate use. Leaks in containers must be repaired immediately.
OFF STREET PARKING
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 174-11
3. Recreational vehicles may be parked temporarily by non-paying guests for a maximum of three consecutive days or fourteen days total during any calendar year. Cooking in the recreational vehicle is prohibited at all times.
4. Recreational vehicles and boats may not be permanently connected to utility lines.
5. Recreational vehicles and boats may bot be used for the storage of goods, materials, or equipment other than those items which pertain to the use of the vehicle.
6. If feasible on a lot, recreational vehicles and boats may be parked outside of required front yard and street side yard setbacks.
174.11 Supplementary Regulations: Storage and Parking of Unlicensed or Other Vehicles
The storage of keeping of motor vehicles not having a properly issued current motor vehicle registration and current motor vehicle license plate properly displayed is prohibited on any lot, parcel or tract of land or part thereof, situated within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Glenwood, except for motor vehicles stored within a fully enclosed building or held for sale by a licensed motor vehicle dealer at his/her place of business in a zoning district which permits such use.
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-1
SECTION 175
Sign Regulations
175.01 Purpose
The Sign Regulations provide standards for communicating information in the environment of the City of Glenwood and its jurisdiction. The regulations recognize the need to protect public health, safety and welfare; to maintain the city’s attractive appearance to provide for adequate business identification, advertising, and communication of information; and to encourage the fair enforcement of sign regulations.
175.02 Definition of Terms
The following definitions shall be used for terms contained in this chapter that are not otherwise defined in the Glenwood Municipal Code or in this Zoning Ordinance.
1. Abandoned Sign: A sign, including sign face and supporting structure, which refers to a discontinued business, profession, commodity, service, or other activity or use formerly occupying the site; or which contains no sign copy on all sign faces for a continuous period of six months.
2. Attached Sign: A sign which is structurally connected to a building or depends upon that building for support.
3. Auxiliary Design Elements: Terms which describe secondary characteristics of a sign, including its method of illumination and other features within the abounds of its basic shape.
4. Awning and Awning Sign: A movable shelter supported entirely form the exterior wall of a building. An awning sign is a message printed on such a shelter.
5. Banner: Material with a printed message or graphic secured or mounted from a structure in such a way as to allow wind movement.
6. Building Marker: An historic or commemorative plaque, or a building name or cornerstone carved into a masonry surface.
7. Business Center Identification Sign: A sign which identifies a building or group of commercial buildings in single ownership or control, sharing paring and access.
8. Canopy and Canopy Sign: A temporary or movable shelter, standing alone and not supported by any exterior wall of any building, and composed of non-rigid materials, exclusive of a supporting framework, to be approved by the Planning and Zoning Director. A canopy sign is a message on such shelter.
9. Clearance: The distance from the bottom of a sign face elevated above grade and the grade below.
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-2
10. Detached Sign: A sign which is self-supporting and structurally independent from any building.
11. Directional Sign: A sign which serves only to designate the location or direction of any area or place.
12. Double-Faced Sign: A sign consisting of no more than two parallel faces supported by a single structure.
13. Frontage: The length of a property line of any one premises abutting and parallel to a public street, private way, or court.
14. Ground Sign: A detached on-premise sign built on a freestanding frame, mast, or pole(s) with a clearance no greater than 3 feet.
15. Illuminations: Lighting sources installed for the primary purpose of lighting a specific sign or group of signs.
16. Marquee: A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and extending over public right-of-way.
17. Maximum Permitted Sign Area: The maximum permitted combined area of all signs allowed on a specific property.
18. Monument Sign: An on-premise freestanding sign mounted on a solid base.
19. Moving Sign: A sign which conveys its message through rotating, changing, or animated elements.
20. Nonconforming Sign: A sign that was legally erected prior to the adoption of this chapter but which violates the regulations of this chapter.
21. Off-Premise Identification Sign: A sign which identifies or advertises a name, symbol, operation, merchandise sold, services rendered, or other information relative to the conduct of any entity or business which is not primarily situated at the premises upon which the sign is located.
22. Pole Sign: An on-premise sign built on a freestanding frame, mast or pole(s) with a clearance greater than 3 feet.
23. Portable Sign: Any sign supported by frames or posts rigidly attached to bases not permanently attached to the ground or a building and capable of being moved from place to place.
24. Premise Identification Sign: A sign which pertains to the use of a premises and which contains information about the owner or operator of that use; the type of business being conducted, or the principal brand name of a commodity sold on the premises; other information relative to the conduct of the use; or any other lawful message that the owner or operator of a premise wishes to communicate. This ordinance does not distinguish between the nature or location of the
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-3
product or sire communicated by signs on a specific site, provided that such sign meets the requirements of this and other city ordinances.
25. Premises: A tract of one or more lots or sites which are contiguous and under common ownership or control.
26. Projecting Signs: A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to and projects from a building face.
27. Residential Sign: A small detached or attached sign located on a residential promise, conveying a message communicated by the owner of the property.
28. Roof Sign: Any sign or part of sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof or on top of or above the parapet or cornice of a building.
(a) Integral Roof Sign: A roof sign positioned between an eave line and the peak or highest point on a roof, substantially parallel to the face of a building.
(b) Above-peak Roof Sign: A roof sign positioned above the peak of a roof or above a parapet or cornice.
29. Sign: Symbolic, visual device fixed upon a building, vehicle, structure, or parcel of land which is intended to convey information about a product, business, activity, place, person institution, candidate, or political idea.
30. Sign Type: A functional description of the use of an individual sign. Includes owner identification, advertising, directional, electronic message, and temporary.
31. Street Façade: Any separate external face of a building, including parapet walls and omitted wall lines, oriented to and facing a public street private way, or court. Separate faces oriented in the same direction or within 45 degrees of one another are considered part of the same street façade.
32. Temporary Signs: A sign, flag, banner pennant, or valance constructed of light weight materials which is not permanently attached to building or land, and which is intended for display for a limited period of time.
33. Wall Sign: A sign attached to and parallel with the side of a building.
34. Window Sign: A sign painted on or installed inside a window for the purpose of viewing from outside the premises.
35. Zone Lot: A parcel of land in single-ownership that is large enough to meet the minimum zoning requirements of its zoning district and can provide such yards and other open spaces that are required by the site development regulations.
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-4
175.03 General Sign and Street Graphics Regulations
a. Compliance
Each sign or art of a sign erected within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Glenwood must comply with the provisions of this chapter, other relevant provisions of the City of Glenwood’s Municipal Code, and applicable building codes.
b. Resolution of Conflicting Regulations
This chapter is not meant to repeal or interfere with enforcement of other sections of the City of Glenwood’s Municipal Code. In case of conflicts between Code sections, State or Federal Regulations, the more restrictive regulations shall apply.
c. Prohibited Signs
The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts.
1. Obsolete Signs. Signs that advertise an activity, business, product or service no linger conducted on the premises on which the sign is located.
2. Signs or sign structures which resemble or conflict with traffic control signs or devises, which mislead or confuse persons traveling on public streets or which create a traffic hazard.
3. Banners, balloons, posters. Signs which contain or consist of banners, balloons, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, or other similarly moving devices, except as specifically provided in -. These devices when not part of any sign shall also be prohibited.
4. Signs which create a safety hazard by obstructing the clear view of pedestrians or vehicles, or which obscure official sigs or signals.
5. Private Message Signs on Public Property. Signs displaying private advertising or other private messages located on public property which is being used for public purposes.
6. Flashing Signs. No flashing, blinking, or rotation lights shall be permitted for either permanent or temporary signs. Electronic message boards are not considered flashing signs for the purpose of this ordinance.
7. Moving Signs. No sign shall be permitted any part of which moves by any mechanical or electronic means.
8. Painted Wall Signs. Off-premise signs painted on building walls unless located in a DC District as part of a program for restoration of historic signs.
d. Exempt Signs
The following signs are permitted in any zoning district and are exempt from other provisions of this chapter.
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-5
1. Real Estate Signs. Signs advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises or part of he premises on which the signs are displayed. One non-illuminated sign, not to exceed six square feet, shall be permitted on each premises. Such signs shall not extend higher than four feet above grade level or closer than ten feet to the front property line unless located on the wall of a building. Such signs shall be removed within seven days after the disposition of the premises.
2. Construction Signs. Signs identifying the architect, engineer, contractor or other individuals involved in the construction of a building and such signs announcing the character of the building enterprise or the purpose for which the building is intended but not including product advertising. One non-illuminated sign not to exceed fifty square feet shall be permitted per street frontage. Such sign shall bot extend higher than ten feet above grade level and meet the front yard requirement for a principal structure unless located on the wall of a building on the premises or on a protective barricade surrounding the construction. Such sign shall be removed within one week following completion of construction.
3. Political Campaign Signs. Signs announcing candidates seeking public office or pertinent political issues to be dealt with at a specific, date-certain election. Such signs shall be confined to private property and shall be removed within one week following the election to which they pertain. This requirement for removal shall not affect the right of a property owner to communicate any other message within the requirements or limitations of this ordinance.
4. Street Banners. Signs advertising a public event, providing that specific approval is granted under regulations established by the City Council.
5. Seasonal Decorations. Signs pertaining to recognized national holidays and national observances.
6. Public Signs. Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest, erected by or upon the order of a public officer in the performance of his public duty, such as safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest and other similar signs, including signs designating hospitals, libraries, schools and other institutions or places of public interest or concern.
7. Signs Integrated into Building Design. signs for churches or temples, or names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets or other similar signs when carved into stone, concrete or other building material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the structure to which they are attached.
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-6
8. Window Signs. Such signs which are displayed inside of a window or within a building, provided, however, that neon window signs shall be permitted only in those districts where neon signs are permitted.
9. Works of graphic art painted or applied to building walls which contain no advertising or business identification messages. Restoration of historic advertising signs in the DC District shall be included in this exclusion.
10. Residential signs under 4 square feet in size.
11. Neighborhood or subdivision identification signs under 50 square feet in size.
12. Signs which are not visible from a public right-of-way, private way, or court or from a property other than that on which the sign is installed.
e. Temporary and Civic Signs
1. Temporary or portable signs for grand openings, sales, and special events are permitted in Commercial and Industrial zoning districts, subject to the following requirements.
(a) Such signs are subject to the permit procedures set forth in this section.
(b) The size of such signs does not exceed the limitations set forth in Table 175-3.
(c) No more than one such sign is permitted at any single premises.
(d) Temporary or portable signs may be present at any single premises for a maximum of 30 consecutive or non-consecutive days per year.
2. Temporary signs for non-profit civic campaigns or events, political campaigns, or other non-commercial events are permitted in any zoning district and are exempt from other provisions of this section, subject to the following requirements.
(a) Such signs are installed no earlier than 30 days before the dare of the event or election and removed no later than 7 days after the date of the event or election.
(b) The maximum size of such signs is 32 square feet when located in any residential zoning district; and 100 square feet in any other zoning district.
f. Visions-Clearance Area
No sign may project into or be placed within a vision-clearance area defined by a triangle with legs of forty feet from the point at which the curbs or edges of two intersecting streets, private ways, or alleys, or an intersecting street, private way, alley, or driveway, meet.
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-7
175.04 General Regulations: Basic Design Elements for Signs
General sign regulations shall be as set forth in this section.
a. Conformance Required
Except as may be hereinafter specified, no sign shall be erected, placed maintained, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered which does not comply with all off the regulations established by this title.
b. Maintenance
All signs shall be maintained in a good state of repair, including, but not limited to, the structural components, the lighting, if any, the portion attaching the sign to the ground or structure, and the surface features.
c. Nonconformance and Amortization
Where a sign at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this title that could not be built under the terms of this title by reason of restrictions on area, use, height, setback, or other characteristics of the sign or its location on the lot, such sign may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. No such sign may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity; however, reasonable repairs and alterations may be permitted.
2. Should such a sign be destroyed by any means to an extent of sixty percent or more of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this title.
3. Within any zoning district, all signage shall comply fully with the provisions of this Ordinance, unless otherwise provided, within fifteen years after the effective date of this Ordinance.
d. Wall Signs and Graphics
Wall signs and graphics are subject to the following general regulations.
1. A wall sign shall not extend more than 30 inches from the wall to which it is attached.
2. A wall sign must be parallel to the wall to which it is attached.
3. A wall sign may not extend beyond the corner of the wall to which it is attached, except where attached to another wall sign, it may extend to provide for the attachment.
4. A wall sign may not extend beyond its building’s roof line.
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-8
5. A wall sign attached to a building on its front property line may encroach upon public right-of-way by no more than 18 inched. Such a wall sign shall provide minimum clearance of eight feet, six inches.
6. For the purpose of calculating permitted sign areas pursuant to this chapter, signs painted on the walls o buildings shall be considered wall signs.
7. Where permitted, canopy signs are counted as wall signs when calculating total permitted sign area.
e. Projecting Signs and Graphics
Projecting signs and graphics are subject to the following general regulations.
1. The maximum projection of any projecting sign shall be as follows:
(a) 3 feet over public sidewalks less than 12 feet wide;
(b) 5 feet over public sidewalks 12 feet wide or more, or over private property.
2. A projecting sign may be no closer than two feet from the vertical plane of the inside curb line.
3. Each projecting sign must maintain at least the following vertical clearances:
(a) 12 over sidewalks; except that a canopy may reduce its vertical clearance to 7 feet, 6 inches.
(b) 15 feet outside of parking areas or driveways, but within three feet of such areas; or within 50 feet of the right-of-way lines formed by a street intersection;
(c) 15 feet over parking lots;
(d) 18 feet over alleys or driveways.
4. No projecting sign extending three feet or more from a property line may be located within 25 feet of any other projecting sign extending three feet or more from a property line.
5. Projecting signs must minimize visible support structure and may not expose guy wires, cables, turnbuckles, angle iron, or other similar external support structure.
f. Pole Signs
All pole signs shall be constructed of metal or masonry, unless a conditional use is granted for any other material.
1. Each pole sign must maintain at least the following vertical clearances:
(a) 8 feet, 6 inches over sidewalks;
(b) 10 feet outside of parking areas or driveways, but within three feet of such areas; or within 50 feet of the right-of-way lines formed by a street intersection.
(c) 14 feet over parking lots;
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-9
(d) 18 feet over alleys or driveways.
2. Permitted pole signs may revolve at a rate not to exceed six (6) revolutions per minute.
g. Roof Signs
Roof signs are subject to the following regulations:
1. Where permitted, integral roof signs may be used interchangeably with wall signs.
2. Integral roof signs may not exceed the permitted height for pole signs.
3. An integral roof sign must be mounted parallel to the wall of the building to which it is attached.
h. Detached Signs
Any wooden detached signs are by conditional use only.
175.05 General Regulations: Other Design Elements
a. Illumination
Lighting, when installed, must be positioned in such a manner that light is not directed on to an adjoining property or onto a public street or highway.
b. Marquees and Marquee Signs
Signs placed on, attached to, or constructed on a marquee are subject to the maximum projection and clearance regulations of projecting signs.
c. Banners
1. A banner sign projecting from a building may not exceed the wall height of the building.
2. Maximum projection for any banner is five feet with a minimum clearance of ten feet.
3. Maximum size of a banner is twice the permitted size of a projecting sign or 120 square feet, whichever is less.
d. Clocks
For the purposes of this chapter, clocks are not considered a moving sign.
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-10
175.06 General Permit Procedures
a. Applicability
1. A sign permit, approved by the zoning administrator, shall be required before the erection, construction, alteration, placing, or locating of all signs conforming with this title.
2. A permit shall not be required for repainting without changing permanent wording, composition, or colors, or nonstructural repairs.
b. Plans Submittal
A copy if plans and specification shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for each sign regulated by this title. Such plans shall show sufficient details about size of the sign, location and materials to be used and such other data as may be required for the zoning administrator to determine compliance with this title.
c. Appeals
Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the zoning administrator to approve or disapprove a sign permit, as provided by this title, any appeal such decision to the Board of Adjustment as provided by Section 177 of this title.
d. Application Fees
Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by any applicable fees, which shall be established by the City Council from time to time by resolution.
175.07 Method of Measurement for Regulators
a. Maximum Permitted Sign Area
Maximum permitted sign area for a premise is set forth as a numerical limit or as a function of the frontage of the premises on a street or private way. For properties with frontage on more than one street or private way, the total frontage shall be calculated as the longest frontage plus one-half the length of all additional frontages.
b. Sign Area
1. Sign area includes the entire area within the perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the sign, excluding any structure essential for support or service of the sign, or architectural elements of the building.
2. The area of double-faced signs is calculated on the largest face only.
3. The sign area for ground signs, monument signs, and architectural sign bands is calculated as the area enclosing the extreme limits of the copy only.
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-11
4. When a sign is “individual letters” mounted to a wall, the area will be calculated by using 50% of the area within the perimeter enclosing the letters.
c. Height
The height of a sign is measured from the average grade level below the sign to the topmost point of the sign or sign structure.
d. Setback
The setback of a sign is measured from the property line to the line projected to the ground plane of the nearest portion of the sign.
175.08 Permitted Sign Types by Zoning Districts
Table 175-1 sets forth the sign types permitted within each zoning district of the City of Glenwood.
175.09 Auxiliary Design Elements
Table 175-2 sets forth auxiliary design elements permitted within each zoning district of the City of Glenwood.
175.10 Maximum Permitted Sign Area
Table 175-3 sets forth the maximum sign area permitted within each zoning district of the City of Glenwood.
175.11 Permitted Signs by Numbers, Dimensions, and Location
Table 175-4 Sets forth the maximum permitted numbers of signs per premise; the maximum permitted dimensions of each sign, and the required setbacks for detached signs.
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-12
Table 175-1: Permitted Signs by Type and Zoning Districts
SIGN TYPES AR
RR R-1
R-2
R-3 R-4
MH UC
CC DC
GC HC
BP LI
GI Detached Signs
Residential P
P P
P P
P P
P N
N N
N N
N
Premise Identification P
P(C) P(C)
P(C) P(C)
P P
P P
P P
P P
P
Incidental P(C)
P(C) P(C)
P(C) P(C)
P P
P P
P P
P P
P
Ground P
P(C) P(C)
P(C) P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P
Pole N
N N
N N
N P
P P
P P
P P
P Attached Signs
Awning N
N N
N N
N P
P P
P P
P P
P
Banner N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N
Building Marker P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P
Canopy N
N N
N N
P P
P P
P P
P P
P
Incidental P(C)
P(C) P(C)
P(C) P(C)
P P
P P
P P
P P
P
Marquee N
N N
N N
P P
P P
P P
P P
P
Projecting N
N N
N N
N P
P P
P P
P P
P
Roof, Integral N
N N
N N
N P
P P
P P
P P
P
Roof, Above Peak N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N P
P
Wall P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P P
P
Window N
N N
N N
N P
P P
P P
P P
P Miscellaneous
Flag P
P P
P P
P
P P
P P
P P
P
Portable N
N N
N N
N
N N
N P
N N
N
Billboard P
P N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N
Off-Premise
Identification Sign P
N N
N N
N
N N
N N
N P
P
P: Permitted for All Uses P(C): Permitted for Civic Uses N: Not Permitted
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-13
Table 175-2 Permitted Signs by Type and Zoning Districts
SIGN TYPES AG
RR R-1
R-2
R-3 R-4
R-5 UC
CC DC
GC HC
BP LI
GI Design Element Illumination
Indirect P(C)
P(C) P(C)
P(C) P(C)
P P
P P
P P
P P
P
Direct N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N
Internal P(C)
P(C) P(C)
P(C) P(C)
P P
P P
P P
P P
P
Neon N
N N
N N
N P
P P
P P
P P
P
Flashing N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N
Flame N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N
Bare Bulb N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N Other
Electronic Information N
N N
N N
N P
P P
P P
P P
P
Moving N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N
Rotating N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N N
N
P: Permitted for All Uses P(C): Permitted for Civic Uses N: Not Permitted
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-14
Table 175-3: Permitted Signs by Maximum Permitted Area and District
This Maximum Permitted Area for all signs on a premise excluding incidental signs, building marker signs, and flags shall not exceed the lesser of the following: ZONING DISTRICT AR RR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH UC CC DC GC HC BP LI GI
Square Feet of Signage per Linear Foot of Frontage
N/A
N/A
N/A
0.75
1.50
1.5
2.0
1.5
2.0 Maximum Total Square Feet Note 1 Note 2 Note 3 300 Note 4 500 Note 5 200 700 500 700
Note 1: 200 square feet for civic or commercial uses, 4 square feet for residential uses, including home occupations.
Note 2: 50 Square feet for project identification signs: 32 square feet for civic uses, 2 square feet for residential uses, including home occupations, billboards – max square feet.
Note 3: 32 square feet for civic uses, 50 square feet for project identification signs for multi-family or mobile home developments and for non-residential uses when permitted, 2 square feet for residential uses, including home occupations.
Note 4: Maximum limits apply to non-residential premises only. On premises with primary residential use, 50 square feet for project identification signs for multi-family developments, 4 square feet for residential uses, including home occupations.
Note 5: One Business Center Identification Sign with a maximum area of 150 square feet is permitted in addition to the Maximum Total Square Feet established here, subject to the regulations set forth by Table 175-4.
General Note: Developments within MU Mixed Use and PD Planned Development Overlay District shall submit individual sign plans as part of the application process for approval of the district. Development in a PD Planned Development Overlay District shall comply with the size and distribution requirements for their underlaying zoning district.
SIGN REGULATIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 175-15
Table 175-4: Permitted Signs by Numbers, Dimensions, and Locations
Each Individual sign shall comply with the regulations for maximum quantity, maximum size, minimum setbacks, and height limits shown in this table: ZONING DISTRICT AR RR R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MH UC CC DC GC HC BP LI GI
DETACHED SIGNS
Number Permitted
1
1
1
1
N/A
1
N/A
N/A
N/A
Per Premise
Per Feet of Frontage of
Property
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1 per
300
N/A
1 per
300
1 per
300
1 per
300
Maximum Size* (sq. ft.)
100*
X
X
100
300
100
300
200
300
Maximum Height (feet) of
Structure Above Ground
25
10
10
20
25
25
35
20
35
Front Yard Setback (feet)
25
5
10
10
10
0
5
5
0
ATTACHED SIGNS
Side Yard Setback (feet)
10
10
10
10
5
0
5
5
0
Maximum Size* (sq. ft.)
100
X
X
50
N/A
N/A
300
300
300
And % of Street Façade
N/A
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
X: See Table 175-3 for maximum sign sizes.
Note 1: In addition to its total permitted sign area, each premises used for a business center may have one detached center identification sign, subject to the following conditions:
1. The maximum area for a center identification sign shall be 150-square feet.
2. No center identification sign shall be within 300-feet of any other center identification sign or within 150-feet of any other detached sign on the same or adjacent premises.
3. The sign shall display no more than the name and location of the business center.
4. Each sign shall be subject to all other regulations for detached signs or graphics set forth in this section.
General Note: Developments within MU Mixed-Use and PD Planned Development Overlay District shall submit individual sign plans as part of the application process for approval of the district. Developments in a PD Planned Development Overlay District shall comply with the size and distribution requirements for their underlying zoning district.
NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT AND USES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 176-1
SECTION 176
Nonconforming Development and Uses
176.01 Purpose
The purposes of the Nonconforming Development regulations are:
a. To allow for reasonable use of legally created lots of record which do not meet current minimum requirements for their respective zoning districts.
b. To provide for reasonable use of legally constructed structures which do not meet current sire development regulations for their respective zoning district.
c. To allow for the reasonable continuation of legally established uses which do not meet current use regulations for their respective zoning districts.
d. To limit the continuation and provide for the gradual replacement of nonconforming uses.
176.02 Regulations Additive
Regulations for nonconforming uses are in addition to regulations for nonconforming structures. In the event of a conflict, the most restrictive regulations shall apply.
176.03 Nonconforming Lots
a. Pre-Existing Lots of Record
Nonconforming lots of record existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall be exempt, unless otherwise provided, from the minimum lot area and lot width requirements of each zoning district. Such lots may be developed with any use allowed by the regulations for the district and must comply with all other site development regulations set forth by the Zoning Regulations.
b. Reductions Due to Public Acquisition
If a portion of a legally existing lot in any district tis acquired for public use, the remainder of this lot shall be considered a conforming lot.
176.04 Nonconforming Structures
These regulations apply to buildings and structures which were constructed legally under regulations in effect before the effective date of these Regulations.
a. Continuation
A lawful nonconforming structure existing on the effective date of this section may be continued, repaired, maintained, or altered, subject to the provisions of this Section.
NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT AND USES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 176-2
b. Additions or Enlargements to Nonconforming Structures
1. A lawful nonconforming structure may be added to or enlarged if the enlargement if the addition satisfies one or more of the following conditions:
(a) The enlargement of addition, when considered independently of the existing building, complies with all applicable setback, height, off-street parking, and landscaping requirements.
(b) The nonconforming building and impervious surface coverages on the site are not increased and the building, after the addition, conforms to height and off-street parking regulations applicable to its zoning district.
(c) The addition projects no further into a required side yard setback than the existing building; the length of the side wall of the addition is the smaller of 25 feet or 50 percent of the length of the existing nonconforming side wall; and the enlarged building complies with building and impervious coverage, front and rear yard setbacks, and height regulations applicable to its zoning district.
2. No permitted addition to a nonconforming structure may pace a wall within ten feet of a window of an adjacent pre-existing residential structure.
c. Moving of Nonconforming Structures
A lawful nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved in whole or in part to another locations on its lot unless every part of the structure conforms to all site development regulations applicable to its zoning district.
d. Repair of Nonconforming Structures
A lawful nonconforming building damaged by fire, explosion, storm or other calamity, except flood damages, may be repaired and reconstructed provided there is no increase in the degree of nonconformity and that the cost of the reconstruction does not exceed 50% of the value of the building prior to the damage.
e. Conversion of a Conforming Building
A conforming building shall not be changed in any way that will result in a nonconforming development.
f. Applicability of landscaping and Screening Regulations
A pre-existing structure, building or development shall be exempt from Section 173, Landscaping and Screening Regulations. However, any expansion of such structure, building, or development or and adjacent new development onto property that is or becomes vacant on or after the effective dare of these Regulations shall be subject to Section 173.
NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT AND USES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 176-3
g. Amortization of Nonconforming Development
The following nonconformances must be brought into compliance with the provisions of this ordinance within specified periods.
1. Fences, walls, and foliage which violate the vision clearance provisions of this ordinance shall be made conforming within one year of the effective date of the ordinance.
2. Any fences or screens that are inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance shall be made conforming within one year of the effective date of the ordinance.
3. Nonconforming storage operations, including vehicle storage, salvage services, or similar uses made conforming within two years of the effective date of the ordinance.
176.05 Nonconforming Uses
a. Continuation of Nonconforming Uses
1. Any nonconforming use lawfully existing on the effective date of these regulations may continue, subject to the limitations of this Section.
2. Whenever the use of a premise becomes nonconforming through a subsequent change in the zoning ordinance or zoning district boundaries, such use may be continued or changed to another nonconforming use of the same or lesser intensity with the approval of the City Council, following a public hearing and recommendation of the Planning Commission.
b. Change and Amortization of Nonconforming Uses
A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or lesser intensity, as measured by the Intensity Rating in the Use Matrix and by the category of use type. For the purpose of measuring nonconforming use rights, the hierarchy of Intensity Ratings ascends from low to moderate to high to intensive. The hierarchy of uses ascends from agricultural to residential to office to commercial to industrial and transportation. For example, a nonconforming commercial use in a residential district with an Intensity Rating (IR) of H may be converted to another commercial use with a provided an IR of H, M, or L. However, such a use may not be converted to an industrial use type regardless of its IR.
c. Enlargement of Nonconforming Uses
A building or structure housing a lawful nonconforming use may not be added to or enlarged.
NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT AND USES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 176-4
d. Abandonment of Nonconforming Use
1. If any structure or property used as a lawful nonconforming use becomes vacant or unused for a continuous period of twelve months, any subsequent use must conform to all use regulations applicable to the property’s zoning district.
2. If a structure housing a nonconforming use converts to a conforming use, it forfeits any further claim to nonconforming use rights.
e. Allowance for Repairs
Repairs and maintenance of a structure occupied by a nonconforming use may be made, provided that no structural alterations are made other than those required by law.
f. Damage or Destruction of Structures
Should a structure occupied by a lawful nonconforming use be damaged to the extent that the cost of restoration exceeds 60 percent of the replacement cost of the structures=, the nonconforming use shall no longer be permitted.
g. Nonconforming Uses and Conditional Use Permits
A lawful pre-existing use which would require a Conditional Use Permit in its zoning district shall be presumed to have the appropriate Permit and shall be considered a conforming use., The use shall be subject to the regulations governing lapses or revocation of Permits, set forth in Section 177.
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-1
SECTION 177
Administration and Procedures
177.01 Purpose
The Administration and Procedures Provisions establish the methods for implementation of the Zoning Regulations. These provisions include procedures for reviewing specific uses within certain zoning districts amending the Zoning Regulations; and granting variances.
177.02 Site Plan Review Procedures
a. Purpose
The Site Review Procedure provides for the administrative review in addition to plan review required by other sections of the Glenwood Municipal Code of projects that have potentially significant effects on traffic circulation or a significant effect on land uses in adjacent neighborhoods. The procedure provides for review and evaluation of site development features and possible mitigation unfavorable effects on surrounding property.
b. Administration
The Zoning Administration, or his/her designee shall review, evaluate, and act on all site plans submitted pursuant to this procedure. An applicant may appeal a denial of any application to the Board of Adjustment.
c. Uses Requiring Site Plan Review
All uses indicated as subject to Site Plan Review in Table 177-1 are subject to the provisions of this section, unless otherwise subject to a Conditional Use Permit procedure for specific zoning districts.
d. Application Requirements
An application for a Site Plan Review may be filed by the owner(s) of a property or the owners’ authorized agent with the Zoning Administrator. The application shall include the following information:
1. Name and address of the applicant.
2. Owner, address, and legal description of the property.
3. A description of the nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use.
4. A site plan, drawn to a scale sufficient to permit adequate review and dimensioned ad necessary, showing the following information:
(a) The date, scale, north point, title, name of owner, and name of person preparing the site plan.
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-2
(b) The location and dimensions of boundary lines, easements, and required yards and setbacks of existing and proposed buildings and site improvements.
(c) The location, size and use of proposed and existing structures on the site.
(d) The location of all proposed site improvements, including parking and loading areas, pedestrian and vehicular access, sewers, sidewalks, utilities, service areas, fencing, screening landscaping, and lightning.
(e) Location of any major site feature, including drainage and contours at no greater than five feet intervals.
(f) Any other information that may be required for review by the Zoning Administrator, and his/her designee.
e. Administrative Action and Appeal
The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee must act upon each complete application within ten working days of filing. An applicant may appeal a denial to the Board of Adjustment within ten days of the action. The Board of Adjustment shall consider the appeal at the first available meeting after the filing of the appeal.
f. Review and Evaluation
1. The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee (or the Board of Adjustment in cases of appeal), shall review and approve the sire plan based on the criteria established in Table 177-1 and conformance with applicable regulation sin these Zoning Regulations.
2. The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee (or Board of Adjustment in cases of appeal), shall make the following findings before approval of the site plan:
(a) The proposed development, together with any necessary modifications, is compatible with the criteria established in Table 177-1.
(b) Any required modifications to the site plan are reasonable and are the minimum necessary to minimize potentially unfavorable effects.
(c) The site plan conforms to the Zoning Regulations.
g. Modification of Site Plan
The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee (or the Board of Adjustment in cases of appeal), may require modification of a site plan as a prerequisite for approval. Required modifications may be more restrictive than base district regulations and may include but not be limited to, additional landscaping or screening; installation of erosion control measures; improvement of access or circulation; rearrangement of structures on the sire; or other modifications deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, community character property values, and/or aesthetics.
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-3
h. Terms and Modification of Approval
1. A Site Plan Approval shall become void one year after the date of approval, unless the applicant receives a Building Permit and diligently carries out development prior to the expiration of this period.
2. The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, may approve an application to modify a previously approved site plan if he/she determines that he modification does not affect findings related to the criteria set forth in Table 177-1.
3. The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee may revoke a Site Plan Approval if he/she determines that the development is not complying with the terms and conditions of the approval. Such revocation may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
i. Approval to Run with Land
An approval pursuant to this section shall run with the land until the expiration date of such approval.
177.03 Conditional Use Permit Procedure
a. Purpose
The Conditional Use Permit Procedure provides for public review and discretionary Planning Commission approval for uses within zoning districts which have unusual site development or operating characteristics that could adversely affect surrounding properties.
b. Administration
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the administration of the Conditional Use Permit Procedure. The Planning Commission shall review, evaluate, and approve of each application. An applicant may appeal a denial of any application pursuant to this section to the City Council. In addition, a valid protest petition, meeting the requirements set forth in Section 177.04.d.3 of these Regulations shall also initiate an appeal to the City Council.
c. Application Requirements
An application for a Conditional Use Permit may be filed with the Zoning Administrator by the owner(s) of a property or the owners’ authorized agent. The application shall include the following information:
1. Name and address of the applicant.
2. Owner, address and legal description of the property.
3. A description of the nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use.
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-4
4. Any graphic information, including sire plans, elevations, other drawings, or other materials determined by the Zoning Administrator to the necessary to describe the proposed use to approving agencies.
d. Approval Process
The Planning Commission, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each Conditional Use Permit and following such public hearing, shall act on the application.
e. Appeal Process
1. A denial by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council by an applicant within ten days of the action. The appeal request must be submitted in writing to the Zoning Administrator.
2. An approval by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council by the submittal of a valid protest petition, meeting the requirements set forth in Section 177.04.d.3 of these Regulations, within ten days of the action.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the application and appeal documents, along with his/her recommendation and the record of the Planning Commission action, to the City Council.
4. The City Council, after publication and public hearing, shall act on the appeal.
f. Criteria of Review
The Planning Commission shall review and approve the site plan based on the criteria established in Table 177-1 and conformance with applicable regulations in these Zoning Regulations.
g. Scope of Approval
1. The Planning Commission and/or City Council, in cases of appeal, may, at their discretion, apply a Conditional Use Permit to a specific owner or applicant. The approving agencies may establish special site development or operational regulations as a condition for approval of a Conditional Use Permit.
2. The Planning Commission or City Council, in cases of appeal, shall not grant a Conditional Use Permit for any home occupation/home=based business which is otherwise prohibited under Section 171.11 of these Regulations.
h. Lapse and Revocation of Permit
1. A Conditional Use Permit shall become void two years after its effective date if the applicant has not carried out development or occupancy during that period.
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-5
2. The Planning Commission may revoke a Conditional Use Permit should the operation of the use subject to such to such permit violate the conditions under which the permit was granted.
i. Previously Approved Permits
Any special use approved under regulations in effect before the effective date of these Regulations shall be considered to have a valid Conditional Use Permit, subject to requirements imposed at the time of its approval.
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-6
Table 177-1: Criteria for Site Plan Review and Conditional Use Permits
CRITERIA
APPLIES
TO
LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
Site Plan Review
Conditional Use Permit
Development Density
Site area per unit or floor area ratio should be similar to surrounding uses if not separated by major natural or artificial features.
X
HEIGHT AND SCALE
Height and Bulk
Development should minimize differences in height and building size form surrounding structures. Differences should be justified by urban design considerations.
X
X
Setbacks
Development should respect pre-existing setbacks in surrounding area. Variations should be justified by site or operating characteristics.
X
X
Building Coverage
Building coverage should be similar to that of surrounding development if possible. Higher coverage should be mitigated by landscaping or sire amenities.
X
X
SITE DEVELOPMENT
Frontage
Project frontage along a street should be similar to the lot width.
X
X
Parking and Internal Circulation
Parking should serve all structures with minimal conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles.
X
X
All structures must be accessible to public safety vehicles.
Development must have access to adjacent public streets and ways. Internal circulation should minimize conflicts and congestion at public access points.
X
X
Landscaping
Landscaping should be integral to the development, providing street landscaping, breaks in uninterrupted paved areas, and buffering where required by surrounding land uses. Parts of sire with sensitive environmental features of natural drainageways should be preserved.
X
X
BUILDING DESIGN
Architectural design and building materials should be compatible with surrounding areas or highly visible locations
X
Operating Characteristics
Traffic Capacity
Project should not obstruct traffic on adjacent streets. Compensating improvements will be required to mitigate impact on street system operations.
X
X
External Traffic Effects
Project design should direct non-residential traffic away from residential areas.
X
X
Operating Hours
Projects with long operating hours must minimize effects on surrounding residential areas.
X
X
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-7
Table 177-1: Criteria for Site Plan Review and Conditional Use Permits (continued)
CRITERIA
APPLIES
TO
OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS
Site Plan Review
Conditional Use Permit
Outside Storage
Outside storage areas must be screened from surrounding streets and less intensive land uses
X
X
PUBLIC FACILITIES
Sanitary Waste Disposal
Developments within 300 feet of a public sanitary sewer must connect to sewer system. Individual disposal systems, if permitted, shall not adversely affect public health, safety, or welfare.
X
X
Sanitary sewer must have adequate capacity to serve development.
X
X
Storm Water Management
Development should handle storm water adequately to prevent overloading of public storm water management system.
X
X
Development should not inhibit development of other properties.
X
X
Development should not increase probability of erosion flooding landslides, or other run-off related effects.
X
X
Utilities
Project must be served by utilities.
X
X
Rural estate subdivision should be located in the designated areas which can accommodate utility and infrastructure installation consistent with the need to protect the environment and public health.
X
X
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Projects should be consistent with the City of Glenwood’s Comprehensive Development Plan.
X
X
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-8
177.04 Amendment Procedure
a. Purpose
The Amendment Procedures describe the methods by which may be made in the text of the Zoning Regulations (text amendment) and/or the official boundaries of zoning districts (rezoning).
b. Initiation of Amendments
1. Text amendments may be initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council.
2. Rezoning may be initiated by a property owner of authorized agent; the Planning Commission; or the City Council.
c. Rezoning Application Requirements
An application for a rezoning may be filed with the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee. The application shall include the following information:
1. Name and address of the applicant.
2. Owner, address and legal description of the property.
3. A description of the reason for the rezoning application and the nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use.
4. Any graphic information, including sire plans, elevations, other drawings, or other materials determined by the Zoning Administrator to be necessary to describe the proposed use to approving agencies.
d. Amendment Process
1. The Planning and Zoning Board shall consider each proposed text or rezoning amendment at a scheduled Planning and Zoning Board meeting when notice of such proposal is set forth on the meeting agenda and shall recommend action to the City Council. A vote for an amendment by a majority of all Planning and Zoning Board members shall constitute a recommendation to the City Council.
2. The City Council, after publication and public hearing, shall act on the proposed amendment. On applications which receive a recommendation of approval from the Planning Commission, a majority vote of these members either elected or appointed to the City Council is required for approval. On applications which receive a recommendation of denial from the Planning Commission, a majority vote plus one of those members either elected or appointed to the City Council is required for approval.
3. Protest: If a valid protest petition opposing an amendment is filed with the City Clerk by eligible property owners, pursuant to applicable sections of the Code of Iowa, majority vote plus one of those members either elected or appointed to
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-9
the City Council is required for approval. A valid protest petition must meet the following criteria.
(a) Submission of the petition in the office of the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after the conclusion of the public hearing on the amendment by the Planning Commission.
(b) Notarized signatures by at least one of the following:
i. The owner or owners of at least 20% of the property proposed for rezoning.
ii. The owners of 20% of the total area, expecting public rights-of-way and public property, within the zoning jurisdiction of the city and within 300 feet of the proposed rezoning.
e. Required Notice and Publication
Prior to consideration of amending, supplementing, changing, modifying, or repealing these regulations by the governing body, notice of public hearings shall be provided by two of the three following methods, as determined by the City:
1. Notice by Posted Sign: A notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property upon which action is pending. Such notice shall be not less than eighteen inches in height and twenty-four inches in width with a white background and black letters not less than one and one-half inches in height. Such posted notice shall be so placed upon such premises that is easily visible for the street and shall be so posted at least ten days before the date of such hearing. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, mutilate, destroy or change such posted notice prior to such hearings.
2. Publication: At least ten days before the date of hearing, the City Clerk shall have published in a daily newspaper having a general circulation in the City of Glenwood a Notice of the time, place and subject matter of such hearing.
3. Notification by Mail: At least ten days prior to the date of hearing, the party initiating the rezoning request shall present the City Clerk a certified address list of those persons who own property within 300 feet of the subject site. The City Clerk shall mail notice of the time., place and subject matter of the hearing to such property owners at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. In addition, the City of Glenwood shall provide for the following:
(a) Notifications by Mail of School District: The City Clerk shall mail notice of the time, place and subject matter of any Planning Commission rezoning hearings to the School District Administrative Official and/or Chair of the Board of Education, within whose boundaries the subject site is located.
(b) The notification shall be submitted to the applicable official and/or Board of Education at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such meeting.
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-10
(c) Each school district to be affected by such rezoning proposal shall be notified.
177.05 Building Permits and Certificates of Zoning Compliance
a. Administration and Enforcement
The Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce these regulations. The City Council may direct other persons to assist him/her.
If the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall find that any of the provisions of these regulations are being violated, he/she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He/she shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by these regulations to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of it provisions.
b. Building Permits Required
No sign, retaining wall, paved or prepared surfaces, buildings or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit therefore, issued by the administrative official. No building permit shall be issued by the administrative official except in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, unless he/she receives a written order from the Board of Adjustment in the form of an administrative review, special exception, or variance as provided by these regulations.
c. Application for Building Permit
All applications for building permits shall include plans if applicable in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration.
The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the administrative official, including existing or proposed building or alterations; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of these regulations. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the administrative official, after he/she shall have marked such copy wither as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. One copy of the plans, similar marked, shall be retained by the administrative official.
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-11
d. Certificates of Zoning Compliance for New, Altered or Non-Conforming Uses
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefore by the administrative official stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of these regulations.
e. Expiration of Building Permit
1. If the work described in any building permit has not begun within 90 days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall be canceled be the administrative official; and written l be given to the persons affected.
2. The project contemplated by such building permit must be substantially complete, as determined in the sole discretion of the Zoning Administrator by _______________. 20_____. Failure to meet substantial completion by such date shall result in the revocation of the building permit unless an extension of the substantial completion date is granted by the Glenwood City Council for good cause shown.
f. Construction and Use to be as Provided in Applications, Plans, Permits, and Certificates of Zoning Compliance
Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the administrative official authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of these regulations, and punishable as provided by Section hereof.
177.06 Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses
a. The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of zoning compliance, appeals, and other matters pertaining to these regulations.
b. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the office of the administrative official and may be altered or amended only by the City Council.
c. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-12
177.07 Board of Adjustment
a. Establishment
1. A Board of Adjustment is hereby established to provide relief in situations of hardship or to hear appeals as provided by this Section. The Board shall consist of seven (7) regular members.
2. Five (5) members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Two members shall be appointed by the Mills County Board of Supervisors and shall be residents of the area outside the city limits over which the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Glenwood is extended beyond its corporate limits under 414.23 of the Iowa Code, as from time to time amended. All members should be appointed for five-year overlapping terms and are removeable for cause by the City Council after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant.
3. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules and regulations in accordance with these regulations and the laws of the State of Iowa pursuant in Sections 414.7 through 414.14 of the Code of Iowa. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings and records shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The Board shall keep a record of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
b. Procedure for Appeals
1. Appeals shall be made to the Board of Adjustment through the office of the Zoning Administrator in written form as determined by the Zoning Administrator in written form as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and shall decide the appeal within 30 days of the date of the public hearing. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril in life or property.
2. The Board shall provide a minimum of ten (10) days’ notice of a public hearing on any question before it. Notice of the hearing shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the near the property on which the application has been made by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Glenwood; and by written notice to the appealing party.
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-13
3. Upon the public hearing, and party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. A concurring vote of four out of seven members of such Board as so composed shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision in determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the appellant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any zoning ordinance or to affect any variation in such regulations.
4. No order of finding of the Board shall become effective until the eighth day following the posting of a copy of such ruling or finding, duly attested by the secretary of the Board upon a readily visible bulletin board in the City Hall and transmittal of duplicate copies to the Clerk and to the Zoning Administrator.
177.08 Powers and Duties of the Board of Adjustment
The Board of Adjustment shall have only the following powers and duties:
a. Administrative Review
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decisions or determination made by the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.
b. Interpretation of Zoning Map
To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of any zoning regulation, request for interpretation of any map.
c. Variances to Relieve Hardships Relating to Property
To authorize, upon appeal, variances from the strict application of these regulations where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of the specific piece of property at the time of enactment of the zoning regulations; or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situations or condition of such piece or property, such strict application would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardships upon the owner of such property.
1. Requirements for Grant of a Variance. No such variance shall be authorized by the Board unless it finds that:
(a) The appeal falls within the jurisdiction of the Board.
(b) All parties directly in interest have been notified of the proceedings.
(c) The grant of the variances would not have the effect of changing the zoning of the property.
(d) Strict application of the zoning regulations will produce undue hardship and prevent the reasonable use of the property.
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-14
(e) The alleged hardship producing the variance request was not the result of a willful act of the applicant or other person maintaining an interest in the property or immediate predecessors in interest.
(f) Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and in the same vicinity.
(g) The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance.
(h) The granting of such variance is based upon reason of demonstrable hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of convenience, profit, or caprice.
(i) The condition or situation of the property concerned is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to these Zoning Regulations.
(j) The granting of the variance will not cause substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of any Ordinance or Resolution.
2. Findings by Board. The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of Section 177.09 have been met by the applicant for a variance.
3. Conditions of Grant of Variance:
(a) In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with these regulations. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable under Section 177.14 of these regulations.
(b) Under no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of these regulations in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of these regulations in said district.
(c) No non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and no permitted or non-conforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
d. Board has Powers of Zoning Administrator on Appeals: Reversing Decisions of Zoning Administrator
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decisions, or
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-15
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the Zoning Administrator form whom the appeal is taken.
The Concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision, or determination of the administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under these regulations, or to affect any variations in the application of these regulations.
177.09 Appeals from the Board of Adjustment
Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, officer, department, board or bureau of the city aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may seek review of such decision by the District Court for the County in the manner provided by the lays of the State of Iowa.
177.10 Duties of Zoning Administrator, Board of Adjustment, City Council, and Courts on Matters of Appeal
a. It is the intent of these regulations that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning Administrator, and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Administrator, and that recourse from the decisions of Board of Adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law.
b. Under these regulations the City Council shall have only the duties (1) of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments, or the repeal of these regulations as provided by law (2) of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in Section 177 of these regulations, and (3) of directing a city officer to appeal a decision of the Board of Adjustment.
177.11 Severability Clause
Should any section or provision of this resolution be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the resolution as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to unconstitutional or invalid.
177.12 Complaints Regarding Violations
Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is allowed to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaints stating fully the causes and basis
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 177-16
thereof shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. He/she shall record properly such complaint immediately, investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this resolution.
177.13 Penalties for Violation
a. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of the Zoning Regulations of the City of Glenwood, Iowa, is hereby declared to be a common nuisance and subject to penalties and abatement measures authorized under present and future laws.
b. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, an architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
c. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as in necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
SUBDIVISIONS REGULATION: BASIC CONDITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 178-1
SECTION 178
Subdivisions: Basic Conditions
178.01 Purpose
The Purposes of his section are to:
a. Serve the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city and residents of Glenwood and its surrounding jurisdictions.
b. Provide for the orderly development and growth of the city by prescribing rules and standards insuring the functional arrangement of streets, public improvements, open spaces, community facilities, and utilities.
c. Promote the creation of well-planned and attractive residential, commercial, and industrial developments within the city and its jurisdiction.
d. Avoid excessive costs to the taxpayers of Glenwood or the residents of the jurisdiction of the city for the provision of public services and utilities, while maintaining high standards for these services.
e. Protect the unique environment of the City of Glenwood by avoiding environmental damage whenever feasible and appropriate; and by encouraging flexibility in the design of subdivisions.
f. Provide the City of Glenwood with the ability to grow incrementally through the eventual annexation of new developments.
178.02 Jurisdiction and Applicability
a. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all property within the corporate limits of the City of Glenwood and extraterritorial jurisdiction, ads defined in the City of Glenwood Code of Ordinances.
b. No owner of real property within the City of Glenwood and its jurisdiction may subdivide such property without gaining approval pursuant to this ordinance. In addition, no individual may ell or offer to sell any lots or parts of real property that are not subdivided as required by state law or this section.
c. The provisions of this section apply to all zoning districts. However, specific standards and requirements may be modified for Planned Development Overlay Districts.
SUBDIVISIONS REGULATION: BASIC CONDITIONS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 178-2
178.03 Interpretation, Conflict and Severability
a. These regulations shall be held to provide the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. If any provision conflicts with any other provision of the Land Development Ordinance, any other Ordinance of the City of Glenwood, or any applicable State of Federal law, the more restrictive shall apply.
b. Nothing in these provisions shall relieve any property owner or user form satisfying any condition or requirement associated with a previous approval, special permit, variance, development permit, or other permit issued under any local, State, or Federal ordinance or statute.
178.04 Performance of Work by the City
No officer or employee of the City shall perform or cause to be performed any work upon any street or in any addition or subdivision of the city unless all requirements of these regulations have been complied with by the owner of the subdivision.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: APPROVALS AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 179-1
SECTION 179
Subdivision Regulations: Approvals and Procedures
179.01 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to establish procedures for subdivision applications and for review and action on applications by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council. the procedures are designed to assure adequate review and consideration of subdivision applications, while providing for an orderly and expeditious approval process. The Article provides procedures for the approval of three types of subdivisions: Administrative Subdivisions, Minor Subdivisions and Major Subdivisions.
179.02 Administrative Subdivisions
a. Scope
The Administrative Subdivision procedure may be used to adjust an interior property line or combine two or more lots without re-platting providing the following conditions are met:
1. In the case of an Administrative Property Line Adjustment:
(a) The lots involved must be designated within the same zoning district and the proposed adjustment will not create or result in a violation of the zoning ordinance.
(b) The lots involved must be existing platted lots.
(c) The adjustment alters property lines of no more than four lots without creating additional lots.
2. In the case of an Administrative Platting or Lot Consolidation:
(a) The lots involved must be designated within the same zoning district and the proposed platting or lot consolidation will not create or result in a violation of the zoning ordinance.
(b) The lots involved must be existing platted lots.
(c) The lots must eb under unified ownership.
(d) The proposed platting creates no more than four lots, or the proposed consolidation consolidates no more than four lots in to a lesser number of lots.
3. A lot is limited to only one instance an administrative adjustment, platting and/or consolidation.
4. The subdivision is served by existing utilities and does not require the extension of streets, utilities, or public improvements.
5. Each lot resulting from the subdivision procedure will conform fully to all requirements of the zoning district that pertain to the lots; and each lot is
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: APPROVALS AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 179-2
developable according to the site development regulations of the zoning ordinance.
b. Application and Approval Procedure
An application for an Administrative Subdivision may be approved under the following:
1. An application submits an application on a form established by the Planning Commission and including the supporting documents required for Administrative Subdivisions in Table 179-1. These documents shall include a plat of all lots and parcels that are affected by the action, prepared by a Licensed Surveyor.
2. Following submission, the Zoning Administrator and Public Works Director shall review each application according to the following criteria:
(a) Compliance with the conditions for contained in Section 179.02(a) above.
(b) Consistency with the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Glenwood.
(c) Potential adverse environmental effects or effects on neighboring properties.
3. Following such review, the Zoning Administrator may approve the Administrative Subdivision. Such approval shall be denoted by signed certificate of approval which must be filed along with the plat with the Mills County Recorder.
4. The Zoning Administrator retains the right to disapprove the Administrative Subdivision application. In the event of such action, the application may proceed through the Minor and Major subdivision process. If the subdivision complies with the conditions of a Minor Subdivision application, it may be directed to that approval process. Otherwise, the proposed subdivision shall be deemed a Major Subdivision and proceed through the appropriate review and action process.
5. Following approval of an Administrative Subdivision, the subdivider must file the plat and certificate of approval with the Mills County Recorder. If the approved plat is not filed within 90 days of approval by the Zoning Administrator, such approval shall be null and void.
6. The Zoning Administrator shall keep a complete and accurate record of all administrative subdivision approvals.
179.03 Minor Subdivision
a. Scope
The Minor Subdivision procedure may be used when a proposed subdivision meets all of the following conditions:
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: APPROVALS AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 179-3
1. The subdivision adjusts the lot lines of not more than four lots without creating additional lots; or creates no more than four lots from any single parcel, tract, or lot.
2. The subdivision is served by existing utilities and does not require the extension of streets, utilities, or public improvements.
3. Each lot resulting from the subdivision procedure will conform fully to al requirements of the zoning district that pertain to the lots; and each lot is developable according to the site development regulations of the zoning ordinance.
4. No part of the parcel has been the subject of a previous Minor Subdivision or Minor Subdivision approval.
b. Application and Approval Procedures
An application for a Minor Subdivision may be approved under the following procedure:
1. The application submits an application on a form established by the Zoning Administrator and including the supporting documents required for Administrative Subdivisions in Table 179-1. These documents shall include a plat of all lots and parcels that are affected by the action, prepared by a Licensed Surveyor.
2. Following submission, the Zoning Administrator and City Engineer shall review each application according to the following criteria:
(a) Compliance with the conditions for contained in Section 179.03(a) above.
(b) Consistency with the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of Glenwood.
(c) Potential adverse environmental effects or effects on neighboring properties.
(d) Effects of the subdivision on public services. In order to determine this effect, the Zoning Administrator may submit the application to relevant school districts, utilities, and public safety agencies as required.
3. Following such review, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the application along with his/her recommendation, to the Planning Commission.
4. The Planning Commission, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each Minor Subdivision and, following such public hearing, shall make a recommendation to the City Council. If the subdivision is approved by the City Council, the approval shall be documented by a certificate of approval. This certificate shall be filed along with the approved plat with the Mills County Recorder. A record of all subdivision and certificates of approval shall also be maintained by the City Clerk.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: APPROVALS AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 179-4
5. The Planning Commission retains the right to disapprove or not act on the Minor Subdivision application. In the event of such action, the application may proceed through the Major Subdivision process.
6. Following approval of a Minor Subdivision, the subdivider must file the plat and certificate of approval with the Mills County Recorder. If the approved plat is not filed within 180 days of approval by the City Council, such approval shall be null and void.
7. The Zoning Administrator shall keep a complete and accurate record of all Minor Subdivision approvals.
179.04 Major Subdivisions
a. Applicability
The Major Subdivision procedures apply to all subdivisions which are not approved or eligible for approval under the Administrative or Minor Subdivision procedures. In general, these include subdivisions that: 1) are not approved under the Administrative or Minor Subdivision procedure; 2) create more than four lots; 3) Require development or extension of public improvements.
b. Stages in the Approval Process
The approval process for Major Subdivisions consists of three stages: the pre-application stage, the preliminary plat approval stage, and the final plat approval stage.
c. Pre-application Procedures
1. Before filing an application for preliminary plat approval, the applicant shall meet with the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee, regarding general requirements and issues relating to the proposed streets and public facilities.
2. At the pre-application conference, the applicant shall submit a concept plan. The concept plan shall include:
(a) A location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing and proposed streets and public facilities.
(b) A schematic plan illustrating he proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features and their relationship t existing and proposed site topography.
3. Within fifteen working days, the Zoning Administrator shall inform the applicant about the consistency of the concept plan with the objectives and policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Ordinance.
4. The pre-application conference does not require a formal application or payment of a fee.
5. Following the pre-application meeting, the Zoning Administrator shall refer the schematic plan to the Planning Commission for review. The Commission must
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: APPROVALS AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 179-5
approve the subdivision’s general land use and schematic plan prior to preparation of the preliminary plat.
d. Preliminary Plat Application
1. Application Requirements: After the re-application conference, the applicant shall prepare and submit an application for preliminary plat approval. The applicant shall prepare and file 8 copies of the preliminary plat. The application for preliminary plat approval shall be submitted to the City Clerk at least 21 calendar days before the Planning Commission meeting at which the application will be considered. The application shall consist f a form established by the Zoning Administrator, the supporting documents required for Major Subdivisions in Table 179-1; and payment of a fee, the amount of which shall be determined by the City Council.
2. Draft Subdivision Agreement: The preliminary plat application shall include a draft of a subdivision agreement, following a format established by the Planning Commission. The subdivision agreement establishes the mutual responsibilities of city and subdivider, including financing arrangements proposed for the subdivision.
3. Preliminary Plat Approval Procedure:
(a) After submission of a complete application for a preliminary plat, the Zoning Administrator and his/her staff shall review the application. As part of the review, the Zoning Administrator will circulate the application to the City Engineer, local utilities, the school district in which the subdivision is located, public safety agencies, and any other applicable provider of public services deemed necessary. Each reviewing agency shall submit written comments to the Zoning Administrator within a period which he/she establishes.
(b) Following the comment period, the Zoning Administrator shall submit a written recommendation for action to the Planning Commission.
(c) The Planning Commission, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each Major Subdivision and, following such public hearing, shall take action on the application. The Planning Commission may recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the preliminary plat to the City Council. In addition, the Commission may delay action on the application in order to resolve outstanding issues.
(d) Following action by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Chairman of the Commission shall transmit a written recommendation summarizing the Commission’s action to the City Council.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: APPROVALS AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 179-6
(e) The City Council, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each Major Subdivision and, following such public hearing, shall take action on the application.
(f) Approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council shall not constitute approval of a final plat. The approval shall be considered an expression of conditional approval to guide the preparation of a final plat, to be considered subsequently by approving authorities. The preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following rights:
i. The general terms and conditions under which the plat was approved will not change.
ii. The applicant may submit for approval a final plat for the whole or a part of the preliminary plat on or before the expiration date of the preliminary approval.
iii. The preliminary plat approval shall stay in force for a period pf one year from the date of approval by the City Council. The City Council may, at its discretion, establish a longer effective date for the preliminary plat approval. The City Council also may grant extensions to the effective period of a preliminary plat.
iv. Phased Subdivisions: The final plat may be submitted in phases, provided that no phase represents the lesser f 10 lots or 20% of the total number of lots in the entire approved preliminary plat. The initial phase of the final plat must be submitted according to the effective dates established in Section (3) above. In the event of a phased subdivision, the initial preliminary plat approval remains effective for a period not to exceed five years, unless otherwise extended by the City Council.
e. Final Plat Application Process
1. Application Requirements: The Applicant shall prepare and submit an application for final plat approval within one year of the preliminary plat approval. unless an extension has been granted by the City Council. The application for final plat approval shall be submitted to the City Clerk at least 21 calendar days before the Planning Commission meeting at which the application will be considered. The application shall consist of a form established by the Zoning Administrator; the supporting documents required for Final Plat Approval of Major Subdivisions in Table 179-1; and payment of a fee, the amount of which shall be determined by the City Council.
2. Final Subdivision Agreement: The final plat application shall include the final subdivision agreement to be executed between the City and the applicant. The terms of this agreement shall be acted upon along with action on the Final Plat.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: APPROVALS AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 179-7
3. Performance Bond: The subdivision agreement shall specify the amount of the performance bond for public improvements to be filed prior to receiving final plat approval or, alternately, shall contain a statement that required improvements have been satisfactorily completed. The performance bond, if required, must be presented in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney prior to final approval of the subdivision.
4. Final Plat Approval:
(a) The Zoning Administrator and Planning Commission shall review the final plat for consistency with the approval preliminary plat and for compliance with the Land Development Ordinance and other applicable local, state, or federal statutes and regulations. If the final plat meets all conditions of the ordinance and is substantially consistent with the terms of the preliminary plat approval, the Commission shall have no recourse but to approve the final plat.
(b) If the Planning Commission finds in its review that the submitted final plat is inconsistent with the preliminary plat, does not comply with the conditions of relevant ordinances and statutes, or requires a waiver of any section of the LDO, it shall hold a public hearing on the final plat. Following such public hearing, the Commission shall transmit its recommendation on the final plat to the City Council.
(c) The City Council, following proper notice, shall hold a public hearing on each final plat and subdivision agreement and, following such public hearing shall take final action on the application. The City Council is further empowered to grant waivers of as section of the Subdivision Regulations after a waiver request has received a recommendation from the Planning Commission.
f. Filing the Final Plat
1. Following City Council approval of a final plat, the Chairman of the Planning Commission and the Mayor of the City of Glenwood shall sign a certificate of approval, which shall be a part of the reproducible documents of the subdivision plat required with subdivision of the final plat.
2. The passage of a resolution by the City Council accepting the plat shall constitute final approval of the platting of the area shown on the final plat. The applicant shall record the plat in the office of the office of the Recorder of Mills County and shall file satisfactory evidence of such recording in the office of the City Clerk before the City shall recognize the plat as being in force.
3. The subdivider must file the final plat along with all applicable covenants and other documentation within 180 days of the execution of the preliminary plat by the Chairman of the Planning Commission and the Mayor.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: APPROVALS AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 179-8
Table 179-1: Application Requirements
PLAT INFORMATION
ADMINISTRATIVE
SUBDIVISION
MINOR
SUBDIVISION
MAJOR
PRELIMINARY
SUBDIVISION
FINAL
Name, address of owner and applicant.
X
X
X
X
Name, signature, license number, seal and address of engineer, land surveyor, architect, planner, and / or landscape architect, as applicable, involved in preparation of plat.
X
X
X
X
Title block, denoting type of application, tax map sheet, legal description, and general location.
X
X
X
X
Key map, showing location with reference to surrounding property, streets, current street names, city limits, and other features within ¼ mile of the subdivision boundary.
X
X
X
X
Present and proposed zoning.
X
X
North arrow, date, and graphic scale.
X
X
X
X
Proof that taxes are current.
X
X
X
Signature blocks for Planning and Zoning Commission Chairman, Administrative Official, and Mayor.
X
X
X
X
Appropriate certification blocks.
X
X
X
X
Monumentation.
X
X
X
Metes and bounds description, including dimensions, bearings, curve data, tangent length, radii, arcs, chords, and central angles for all centerlines and ROW’s and centerline curves on streets.
X
Acreage of tract.
X
X
X
X
Date of original and all revisions.
X
X
X
X
Dimensioning of setbacks.
X
X
X
Location, dimensions, and names of existing and proposed streets.
X
X
X
X
All proposed lot lines, lot dimensions, and lot areas in square feet.
X
X
X
X
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: APPROVALS AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 179-9
Table 179-1: Application Requirements (continued)
PLAT INFORMATION
ADMINISTRATIVE
SUBDIVISION
MINOR
SUBDIVISION
MAJOR
PRELIMINARY
SUBDIVISON
FINAL
Copy of any existing or proposed deed restriction or covenants.
X
Concept
X
Existing and proposed easements or land reserved for or dedicated to public use.
X
X
X
X
Phasing plan.
X
X
Payment of application fees.
X
X
X
X
ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION
Property owners and lines within 200 feet.
X
X
All existing water courses, floodplains, wetlands, habitat areas or other environmentally sensitive features within 200 feet.
X
X
X
X
Survey of trees and wooded areas, (noting size and location of trees) and mature or environmentally sensitive vegetation.
X
X
Existing ROW’s and easements within 200 feet.
X
X
X
X
Topography at five (5) foot contours including areas up to 200 feet of the plat boundaries.
X
X
Existing site drainage system.
X
X
X
X
Comprehensive drainage study and soil percolation tests.
X
X
IMPROVEMENTS & CONSTRUCTION INFORMATION
Proposed utility infrastructure plans including water, sanitary sewer, and storm water management.
General
Detailed
Sediment/Soil Erosion Control Plan.
X
X
Existing and proposed contours
X
Construction details as required.
X
Road and paving cross-sections.
X
X
Proposed street names.
X
X
New block and lot numbers.
X
X
X
X
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: APPROVALS AND PROCEDURES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 179-10
Table 179-1: Application Requirements (continued)
PLAT INFORMATION
ADMINISTRATIVE
SUBDIVISION
MINOR
SUBDIVISION
MAJOR
PRELIMINARY
SUBDIVISION
FINAL
Lighting plan and details.
Concept
X
Pedestrian circulation patterns and sidewalk or trail locations.
X
X
Certifications and seals from licensed professional engineer, as required by Ordinance.
X
X
Improvement financing plan, including sources of funding (private, assessments, public, and other sources).
X
X
Draft subdivision agreement.
X
Final subdivision agreement.
X
Required Number of Copies of Plat Document
8
8
8
8
Required Minimum Scale of Plat Documents
1”=100 feet
1”=100 feet
1”=100 feet
1”=100 feet
Required Number of Copies of Plat at 11’x17’ size
1
1
1
1
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: DESIGN CRITERIA AND GENERAL STANDARDS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 180-1
SECTION 180
Subdivision Regulations: Design Criteria and General Standards
180.01 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to provide flexible design alternatives in order to assure that subdivision in the Glenwood area create functional and attractive environments, minimize adverse effects, become assets to the city’s urban and natural setting, and adapt to their specific situation. The section defines specific types of subdivisions that have carrying design characteristics, applicable to various settings within the City of Glenwood and jurisdiction. It outlines specific design criteria that should be incorporated into the concepts of various types of subdivisions.
180.02 Site Design and Constraints
a. Consideration of Plans
The design of developments shall consider all existing local and regional plans for Glenwood and its Jurisdiction. These include the Comprehensive Development Plan for the City of Glenwood.
b. Grading Permit Required
1. A Grading Permit is required for erosion and sediment control on all construction sites. For all sites greater than 5 acres in size the developer shall apply to the Iowa Department of Natural Resources for a Stormwater Pollution Control permit and copy of that application must be provided to the Zoning Administrator. An approval permit from the IDNR shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator prior to any grading or site disturbing activity. For sites less than 5 acres in size, the application for a grading permit shall include:
(a) A location map showing the location and extent of grading activity.
(b) A Sediment and Erosion Control Plan.
2. After subdivision of a complete application for a grading permit for sites less than 5 acres, the Zoning Administrator and his/her staff shall review the application. As part of the review, the Zoning Administrator may circulate the petition to any agency with statutory authority for the management of drainageways and stormwater management.
3. For sites less than 5 acres, a grading permit shall be issued within twenty (20) working days if the Zoning Administrator has determined or received assurances from applicable state agencies that the Sediment and Erosion Control Plan is compatible with statute, and further that is compatible with the objectives and policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan and Land Development Ordinance regulations regarding soil and sediment erosion, and environmental water quality.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: DESIGN CRITERIA AND GENERAL STANDARDS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 180-2
c. Preservation of Natural Features and Drainage Patterns
1. To the maximum extent possible, development shall be located to preserve natural features of the site, to avoid areas of environmental sensitivity and to minimize negative impact and alteration of natural features and drainage patterns.
2. The subdivider shall give maximum consideration to the preservation of the following areas as open space, to the extent consistent with reasonable utilization of land:
(a) Wetlands and other unique environmental areas as defined in Section 404, Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 and delineated on wetlands maps prepared by the US Fish and Wildlife Service. Construction and fill activity shall be prohibited on wetlands as regulated by State and federal agencies.
(b) Significant stands or mature specimens of trees shall be designated by required tree surveys.
i. Non-Residential and Attached Residential: No tree taller than 20 feet or larger than 4 inches in diameter (measured six inches above the ground) shall be removed except when approved by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee. Trees removed subject to City approval shall be replaced as recommended by the City Tree Board. The owner of a site with natural landscaping that is unhealthful (e.g. spaced too closely) may be permitted to plant replacement trees in the parkway in the City, if approved by the Zoning Administrator.
ii. Single-Family Residential: Placement of the building must avoid trees taller than 20 feet or larger than four inches in diameter measured six inches above the ground. Any such tree removed or damaged should be replaced by a species compatible with existing trees, on a one-to-one basis. The number of replacement trees will be limited by what can be reasonably accommodated within the available lot area.
(c) Flood plain lands, other than areas that have already experienced substantial development.
(d) Slopes in excess of 15% as measured over a 50-foot interval. Development on slopes over 15% may be permitted only if an erosion and slope stabilization plan is submitted and approved with the development and if appropriate measures ae taken in compliance with this approval plan. The City may, at its discretion, require the review and certification of such a plan by a licensed Professional Engineer.
(e) Habitats of endangered species. Development shall avoid fill or disturbance of habitat sites as identified on federal or state lists administered by the US Fish and Wildlife Service of the US Department of the Interior, and applicable state environmental regulatory agencies. Developers are
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: DESIGN CRITERIA AND GENERAL STANDARDS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 180-3
encouraged to preserve habitat areas as a connected open space consistent with the parks and greenways system designated in the Glenwood Comprehensive Development Plan.
d. General Guidelines for Subdivision Layout
Subdivisions shall be designed to comply with the following overall performance objectives:
1. Avoidance of adverse effects on ground water and aquifer recharge.
2. Reduction and minimizing of cut and fill.
3. Avoidance or reduction of unnecessary impervious surfaces.
4. Prevention of flooding and encroachment of water to other properties.
5. Provision of adequate access to lots, including alternative routes to lots and sites within the subdivision and minimizing of cul-de-sacs over 500 feet.
6. Mitigation of negative environmental effects on surrounding properties, including effects of shadow, noise, odor, traffic drainage, and utilities.
7. Respect for the urban character and traditional layout of Glenwood, including providing continuity to established street and community facility networks; establishing linkages and connections between new development and existing parts of the city; and preserving historically and architecturally significant sites and buildings, determined as those sites or districts either listed on or determined to be eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places, as determined by the State Historic Preservation Office.
8. Dedication of arterial, collector, and key local streets on the general alignments specified in the Comprehensive Development Plan.
180.03 Subdivision and Development Design Categories and Rules
a. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish special design criteria for various types of subdivisions and developments. These categories reflect various policy contexts in the Glenwood jurisdiction.
b. Subdivision and Development Design Categories
Subdivision and development categories, policy implications, contexts, and special application and regulatory requirements are set forth in Table 180-2.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: DESIGN CRITERIA AND GENERAL STANDARDS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 180-4
Table 180-1: Development Types and Policy Requirements Subdivision or Development Type Desirable Context Typical Zoning Characteristics Submission Requirements
Conventional Rural
Areas in the ETJ that will develop to low densities and unlikely to be annexed or receive urban services.
Areas with relatively little environmental sensitivity.
RR
Rural standards, including service by will and septic or other individual wastewater system.
Gravel street surface, although streets may be hard-surfaced.
Surface drainage.
Normal submission requirements outlined in Table 179-1
Conservation Rural
Areas in the ETJ that will develop to low densities and unlikely to be annexed or receive urban services but include significant environmental resources and constraints.
RR with RC Overlay
Rural standards, including service by well and septic or other individual wastewater system. May be designed to accommodate community wastewater systems.
Gravel street surface, although streets may be hard-surfaced.
Surface drainage.
Significant reservations of open space, conserving environmentally sensitive areas.
Normal submission requirements outlined in Table 179-1.
Special submission requirements and demonstration of design techniques set forth in Section 170-40.
Conventional Urban
Areas that are feasibly provided with city services. These areas are likely to be annexed if located outside the corporate limits.
R-1 & higher
*Urban standards, including city water and sewer.
*May consider alternative stormwater management mechanisms, including surface drainage and retention/detention.
*May include non-residential subdivisions.
Normal submission requirements outlined in Table 179-1.
Conservation Urban
Areas that are feasibly provided with city services but include significant environmental resources and constraints.
Examples are sites in the Loess Hills environments north of the city.
R-1 & higher with RC Overlay
Urban standards including city water and sewer.
May use storm drainage alternatives, including retention/detention or managed wetlands.
Significant reservations of open space, conserving environmentally sensitive areas.
Normal Submission requirements outlined in Table 179-1.
Special submission requirements and demonstration of design techniques set forth in Section 170.40.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: DESIGN CRITERIA AND GENERAL STANDARDS
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 180-5
Table 180-1: Development Types and Policy Requirements (continued) Subdivision or Development Type Desirable Context Typical Zoning Characteristics Submission Requirements
Traditional Neighborhood Developments
Areas within the city limits or to be annexed where innovative planning following TND principles is appropriate.
R-1 & higher with PD Overlay
Urban standards including city water and sewer.
Narrower streets and modified street system design form conventional development.
Small lots, closer spacing of houses, reduced setbacks, and mixing of uses.
Normal submission requirements outlined in Table 179-1.
PD application incorporating Traditional Neighborhood Development standards.
Planned Development (Preliminary)
In-city areas that require special flexibility, including modification of normal use and setback standards.
Large projects with substantial urban impacts.
Projects which may develop over a long period of time following a master plan.
Any Districts with PD Overlay
*Urban standards, including city water and sewer.
*May include mixed uses and master planned development that modifies normal zoning standards.
Submission requirements for PD districts, set forth in Section 170.20.
Planned Development
(Final)
In-city areas that require special flexibility, including modification of normal use and setback standards.
Large projects with substantial urban impacts.
Multi-building site developments where architecture is determined, such as large apartment complexes or commercial centers.
Any Districts with PD Overlay
Urban standards including city water and sewer.
Submission requirements for PD districts, set forth in Section 170.20.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 181-1
SECTION 181
Subdivision Regulations: Circulation System Design
181.01 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to assure the development of functional and safe circulation patterns within new subdivisions, in order to encourage economical and effective movement of motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians; provide access for public safety vehicles; and encourage the development of circulation systems that enhance the quality of life within new and existing neighborhoods in the City of Glenwood and its planning jurisdiction.
181.02 General Standards
The design of circulation systems should conform to the following general standards and requirements:
a. Roadway System Design
1. The road system shall be designed to permit safe and orderly movement of traffic, to meet but not exceed needs of the present and future served population; to be simple and logical; to respect natural features, topography, and landscape, and to present an attractive streetscape.
2. The system shall conform with the City’s Comprehensive Development Plan. For streets not shown on the Comprehensive Development Plan, the arrangement of streets shall provide for the logical extension of existing streets.
3. The street network of a subdivision should provide for logical, continuous extensions of streets to subsequent later developments. Such extensions shall make provision when necessary with a temporary turnaround with a radius of at least 60 feet. Temporary turnaround will require a temporary easement if it extends beyond the reserved street right-of-way.
4. The system shall provide adequate traffic flow through a subdivision and provide at least two routes from each lot within the subdivision to the rest of the City, except as explicitly permitted by the approving authorities. Additionally, the system should be designed to discourage through traffic from using local streets.
5. The system should provide good internal street network connectivity. Internal connectivity shall be measured by a Connectivity Index, calculated as:
CI = L/N
Where:
N = the number of nodes (including intersections and cul-de-sacs heads) in a subdivision
L = the number of street links defined by those nodes. A desirable target for street connectivity is an index of 1.30 to 1.40.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 181-2
b. Pedestrian and Bicycle Systems
1. A continuous pedestrian system shall be provided within each non-industrial subdivision, designed to conduct pedestrians between every point in the subdivision in a safe manner.
2. In conventional subdivisions, the pedestrian system will ordinarily be provided by sidewalks placed parallel to and on both sides of each street, with exceptions permitted to preserve natural features, create visual interest or maintain greenways and pedestrian ways proposed in the Glenwood Comprehensive Development Plan.
3. In innovative developments, the pedestrian system may be ab independent network diverging from streets but providing continuous pedestrian access between al points.
4. The pedestrian system, including sidewalks and intersection crossings, shall be designed to comply with the American with Disabilities Act.
5. Bikeways or recreational trails shall be required only if specifically indicated by the Comprehensive Development Plan. Any land dedicated for trail development shall be credited toward the satisfaction of pedestrian system and open space standards set forth by this ordinance.
181.03 Street Hierarchy and Design
a. Characteristics of the Hierarchy
1. Streets shall be classified according to a street hierarchy with design tailored to function.
2. The street hierarchy shall be defined by road function and projected average daily traffic (ADT), as calculated by trip generation rates prepared by the Institute of Transportation Engineers or other generally accepted standards.
3. Each residential street shall be classified and designed to meet appropriate standards for its entire length.
4. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the approving agencies that the distribution of tragic created by the subdivision will not exceed the design capacity of the proposed street system, and its individual segments.
5. The categories, functions, and projected traffic loads of the street hierarchy are set forth in Table 181-1.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 181-3
b. Car-way Width
1. Car-way width for each street classification is determined by parking and curbing requirements based on form or intensity of adjacent development.
2. To promote economic development of streets, minimum car-way width should generally be used. Minimum car-way widths are set forth in Table 181-2.
c. Curbs, Gutters, and Shoulders
1. Curbing shall be required for the purposes of safety, drainage, and protection of the pavement edge, as set forth in Table 181-3.
2. Requirements for curbs vary according to street function and the nature of adjacent development. Adjacent development is defined as urban or rural as follows:
(a) Rural: Residential or predominately agricultural land use where average lot frontage exceeds 200 feet, generally within an RR district.
(b) Intermediate: Residential land use where average lot frontage may range from 150 to 250 feet within areas in the city’s growth path, but unlikely to receive short-term urban services.
(c) Urban: Residential land use where average lot frontage is less than or equal to 150 feet; or adjacent land uses include commercial, office, industrial, or civic use types.
3. Where curbing is required, shoulders and drainage swales may be used only if soils or topography make the provision of shoulders preferable to curbs; or where the character of an area is preserved by the use of shoulders and drainage swales.
4. Shoulders, when developed, shall be constructed in accordance with the standards defined in Table 181-3 for all streets; and located within right-of-way. Swale width is site-specific. Shoulders shall consist of stabilized turf or other acceptable material.
5. All curbs shall provide ramps for accessibility by handicapped people consistent with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
6. Curb construction shall follow standards established by the City of Glenwood.
d. Sidewalks
1. Sidewalk requirements are determined by road classification and intensity if development, as set forth in Table 181-3.
2. Where sidewalks are not otherwise required by Table 181-3, the City may require their installation if necessary to provide access to generators of pedestrian traffic or major community feature; to continue a walk on an adjacent street; to link parts of the city; or to accommodate future development.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 181-4
3. In conventional development, sidewalks shall be placed generally parallel to streets within right-of-way. Exceptions are possible to preserve important natural features or to accommodate topography or vegetation; when applicant shows an alternative for a safe convenient pedestrian system; or in creative subdivisions.
4. Commercial areas, sidewalks may abut curb.
5. Pedestrian rights-of-way a least 15 feet in width may be required through the center of blocks over 660 feet in length if deemed necessary by the approving authorities to provide access to schools or community facilities; or to maintain a continuous pedestrian network within and between subdivisions and districts of the City of Glenwood and its jurisdiction. Such rights-of-way shall be dedicated to the public in the same manner as streets.
6. Sidewalks shall provide a clear path of at least four foot in width, free of any obstructions.
7. All sidewalks shall be constructed according to current standards in use by the City of Glenwood. Sidewalks shall be of concrete construction four inches thick except at points of vehicular crossing where they shall be six inches thick.
8. All sidewalks, crossings, and other segments of a continuous pedestrian system must comply with standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
e. Bikeways and Recreational Trails
1. Bikeways and recreational trails shall be required in subdivision only when specified as part of the comprehensive development plan.
2. Off-street recreational trails shall be a minimum of ten feet in width for two-way traffic and comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. Surfacing of trains shall be acceptable to the City of Glenwood. Gradients for bikeways and recreational trails should not exceed love percent, except for short distances.
3. Recreational trails may satisfy part of the requirements of his ordinance for sidewalks or open space.
4. All residential streets shall utilize bicycle sage drainage grates at storm sewer inlets.
f. Right-of-Way
1. Measurement: The right-of-way of a street shall be measured from lot line to lot line and shall be wide enough to contain the car-way, curbs or shoulder, sidewalks and sidewalk setbacks, other necessary graded areas, and utilities.
2. Any right-of-way that continues an existing street shall be no less than that of existing street.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 181-5
3. The requirements for rights-of-way for functional categories of roads is set forth in Table 181-3.
4. Dedications: Dedications of right-of-way for collector, sub-collector, community, or arterial streets shall be made consistent with the comprehensive development plan.
g. Street Design Standards
1. Pavement standards shall be per recommendation of the City Engineer with the following minimum standards:
(a) Minimum acceptable pavement shall be:
i. Seven (7) inch reinforced concrete pavement (3,500 PSI) with six (6) inch integral concrete curbs.
ii. Nine (9) inch asphaltic concrete pavement with seven inches of coarse graded binder course and two inches of fine graded surface course with a six (6) inch concrete curb and 24-inch gutter.
(b) All streets shall be paved to current standards utilized in the City of Glenwood except:
i. Local streets in intermediate subdivision. Intermediate subdivisions may utilize 6-inch P.C.C. non-reinforced paving or 7-inch hot mix asphaltic paving.
ii. Street pavement thickness shall relate to the role of the street in the hierarchy, subgrade conditions, and pavement type.
2. Continuity of Arterial of Collector Streets:
No subdivision shall prevent the extension of arterial or collector streets through and beyond the subdivision. The subdivider may plan and design collector streets not designated in the Comprehensive Development Plan subject to the approval of the City Council.
3. Cul-de-sacs:
(a) Cul-de-sac streets designed to have one end permanently closed generally should not exceed 500 feet in length and shall be designed so that vision from entrance to end is not restricted. A longer length is permissible within conservation developments or in the case of unconventional developments, such as golf course subdivisions or where topography or environmental limitations significantly restrict the ability to provide alternate street access.
(b) The closed end of a cul-de-sac within a conventional subdivision shall have a turnaround with a street property line diameter of at least 120 feet in residential subdivisions. This diameter may be increased by the Planning Commission if deemed necessary in the case of a commercial or industrial
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 181-6
subdivision. The pavement diameter shall be 42.5 feet and may be increased if deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.
4. Street Grades:
Maximum permitted street grades are set forth in Table 181-2. In typical circumstances, the minimum permitted street gradient shall be 1.0%. In exceptional circumstances, the City Engineer may permit street gradients of less than 1.0%, however, under no circumstances may the gradient be less than 0.5%.
5. Street Intersections:
(a) Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles as possible, unless limited by topography, existing street alignments, or other clearly defined constraints.
(b) In most cases, no more than two streets should intersect at a single intersection. Exceptions may be made within TND or Planned Developments.
(c) Local streets shall minimize intersections with major arterials.
(d) New intersections along one side of an existing or proposed street shall, if possible, align with intersections on the other side of the street. Offsets between adjacent intersections shall measure at least 150 feet between centerlines. The use if T - Intersections is encouraged on local streets within the interior of a subdivision.
(e) Intersections design standards are set forth in Table 181-2.
6. Block Size:
The length, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be suited to the proposed land use and design of the proposed subdivision. Blocks within urban subdivisions shall not exceed 660 feet in length, unless necessitated by exceptional topography or other demonstrable constraints.
7. Other design standards shall be as set forth in Table 181-4.
181.04 Lighting and Wiring
a. Underground Wiring
1. All electric, telephone, television, cable TV, and other communication lines shall be provided by underground wiring within easements or public right-of-way, except where in the opinion of the approving authorities, such location is not feasible. Poles for permitted overhead lines shall be placed in rear lot line easements; or in other locations designed to lessen their visual impact.
2. New lots adjacent to existing overhead service may utilize that service; however, new local service connections shall be underground.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 181-7
3. Year-round screening of any above ground utility apparatus is required. Screening shall be consistent with the Landscape and Screening Standards set forth in Section 173 of the Zoning Chapter of the Land Development Ordinance.
181.05 Traditional Neighborhood Developments (TNDs)
a. Purpose
Traditional Neighborhood Developments provide innovative mixed-use environments that reflect the planning and development patterns in place when Glenwood and other traditional communities were initially developed. TNDs manage automobiles but maintain a scale and set of linkages that promote pedestrian travel and civic space. These theories of urban design have been classified as “New Urbanism” although they transport the patterns of development of traditional Glenwood in to new settings. The TND regulations included in this section are intended to capture the essence of this design technique, while avoiding excessive requirements that will discourage the use if the concept. The Glenwood regulations are intended to capture the general concept and vision of traditional neighborhood design and to provide flexibility and incentives to encourage TNDs without being so prescriptive as to inhibit the use of the concept.
b. Size
The minimum size of a TND shall be 10 acres.
c. Application and Approval
1. TNDs shall require approval of a PD Planned Development District.
2. All applications for a TND Subdivision must be accompanied by a TND Development Plan, in addition to other documents required by these regulations. This plan shall illustrate the distribution of land uses throughout the subdivision; the location and design features; architectural controls; and other information necessary to communicate the concept of the TND subdivision. The TND Subdivision Plan shall be a part of the approved subdivision. Subsequent building and development permits shall be issued by the City only in consistency with the TND Development Plan.
3. Articles of incorporation and/or covenants for a homeowners’ association or other provision assuring maintenance or operation of all common spaces shall be submitted with the TND application.
d. Permitted Land Uses
1. Mixed Land Uses:
Retail, service, civic, office, and various types of residential land uses may be combined within a TND development, notwithstanding the use regulations of the
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 181-8
underlying zoning district. The distribution and location of land uses shall be consistent with the TND Plan submitted for the subdivision.
2. Commercial and Residential Mix:
The gross floor area of commercial area permitted within a TND shall not exceed 10,000 square feet per 100 people projected to live in the development. For the purpose of calculating projected population, the following factors shall be used:
(a) Single-Family Detached: 3.5 people per unit
(b) Single-Family Attached: 2.75 people per unit
(c) Townhouses: 2.5 people per unit
(d) Multi-family: 2.0 people per unit
3. Parks and Open Space:
Parks and public open spaces shall make up at least 10% of the total area of the TND development.
e. Density
1. The average site area per unit of a TND shall be established by the underlying zoning district. However, the density of individual parts of the TND may exceed the average density.
2. Overall density permitted by the underlying zoning district of the TND may be increased as follows for specific amenities: 10% for the provision of a centrally located town square if at least one acre for each 25 acres of developed area; 10% for the provision of approved ornamental lighting throughout the TND Subdivision; and 10% for the development of a central community boulevard. Cumulative density bonuses shall not exceed 25% of the density permitted by the underlying zoning district.
f. Lot Dimensions and Setbacks
1. Lot Dimensions:
Individual lot size dimensions, including minimum width, may be reduced to 80% of the requirement of the underlying zoning district. Any savings on lot size shall be devoted to public space, including but not limited to town squares, small parks, greenways, and community facilities.
2. Lot Setbacks:
(a) Lot setbacks may be varied from those otherwise specified for the zoning district. Typically, the front-yard setback, should respect a build-to line that is not less than 5-feet nor greater than 20-feet. Different setbacks may be incorporated as part of the TND district approval. Setback limits must be established on the preliminary and final plot.
(b) The distance across a street from building face to building face shall not exceed 100-feet except along a community street or boulevard.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 181-9
(c) The setback from any garage entrance to any circulation way, including an alley, must be at least 20-feet unless the project design makes other specific provisions for dedicated off-street parking. Garage access from the rear of lots by way of an alley is encouraged.
g. Street System Design
1. Street Continuity:
All street within a TND District connect t other streets within the district, forming a continuous network. All streets and alleys shall terminate at other streets within the TND District and shall connect to other streets on the edge of the district.
2. Street and Block Characteristics:
(a) The design of the street system shall create an open network that creates blocks with a length of no more than 660 feet.
(b) Street loops and cul-de-sacs may be included as part of the street system design. However, no street with a single point of access onto a connecting street should be longer than 500 feet.
(c) Street or right-of-way widths may be carried for local streets within TND Subdivisions as provided in Section 181.05, Transportation and Parking Standards.
3. Community Streets and Boulevards:
Community streets and boulevards are streets that are designed as central open space features within a TND development. The incorporation of these facilities within a TND is strongly encouraged and receives a density bonus, as provide in Section 28.4. Characteristics of such a street include:
(a) Alignment that generally runs more than 50% of the longest dimension of the development.
(b) Orientation to a main activity center in the development, including parks and neighborhood greens, civic facilities, commercial activity centers, or designed landmarks.
(c) Extensive street landscaping and parallel sidewalks and trails.
(d) Thematic lighting and street furniture.
(e) A street section which incorporated a median or wide sidewalks setbacks. A median’s width should be equal to 1.00 times the width of either individual street channel 20 feet or over in width. If the road channel is undivided, the distance between sidewalk and curb should be equal to at least 50% of the curb-to-curb width.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 181-10
Table 181-1: Street Hierarchy
RESIDENTIAL STREET TYPE
FUNCTION
GUIDELINE MAXIMUM ADT
Lane, Court, or
Cul-De-Sac
Street providing private or controlled access to no more than twelve housing units.
120-150
Local
Provides frontage to lots and carries traffic with origin or destination on street itself. Carries least traffic at lowest speed. East-west orientation provides best solar access. Local residential streets usually do not interconnect with adjoining neighborhoods or subdivisions.
250-1,000
Collector
Conducts and distributes traffic between local streets and major streets in the community. Carries larger volume of traffic. Residential collectors interconnect and provide through access between residential neighborhoods. Collector streets should preserve one through traffic lane in each direction, without encroachment by parking. Collectors may be included in the city’s Surface Transportation Program system for federal aid.
1,000-2,500
Minor Arterials
Provides community wide access between residential neighborhoods and to other activity centers in Glenwood, including downtown and major commercial facilities. Direct access may be provided to other arterial streets Parking should generally be prohibited on other arterials. Other arterials should be excluded from residential areas. These streets are part of the Surface Transportation Program system for federal aid.
2,500-7,500
Major Arterials
Inter-regional road in the street hierarchy. Conveys traffic between activity centers, often at high speeds and with limited access. Should be excluded from residential areas. These streets are part of the Surface Transportation Program system for federal aid.
7,500+
Table 181-2: Car-way Width, Grade, and Intersection Standards
* Denotes Maximum Street Grade Within 50 feet of an Intersection.
Note 1: Intersections shall be rounded at the curb line, with the street having the highest radius requirement as shown in Table 181-2 determining the minimum standard for all curb lines.
Note 2: Arterial street width, grade, and curb radii are determined by state standards and the designation of individual street or roadway segments. RESIDENTIAL STREET TYPE MOVING LANES PARKING RESTRICTIONS MAXIMUM GRADE BACK OF CURB MINIMUM CURB RADii
Lane or Court
Two 11-foot
No restriction
10% (5%*)
22 feet
20 feet (Note 1) Cul-de-sac Two 11-foot No restriction 10% (5%*) 26 feet 20 feet (Note 1)
Urban Local
Two 11-foot
No restriction
10% (5%*)
26 feet
20 feet (Note 1) TND or PD Local Two 11-foot No restriction 10% 22 feet
Intermediate Local
Two 11-foot
No restriction
10%
26 feet
20 feet (Note 1) Rural Local Collector Two 11-foot No restriction 10% (5%*) 26 feet 20 feet (Note 1)
No parking
Two 12-foot
No parking
10% (5%*)
28 feet
25 feet (Note 1) One-side Parking Two 12-foot One-side only 10% (5%*) 32 feet 25 feet (Note 1)
Two-side Parking
Two 12-foot
No restriction
10% (5%*)
36 feet
25 feet (Note 1) Arterials Note 2 Note 2 6% Note 2 Note 2
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: CIRCULATION SYSTEM DESIGN
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 181-11
Table 181-2: Curb, Sidewalk, and Right-of-Way Requirements
STREET TYPE BACK OF CURB WIDTH CURB/SHOULDER SIDEWALK SIDEWALK SETBACK TOTAL ROW
Lane or Court
22 feet
Not Required
Required
NA
50 feet
Cul-de-sac
26 feet at
approach,
42.5 ft. radius*
Required
Required
Note 1
60 feet at approach 120 feet diameter LOCAL
Rural
26 feet
Not Required
Not Required
NA
60 feet
Intermediate
26 feet
26 feet
Not Required
One side
6 feet 60 feet
Urban
Curb
Both Sides
6 feet 60 feet
TND
22 feet
Curb
Both Sides
Curb to 6 feet
50 feet
Community Boulevard
(divided)
18 feet, 20
foot median
Project specific
Both Sides
8 feet
85 feet
Community Boulevard (undivided)
32 feet
Project specific
Both Sides
8 feet
66 feet COLLECTORS
Rural Urban
28 feet
Not Required
Not Required
NA
66 feet
No parking
28 feet
Curb
Both Sides
8 feet
70 feet **
One-side parking
32 feet
Curb
Both Sides
8 feet
70 feet **
Two-side parking
36 feet
Curb
Both Sides
8 feet
70 feet ** ARTERIALS
Urban and Rural
36-48 feet
(Note 2)
Note 2
Note 2
8 feet
66-80 feet minimum
* Minimum where no parking is permitted, and radius is measure from center to back of curb.
** Right-of-way widths for these classes of street may be modified within Conservation Subdivisions, Planned Developments, or TNDs.
Note 1: Sidewalks to be located within the street right-of-way at property line where possible, otherwise 6 ft. Minimum will apply.
Note 2: Arterial street width, grade, and curb radii are determined by state standards and the designation of individual street or roadway segments.
Table 181-4: Street Design Requirements
STREET TYPE MINIMUM RADIUS OF HORIZONTAL CURVES MINIMUM SIGHT DISTANCE ON VERTICAL CURVES MINIMUM SLOPE PPC PAVEMENT THICKNESS
Lane or Court
100 feet
150 feet
10%
6 inches Local Urban 200 feet 200 feet 10% 7-inches
Intermediate
200 feet
200 feet
10%
7-inches Rural 200 feet 200 feet 10% Determined by road design
TND/PD
100 feet
150 feet
10%
Determined by road design Collector 200 feet 200 feet 8% Determined by road design
Arterials
300 feet
250 feet
6%
Determined by road design
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 182-1
SECTION 182
Subdivision Regulations: Public Improvements and Infrastructure
182.01 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to assure that all subdivision developed in the City of Glenwood and its jurisdiction are adequately furnished with necessary public services. These services include adequate water, waste management, and storm water drainage utilities; and park and open soave resources.
182.02 Water
Installation of water services shall be regulated by the Glenwood Water Board of Trustees. Regulations regarding water utilities can be found in the Glenwood Water Regulations and well installation regulations are located in the Glenwood Code of Ordinances.
182.03 Sanitary Sewers
a. Connection
1. All installations shall be properly connected to an approved and functioning sanitary sewer system prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
2. Depending on the number of units, residential subdivision shall be connected to an existing public sanitary sewer system if such a system is available, by gravity service, within the following distances:
Size of
Development
Distance
1 unit
200 feet
2 units
400 feet
3 units
600 feet
4 units
800 feet
5-15 units
1,000 feet
15 units or over
0.5 mile
Developments with more than 15 units and located within 0.5 mile of an existing public sanitary sewer system must provide adequate justification as to why they are unable to connect to such a system. For developments with more than 15 units and located more than 0.5 mile form a public sanitary sewer system, the waste disposal strategy, shall be considered by the approving authorities on a case-by-case basis.
3. If the City creates a benefit fund for the purpose of financing public extensions of sanitary interceptor sewers to newly developing areas, each subdivision to be benefited by such extensions shall contribute to such a fund. Subdivision within
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 182-2
the city limits of Glenwood at the time of platting; or subdivisions currently served by existing sanitary sewer service shall be exempt from this requirement. Contributions to the fund shall be computed on the basis of proportionate costs and benefits of necessary extensions. Assessments shall be made on a per lot basis for single-family development; a per unit basis for multi-family residential development; and a site area basis for non-residential development.
4. All proposals for new public sanitary sewer systems or extensions of existing systems shall be approved by appropriate public agencies.
5. All state requirements shall be met, and approvals form the Department of Natural Resources or other appropriate state agencies shall be obtained for all waste disposal systems.
b. Sanitary Sewer System Design Standards
Sanitary sewer facilities shall be provided to provide adequate service to the subdivision and conform to the city’s sewer plan.
1. Materials: Sewer pipe material shall meet the standards set forth in the Glenwood City Code.
2. All sewers shall have a minimum diameter of eight (8) inches.
3. Location: Wherever possible, sewers shall be located in the streets or alley rights of way and easements.
4. Stub-Outs: All sanitary sewer stub-outs shall be carried to a property line.
c. Certifications
A certification from a registered Professional Engineer shall be filed with the City of Glenwood certifying that the sanitary sewer system of the subdivision is designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Section; and all applicable standards of the State of Iowa. This certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of “as-built” system plans.
d. Private Wastewater Disposal Systems
If the development does not meet the required criteria for connection to a public sanitary sewer system and gravity sewer service connections, or if for reasons of topography, economic feasibility, or other special conditions, the developer proposes service by a private wastewater disposal system, the developer shall request a variance according the following provisions:
1. Subsurface or septic systems are not permissible on any lot created after the effective date of this Ordinance if the gross density of the subdivision is higher than one unit per 1.5 acres; if individual lots are smaller than one acre; or in any urban subdivision.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 182-3
2. The developer shall submit with the preliminary plat application an Economic Feasibility Study Report and an Environmental Impact Study report, prepared by a Professional Engineer, which documents the cost of providing city sewer service to the subdivision versus the cost of the proposed private disposal system. The preliminary plat application shall also show the proposed system for each lot and shall submit percolation tests for each lot, taken at the proposed adsorption field sites to determine the size of the field required for each lot.
3. The City shall consider all these submittals in determining whether to permit installation of private wastewater disposal systems for the subdivision.
4. If a private wastewater disposal system is approved by the City with the preliminary plat approval, the system shall be designed and built in accordance with regulations of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources. The developer’s Professional Engineer shall furnish the City with three certified copies of as-built plans showing service line locations and final sewer and maintenance access locations, lengths, elevations, and grades.
5. If a sanitary sewer system is to be provided to an area within a ten-year period, as indicated in an officially adopted document of the City the County, or other authorized agency, the City may require installation of a capped system or dry lines. Alternately, the City may require a payment in lieu of the improvement, to be credited toward the extension and extension of the subdivision of a future sanitary sewer system.
6. City approval to install a community and/or private wastewater disposal system shall be allowed subject to the following additional provisions:
(a) The developer and all successive lot owners shall agree to connect to the City sanitary sewer system if installed to the corner of their lot. Such connection shall not be required for ten years after the date of construction of the initial wastewater disposal system.
(b) With connection to the City sanitary system, all existing lot owners shall be required to disconnect from and abandon the pre-existing wastewater disposal system in conformance with all local and State standards and shall share equally in the cost of such disconnection. Disconnection and abandonment shall be completed within six months after connection to the City sanitary sewer system.
182.04 Storm Water Management
a. Design
1. All subdivisions shall have a storm water management system that is adequate to prevent the undue or unplanned retention of storm water on the site. undue retention does not include:
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 182-4
(a) Retention through planned facilities.
(b) Retention not substantially different from pre-existing conditions.
2. The design of the storm water management system shall be consistent with general and specific concerns and standards of the Comprehensive Development Plan and the drainage control programs of applicable public agencies. Design shall be based on environmentally sound site planning and engineering techniques.
3. To maximum degree possible, drainage form subdivisions shall conform to natural contours of land and not disturb pre-existing drainageways.
4. Adjacent properties shall not be unduly burdened with surface water from the subdivision. Specifically:
(a) There may be no unreasonable impediment of water from higher adjacent properties across the subdivision, causing damage to lower properties.
(b) No action shall unreasonably collect and channel storm water onto lower properties. The volume or rate of post-development run off shall not exceed the amount of pre-development runoff, and is to be managed in a manner consistent with Iowa statues and existing case law regarding such flows.
5. Design shall use the best available technology to minimize off=site runoff, encourage natural filtration, simulate natural drainage, and minimize discharge of pollutants. Best available technology shall include retention basins, swales, porous paving, and terracing.
6. No surface water shall be discharged in to a sanitary sewer system.
7. Where possible, a subdivision’s drainage system shall coordinate with that of surrounding properties or streets.
8. All storm water design shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. The preliminary plat submission must include preliminary drainage computations and demonstrations that the proposed storm water management system meets the requirements of this Section. A certification from a registered Professional Engineer shall be filed with the City of Glenwood certifying that the storm water management system of the subdivision is designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Section; and all applicable standards of the State if Iowa. This certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of ‘as-built” system plans.
b. Erosion Control
With the submission of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit an erosion control plan, prepared and certified by a licensed Professional Engineer, for an land disturbing activity. All grading activities must be carried it consistent with this approved erosion control plan.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 182-5
182.05 Parks and Public Facilities
a. Purpose
In order to serve the education and recreational needs of new residents within the subdivision and promote the public health, welfare, community character and property values, residential subdividers are required to donate resources to make improvements to the City of Glenwood’s parks system as a condition of subdivision approval.
b. Park Reservations: General Requirements
The amount of park facilities for new residents is partly based on date and policy in the adopted City of Glenwood Comprehensive Plan. The Plans reflect a local adaptation of standards of the National Recreation and Park Association (NRPA). The Comprehensive Plan is the result of a system-wide technical analysis and citizen participatory planning process, which identified near-term and long-range needs for the local parks system.
Given these findings, the City of Glenwood has determined the following:
1. Park Dedication. If required by the city and consistent with the comprehensive development plan, a subdivision shall dedicate up to 0.04 acres per dwelling unit for parkland. Alternately, the subdivider shall pay a fee equivalent to the cost of 0.04 acres per unit, to be used specifically by the City for the acquisition and development of park and recreational facilities which directly benefit the subdivision.
2. Location. Land donated fir new parks shall be located based generally on the City’s Comprehensive Plan and official map and shall specifically consider the design of each development and natural features present. The amount of land required shall not include wetlands, floodway, floodplain or storm water detention facilities.
3. Combining Parks and Schools Lands. Whenever possible, and whenever in the best interests of the City and the affected school district, land dedicated for park and recreation sites shall be contiguous to land dedicate for a school site. Where the subdivision is less than forty (40) acres, park and recreation land to be donated should, where possible, and in the best interest of the City and the affected school district, be combined with donations from adjoining developments in order to promote usable park and recreation lands, and thereby minimize hardship on a particular subdivider.
c. Park Donation Substitutes
If park land would be more appropriately located off-site, the City Council may agree to accept cash in lieu of and from a residential subdivider. The amount of land required from a residential subdivider may be reduced depending on the amount of the improved land, up to two (2) acres established as a private park by the subdivider,
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 182-6
provided that such land is determined to be of equivalent value and available by right to all residents of the development. The subdivider shall present residents, through physical design and legal documentation that the private facility shall be equally available to all residents of the development.
d. Criteria for Requiring a Contribution of Cash in Lieu of Park and Recreation Land
1. General Requirements. Where the subdivision is small, and the resulting sire is too small to be practical or when the available land is inappropriate for parks and recreational land use, or when land for a park and recreation use cannot be made contiguous to land dedication for a school site, the City Council shall determine whether the subdivider shall be required to pau a cash contribution in lieu of the required land donation.
2. Park Accounting Trust and Use of Fees. The cash contributions in lieu of land for parks and recreation use shall be held in trust by the City of Glenwood for expenditure by the City as determined by the City Council. Such cash contributions shall be used solely for the acquisition of land for parks and recreation which will be available to serve the immediate of future needs of the residents of the subdivision or development, or for the improvement of recreation facilities and other parks already existing which will benefit the subdivision.
182.06 Reservation of Additional Lands
The City Council may require reservation of sites to be purchased for schools and other civic facilities as a condition for approval of the subdivision. Where the Comprehensive Plan or the designation of the City calls for a larger amount of land in a particular subdivision or planned development for park and recreation use, or as additional public land that the subdivider is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the subdivider’s contribution shall be reserved for subsequent acquisition by the City. Reservation of land for public acquisition shall be for a period not to exceed three years from the date that the plat is officially recorded.
182.07 Topography and Grading
The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site and its surroundings must be suitable for its intended purposes. A subdivider shall allow the City to have access to the proposed sites for the purpose of conducting soil boring tests.
182.08 Timing and Conveyance
Unless otherwise determined through a Subdivision Agreement, a subdivider shall convey to the City (or such other governmental body, corporation or such owner as determined by the City) the land required under this Section at the time of final approval by the City
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 182-7
Council of the subdivision or resubdivision plat or final development plan, by the delivery of the following documents:
a. A good and sufficient Trustee’s or Warranty Deed conveying fee simple title free and clear of all liens and encumbrances (except liens or encumbrances dischargeable by cash accompanying said deed) except for current real estate taxes;
b. A deposit of money equal to 100% of the most ascertainable taxes for the year, pro-rated to the date that the deed is delivered;
c. A plat of survey containing thereon the legal description of the property to be conveyed and any other matters which may be required by the City Administrator, under as advised by the Zoning Administrator, City Attorney, and the consulting City Engineer.
182.09 Timing of Payment
Cash contributions required under this Section shall be paid as follows:
a. Fees Paid Prior to Final Plat
Unless otherwise provider by the terms f a developer agreement entered into between the City and the subdivider, all fees required pursuant to this Section, including fees arising from the development of land located in the City’s two-mile planning jurisdiction that may be subject of an intergovernmental agreement, shall be due and owing prior to the final plat approval by the City Council.
However, if the subdivider’s lands are the subject of an annexation agreement, payment shall be made at the times and in the manner provided in said annexation agreement.
b. Procedures for Fee Collection and Administration
It shall be the duty of the Finance Director, or other official designated by the City Council to establish regulations and procedures for the collection and administration of the cash contributions required under this Section.
182.10 Developer Agreements
a. Developer Agreements May Establish Time and Manner of Compliance
The City may enter into a Developer Agreement with any subdivider which sets forth the time and manner of compliance with the terms of this Section and Implementation of any other provisions of these regulations.
b. Prior Development Agreement
In any developer agreement has preciously been entered into between the City and a subdivider, and that Agreement remains in full force and effect, the provisions of that
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 182-8
agreement shall control, and this Section shall have no force and effect, provided that the subdivider complies with the terms of such Agreement. However, if such subdivider is not complying with the terms of that Agreement then the provisions of this Section shall apply, and the City shall utilize the criteria set forth herein to determine the appropriate exaction amount, less credits, if any.
Further if the development contemplated by a subdivider has either increased in number of units or has otherwise increased the demand for park and recreation facilities, then the developer Agreement previously entered into between the subdivider and the City shall be amended and the subdivider shall provide additional land, or a pro-rata fee, bases on the provisions of this Section, less credits, if any.
182.11 Easements
a. Utility Easements
1. Urban Subdivisions: Easements for utilities shall be provided for in the subdivision dedication allowing for the constructions, maintenance, repair, and replacement of utilities. Such easements shall be at least 10-feet in width.
2. Easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots, and easements of lesser width may be approved if accepted by utility providers, and easements shall connect with easements on adjoining properties.
3. Easements shall be approved in writing by any appropriate public or private utility provider intending to use such easement for their facilities. Such approval shall be submitted prior to final plat approval.
4. Rural subdivisions: Easements for utilities shall be placed within street rights-of-way, without requirements for additional utility easements.
b. Drainage Easements
Where a Subdivision is crossed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way shall be provided. It shall correspond generally with the extent of such watercourse, together with any additional construction or expansion necessary to allow it to conduct storm water adequately. The total width of any easement shall be sufficient to cover the 100-year flood plain calculated for a fully developed upstream drainage basin. Parallel streets or parkways may be utilized to preserve such drainageways.
c. Setback Requirements for Structures Adjacent to Creeks and Drainageways
1. In addition to other applicable provisions of city ordinances, no persons shall be granted a permit for the construction of any structure, exclusive of fences, bank stabilization structures, poles signs, and non-related parking areas adjacent to any creek or stream unless such structure is located so that no portion whereof is any closer to the stream than will allow a maximum 3:1 slope between the water’s edge
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 182-9
(during normal flow conditions) of the stream and the closest point of the structure at-grade.
2. An exemption from the provisions of Sub-section (1) above may be granted if all of the following conditions are met and required certification is filed with the City of Glenwood:
(a) Certification by a registered professional engineer that adequate bank stabilization structures or slope protection will be installed in the construction of said structure, having an estimated useful life equal to that of the structure, which will provide adequate lateral support so that no portion of the structure adjacent to the stream will be endangered by erosion or lack of lateral support.
(b) Certification shall be affixed to an accurate set of “as-built” construction plans for the structure, as well as “as-built” plans of depicting any bank stabilization or slope protection measures or structures.
(c) In the event that the structure is adjacent to any stream that has been channelized or otherwise improved by any agency of government, then such certification providing this exemption must take the form of a certification as to the adequacy and protection of the improvements installed by such governmental unit.
d. Other Easements
The subdivision shall provide easements for other public utilities that cross through it, in a form acceptable to the City or appropriate public agency.
182.12 Dedications
Before final plat approval is granted to the subdivision, dedications to public use of all streets, alleys, other public rights-of-way, or other parks and public lands shall be completed as required by this Ordinance.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: IMPROVEMENT FINANCING AND GUARANTEES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 183-1
SECTION 183
Subdivision Regulations: Improvement Financing and Guarantees
183.01 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to ensure the equitable financing and proper installation and maintenance of required streets, utilities, and other improvements. The guarantee shall be structured to provide adequate assurances to the City while not adding unnecessary costs to the developer.
183.02 Application
This article applies to subdivisions which require the installation of streets, utilities, or other public improvements by the City or developer.
183.03 Responsibility of Subdivider
The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation and/or construction of all improvements required by this Ordinance and shall warrant the design, material, workmanship, construction, and performance of such improvements for two years after the date of completion.
183.04 Subdivision Agreement
a. Condition for Approval of Plat
As a condition for final approval, each subdivision plat must include a subdivision agreement entered into between the City of Glenwood and the subdivider. Additionally, no contract for the construction of public improvements involving a subdivision within the extraterritorial jurisdiction but outside the corporate limits of Glenwood shall be awarded without the approval of such an agreement.
b. Components of the Agreements
The agreements shall include provisions for the financing and distribution of responsibilities among the City and the subdivider for land acquisition, design and installation of public improvements. The agreement shall also state specifically how public services will be provided in the Subdivision prior t annexation by the City.
c. Rules for Distributing Improvement Costs
Generally, the following rules shall be followed in distributing costs for public improvements:
1. Public Costs
Allowable public costs will be those items that have demonstrable benefit to the general public. These items may include:
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: IMPROVEMENT FINANCING AND GUARANTEES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 183-2
(a) Pavement width in excess of 26 feet for streets designated as collector or arterial streets in the Glenwood Comprehensive Development Plan or any subsequent amendment thereof. On collector and arterial streets requiring a higher standard of paving than normal, the additional cost shall be borne by the City or other public agency.
(b) The incremental cost of water mains over six inches.
(c) Oversized storm sewers or drainage structures required t serve other areas in the watershed. Such expenses may also be assessed on an area basis to properties served by the improvement.
(d) Sanitary outfall sewers or water lines outside of the limits of a subdivision that serve areas larger than that of the subdivision, provided that such extension is consistent with the sequencing or development specified in the Comprehensive Development Plan.
(e) The additional costs of sanitary sewers over 8 inches in diameter, when such sewers are required by the City.
(f) Park and recreation facilities consistent with the Comprehensive Development Plan.
(g) Those costs required to be paid by the City for extension of water and sewer lines, pursuant to the Glenwood Municipal Code.
2. Private Costs
Allowable special assessment costs will be those items that have direct benefit primarily to adjacent properties. These items may include:
(a) The entire cost of grading street rights-of-way, including intersections.
(b) All sanitary sewer lines serving the subdivision up to 8 inches and water lines serving the subdivision up to 6 inches.
(c) All paving and street construction, including curbs and gutters, up to a car-way width of 26 feet.
(d) A stormwater management system adequate to provide for the collection, retention, and removal of surface runoff, extending to the boundaries of the subdivision.
(e) Sidewalks as required by this Ordinance. Construction of sidewalks may be delayed until after completion of site grading and construction but must be completed prior to occupancy of the structure.
(f) The contract charge for underground electrical and gas service.
(g) An iron rod not less than one-half inch in diameter and 24 inches in length as follows:
i. Set in concrete three feet deep at the intersection of all lines forming angles in the boundary of the subdivision and at all street intersections.
ii. At lot corners and changes in direction of block and lot boundaries.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: IMPROVEMENT FINANCING AND GUARANTEES
City of Glenwood – Land Development Ordinance 183-3
(h) Those costs required to be paid by the developer for extension of water and sewer lines, pursuant to the Glenwood Municipal Code.
3. The subdivider in lieu of installing and constructing said improvements at his/her expense, may, along with all owners of property to be affected by such improvements and all perfected lienholders, petition the Council to cause the construction of such improvements. This petition shall waive any applicable limitations of the amount that could ne assessed against subdivision property owners including intersection costs, and other costs normally paid by the City in special assessment projects.
183.05 Subdivisions Contiguous with City
Unless otherwise provided as a specific part of the subdivision approval by the city, all subdivisions now or hereafter laid out adjoining or contiguous to the corporate limits of the city shall be included within such corporate limits and become a part of the City of Glenwood. The residents of the subdivision shall eb entitled to all the rights and privileges and subject to all laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City of Glenwood.
183.06 Performance Guarantees
a. As a condition of the final approval of the plat and prior to its recording with the Mills County Recorder, the City Council shall require and accept the following:
1. The furnishing of a performance bond, letter of credit, cash escrow, or other guarantee in a form acceptable to the City, in an amount not to exceed 100% of the estimated cost of the improvement installation.
2. A specification of the time allowed for the installation of improvements. This period may be extended by the City Council.
3. The performance guarantee amount and requirement, along with the permitted time for installation, shall be included within the Subdivision Agreement negotiated between the City and the Developer and approved with the Final Plat.
183.07 Notification of Completion and Acceptance by City
a. Notification
Upon substantial completion of all required improvements, the developer shall notify the City Engineer in writing, as well as submitting a certification from a registered Professional Engineer, attesting to the conformance of construction to the plans and specifications as approved by the City Council.