
Grinnell, IA Code of Ordinances


CODE OF ORDINANCES



CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES



 

1.01  Title
 
1.08  Amendments


1.02  Definitions
 
1.09  Catchlines and Notes


1.03  City Powers
 
1.10  Altering Code


1.04  Indemnity
 
1.11  Severability


1.05  Personal Injuries
 
1.12  Warrants


1.06  Rules of Construction
 
1.13  General Standards for Action


1.07  Extension of Authority
 
1.14  Standard Penalty



 



1.01    TITLE.




This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Grinnell, Iowa.




                                                   
                                                   
                                      (Ord. 1414 - Oct. 15
Supp.)



1.02    DEFINITIONS.



Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined in the
Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the Council or repugnant to the context of the provision.  Other words and
phrases used herein have the following meanings, unless specifically defined
otherwise in another portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or
repugnant to the context of the provision:



   1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street,
affording secondary means of access to abutting property. 



   2.   “City” means the City of Grinnell, Iowa.



   3.   “City Manager” means the city manager of Grinnell, Iowa.



   4.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of Grinnell, Iowa.



   5.   “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of
Ordinances in which a specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive
title word (such as the Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by
reference).



   6.   “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Grinnell, Iowa.



                                                   
                                                   
                          (Ord. 1414 - Oct. 15 Supp.)



   7.   “Council” means the city council of Grinnell, Iowa.



   8.   “County” means Poweshiek County, Iowa.



   9.   “May” confers a power.



   10.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or
motion.



   11.   “Must” states a requirement.



   12.   “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land,
includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or
land, whether alone or with others.



   13.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Grinnell,
Iowa, as embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the
ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.



   14.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic
or foreign corporation, company, association or joint stock association,
trust, or other legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or
similar representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.



   15.   “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard,
parkway, highway, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.



   16.   “Shall” imposes a duty.



   17.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street
between the edge of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the
adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.



   18.   “State” means the State of Iowa.



   19.   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the
Code of Iowa, as amended.



   20.   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between
property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof
is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of
vehicular traffic.



Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa
have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the
provision.



1.03    CITY POWERS.



The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if
not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any
power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve
the rights, privileges and property of the City and of its residents, and
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and
convenience of its residents and each and every provision of this Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and
the performance of the foregoing functions.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)



1.04    INDEMNITY.



The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by
making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or death
of any person or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or damage to property
whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however
arising from or related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the issuance of
the permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of
such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such applicant, to
abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or
the terms and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by
making such application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its
officers, agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and
all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage,
injury or death, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason
of the foregoing.  The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a
part of any permit or license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any
other ordinance of the City whether expressly recited therein or not.



1.05    PERSONAL INJURIES.



When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to have
been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person by
whose negligence it claims the injury was caused.  The notice shall state
the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location
of the court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged
facts from which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person
notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and
asking the person to appear and defend.  A judgment obtained in the suit is
conclusive in any action by the City against any person so notified, as to
the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the
liability of the City to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to
the amount of the damage or injury.  The City may maintain an action against
the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment together with all
the expenses incurred by the City in the suit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)



1.06    RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of statutory
construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized
to ascertain the intent of the Council with the understanding that the term
“statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term
“ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.



1.07    EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.



Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a
provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as
authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.



1.08    AMENDMENTS.



All ordinances which amend, repeal or in any manner affect this Code of
Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)



1.09    CATCHLINES AND NOTES.



The catchlines of the several sections of the Code of Ordinances, titles,
headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross
references and State law references, unless set out in the body of the
section itself, contained in the Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any
part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or
clarify the contents of a section.



1.10    ALTERING CODE.



It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of the Code of Ordinances, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code of
Ordinances in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to
be misrepresented thereby.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.5)



1.11    SEVERABILITY.



If any section, provision or part of the Code of Ordinances is adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity
of the Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision or part
thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.



1.12    WARRANTS.



If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful
right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon
or conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the
County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative
search warrant.  No owner, operator or occupant or any other person having
charge, care or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure,
building or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search
warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.



1.13    GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.



Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the
Council or any commission, board or officer or employee of the City and does
not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be
exercised in light of the following standard:  The discretionary power to
grant, deny or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts
and circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due
consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and
welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under
similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.



1.14    STANDARD PENALTY.



Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances for
violation of any particular provision, section, or chapter, any person
failing to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise
violating any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation
adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of
at least sixty-five dollars ($65.00) but not to exceed six hundred
twenty-five dollars ($625.00).



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])



(Ord. 1452 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



CHAPTER 2
CHARTER



 

2.01  Title
 
2.04  Number and Term of Council


2.02  Form of Government
 
2.05  Term of Mayor


2.03  Powers and Duties
 
2.06  Copies on File



 



2.01    TITLE.



The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a charter embodying the form of
government existing on July 1, 1975.



2.02    FORM OF GOVERNMENT.



The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council with appointed
Manager form of government.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)



2.03    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City.



2.04    NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.



The Council consists of two Council Members elected at large and one Council
Member from each of four wards as established by this Code of Ordinances,
elected for overlapping terms of four years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)



2.05    TERM OF MAYOR.



The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)



2.06    COPIES ON FILE.



The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the
official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep
copies of the charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)



CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS



 

3.01  Municipal Infraction
 
3.04  Civil Citations


3.02  Environmental Violation
 
3.05  Alternative Relief


3.03  Penalties
 
3.06  Criminal Penalties



 



3.01    MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.



A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein
adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty
required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically
provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious
misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the
Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as
provided herein.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])



3.02    ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION.



A municipal infraction which is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of
Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the
Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an
environmental violation.  However, the provisions of this section shall not
be applicable until the City has offered to participate in informal
negotiations regarding the violation or to the following specific violations:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])



   1.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.



   2.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the
handling, drying or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the
industrial production or manufacturing of grain products.



   3.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the
handling, drying or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial
production or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to
January 15.



3.03    PENALTIES.



A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])



   1.   Standard Civil Penalties.



      A.   First Offense – $100.00



      B.   Second Offense – $250.00



      C.   Each Repeat Offense – $500.00



Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a
repeat offense.



   2.   Special Civil Penalties.



      A.   A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an
industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for
each day a violation exists or continues.



      B.   A municipal infraction classified as an environmental
violation is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each
occurrence.  However, an environmental violation is not subject to such
penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:



         (1)   The violation results solely from conducting an
initial startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance,
testing, or conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation
or the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.



         (2)   The City is notified of the violation within
twenty-four (24) hours from the time that the violation begins.



         (3)   The violation does not continue in existence for
more than eight (8) hours.



3.04    CIVIL CITATIONS.



Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may
issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction.  A
copy of the citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of
Civil Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at
defendant’s last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by
publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and
subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311.  A copy of the
citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation
shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court.  The citation shall serve
as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain the
following information:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])



   1.   The name and address of the defendant.



   2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the
officer issuing the citation.



   3.   The location and time of the infraction.



   4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative
relief sought, or both.



   5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.



   6.   The time and place of court appearance.



   7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.



   8.   The legal description of the affected real property, if
applicable.



If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the
condition of the property, including a building code violation, a local
housing regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health or
safety violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District
Court, the City shall also file the citation in the office of the County
Treasurer.



(Ord. 1348 – Nov. 11 Supp.)



3.05    ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.



Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the
City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. 
Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for
abatement or injunctive relief.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[8])



3.06    CRIMINAL PENALTIES.



This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal
citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal
penalties are also provided for the violation.  Nor does it preclude or
limit the authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])



CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES



 

5.01  Oaths
 
5.07  Conflict of Interest


5.02  Bonds
 
5.08  Resignations


5.03  Duties:  General
 
5.09  Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees


5.04  Books and Records
 
5.10  Vacancies


5.05  Transfer to Successor
 
5.11  Gifts


5.06  Meetings
 



 



5.01    OATHS.



The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:



   1.   Qualify for Office.  Each elected or appointed officer shall
qualify for office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when
required, a bond.  The oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after being
certified as elected but not later than noon of the first day which is not a
Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which
the officer was elected.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)



   2.   Prescribed Oath.  The prescribed oath is:  “I, (name), do
solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and
the Constitution of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and
impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of
(name of office) in Grinnell as now or hereafter required by law.”



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)



   3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths.  The following are
empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter
pertaining to the business of their respective offices:



      A.   Mayor



      B.   City Clerk



      C.   Deputy City Clerk



      D.   Members of all boards, commissions or bodies created by
law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)



5.02    BONDS.



Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:



   1.   Required.  The Council shall provide by resolution for a
surety bond or blanket position bond running to the City and covering the
Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer and such other officers and employees as may be
necessary and advisable.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)



   2.   Bonds Approved.  Bonds shall be approved by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)



   3.   Bonds Filed.  All bonds, after approval and proper record,
shall be filed with the Clerk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])



   4.   Record.  The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the
“Record of Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds
of all City officers, elective or appointive.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])



5.03    DUTIES:  GENERAL.



Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by
the Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



5.04    BOOKS AND RECORDS.



All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open
to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of
law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept
confidential.  Access to public records which are combined with data
processing software shall be in accordance with policies and procedures
established by the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A)



5.05    TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.



Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



5.06    MEETINGS.



All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi- membered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be
held in accordance with the following:



   1.   Notice of Meetings.  Reasonable notice, as defined by State
law, of the time, date and place of each meeting, and its tentative agenda
shall be given.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)



   2.   Meetings Open.  All meetings shall be held in open session
unless closed sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)



   3.   Minutes.  Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the
date, time and place, the members present, and the action taken at each
meeting.  The minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and
information sufficient to indicate the vote of each member present.  The
vote of each member present shall be made public at the open session.  The
minutes shall be public records open to public inspection.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)



   4.   Closed Session.  A closed session may be held only by
affirmative vote of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members
present at the meeting and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)



   5.   Cameras and Recorders.  The public may use cameras or
recording devices at any open session.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)



   6.   Electronic Meetings.  A meeting may be conducted by electronic
means only in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or
impractical and then only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of
the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)



5.07    CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in
any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to
be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. 
A contract entered into in violation of this section is void.  The
provisions of this section do not apply to:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)



   1.   Compensation of Officers.  The payment of lawful compensation
of a City officer or employee holding more than one City office or position,
the holding of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not
prohibited by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[1])



   2.   Investment of Funds.  The designation of a bank or trust
company as a depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[2])



   3.   City Treasurer.  An employee of a bank or trust company, who
serves as Treasurer of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3])



   4.   Stock Interests.  Contracts in which a City officer or
employee has an interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest
of the kind described in subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the
contracts are made by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and
opened, or if the remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as
a result of the contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve
the procurement or preparation of any part of the contract.  The competitive
bid qualification of this subsection does not apply to a contract for
professional services not customarily awarded by competitive bid.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[5])



   5.   Newspaper.  The designation of an official newspaper. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[6])



   6.   Existing Contracts.  A contract in which a City officer or
employee has an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer
or employee was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[7])



   7.   Volunteers.  Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil
defense volunteers.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[8])



   8.   Corporations.  A contract with a corporation in which a City
officer or employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less
than five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned
or controlled directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse
or immediate family of such officer or employee.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[9])



   9.   Contracts.  Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in
writing, publicly invited and opened. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[4])



   10.   Cumulative Purchases.  Contracts not otherwise permitted by
this section, for the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City
officer or employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do
not exceed a cumulative total purchase price of $6,000.00 in a fiscal year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3j])



   11.   Franchise Agreements.  Franchise agreements between the City
and a utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of
essential City utility services.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3k])



   12.   Third Party Contracts.  A contract that is a bond, note or
other obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from
the City but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may
not be the original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])



(Ord. 1479 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



5.08    RESIGNATIONS.



An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a resignation
in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and
considered.  A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible
for appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was
elected, if during that time the compensation of the office has been
increased.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])



5.09    REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to
City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order.  The order
shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall
be sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with
the Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the copy, shall
be granted a public hearing before the Council on all issues connected with
the removal.  The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the
date the request is filed, unless the person removed requests a later date.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)



5.10    VACANCIES.



A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled,
at the Council's option, by one of the two following procedures:




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2])




   1.   Appointment.  By appointment, following public notice, by the
remaining members of the Council.  The appointment shall be made within
sixty (60) days after the vacancy occurs and shall be for the period until
the next regular City election unless there is an intervening special
election for the City, in which event the election for the office shall be
placed on the ballot at such special election.  If the Council chooses to
proceed under this subsection, the Council shall publish notice of the
appointment in accordance with Section 372.13 of the Code of Iowa.  If the
remaining members do not constitute a quorum of the full membership, or if a
petition is filed requesting an election, the Council shall call a special
election as provided by law.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2a])




   2.   Special Election.  By a special election held to fill the
office for the remaining balance of the unexpired term as provided by law.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2b])





(Ord. 1404 - Oct. 14 Supp.)




5.11    GIFTS.



Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or
series of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a
restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly
with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of
gifts to a public official, public employee or candidate.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)



CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS



 

6.01  Nominating Method to be Used
 
6.06  Time Held


6.02  Candidacy
 
6.07  Candidates Elected


6.03  Run-off Election in Lieu of Primary
 
6.08  Wards


6.04  Run-off Election Procedure
 
6.09  Precincts


6.05  Qualification
 



 



6.01    NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.



All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the
provisions of Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)



6.02    CANDIDACY.



An eligible elector of the City may become a candidate for an elective City
office by filing with the County Commissioner of Elections a valid petition
requesting that the elector's name be placed on the ballot for that office. 
The petition must be signed by eligible electors equal in number to at least
two percent (2%) of those who voted to fill the same office at the last
regular City election, but not less than ten (10) persons.



(Ord. 1405 - Oct. 14 Supp.)



6.03    RUN-OFF ELECTION IN LIEU OF PRIMARY.



A run-off election shall be held in lieu of a primary election for the
choosing of persons for elective offices. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.6)



6.04    RUN-OFF ELECTION PROCEDURE.



A run-off election shall be held only for positions unfilled because of
failure of a sufficient number of candidates to receive a majority vote in
the regular City election.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)



6.05    QUALIFICATION.



Candidates who do not receive a majority of the votes cast for an office, but
who receive the highest number of votes cast for that office in the regular
City election, to the extent of twice the number of unfilled positions, are
candidates in the run-off elections.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)



6.06    TIME HELD.



Run-off elections shall be held four (4) weeks after the date of the regular
City election and shall be conducted in the same manner as regular City
elections.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)



6.07    CANDIDATES ELECTED.



Candidates in the run-off election who receive the highest number of votes
cast for each office on the ballot are elected to the extent necessary to
fill the positions open.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)



6.08    WARDS.



The City is divided into four (4) wards as follows:



   1.   The First Ward shall be all of that part of the City which is
encompassed by a line beginning at the intersection of the centerline of
Sixth Avenue at the east City limits and extending west along the centerline
of Sixth Avenue to the centerline of Park Street, then extending north along
the centerline of Park Street to the centerline of Ninth Avenue, then
extending west on Ninth Avenue to the centerline of Broad Street, then
extending north on Broad Street to 12th Avenue, then continuing on the
centerline of Country Club Drive to the centerline of Sixteenth Avenue, then
extending west to the centerline of West Street, then extending north to the
existing corporate limits, then extending east and south along the corporate
limits to the point of beginning.



   2.   The Second Ward shall be all of that part of the City which is
encompassed by a line beginning at the intersection of the centerline of
Sixth Avenue at the west City limits and extending east along Sixth Avenue to
the centerline of Bliss Street, then extending north to the centerline of
Eighth Avenue, then extending east on the centerline of Eighth Avenue to the
centerline of Spencer Street, then extending south on the centerline of
Spencer Street to the centerline of Sixth Avenue, then extending east on the
centerline of Sixth Avenue to the centerline of Park Street, then extending
north along the centerline of Park Street to the centerline of Ninth Avenue,
then extending west on Ninth Avenue to the centerline of Broad Street, then
extending north on Broad Street to 12th Avenue, then continuing on the
centerline of Country Club Drive to the centerline of Sixteenth Avenue, then
extending west to the centerline of West Street, then extending north to the
existing corporate limits, then extending west and south along the existing
corporate limits to the point of beginning.



   3.   The Third Ward shall be all of that part of the City which is
encompassed by a line beginning at the intersection of the centerline of
Sixth Avenue at the west City limits and extending east along Sixth Avenue to
the centerline of Bliss Street, then extending north to the centerline of
Eighth Avenue, then extending east on the centerline of Eighth Avenue to the
centerline of Spencer Street, then extending south on the centerline of
Spencer Street to the centerline of Sixth Avenue, then extending east to the
centerline of Broad Street, then  extending south on the centerline of Broad
Street to the centerline of First Avenue, then extending east on the
centerline of First Avenue to the centerline of Park Street, then south on
the centerline of Park Street to the centerline of Washington Avenue, then
extending east on Washington Avenue to the centerline of the Union Pacific
Railroad, then extending south on the centerline of the Union Pacific
Railroad to the intersection with the existing corporate limits, then
extending south, west and north along the existing corporate limits to the
point of beginning.



   4.   The Fourth Ward shall include all of that part of the City
lying south of the First Ward and east of the Third Ward.



(Ord. 1358 – Nov. 11 Supp.)



6.09    PRECINCTS.



The following wards shall have the precinct designations as follows:



   1.   The First Ward as described in Section 6.08 shall be the Sixth
Precinct.



   2.   The Second Ward as described in Section 6.08 shall be the
Seventh Precinct.



   3.   The Third Ward as described in Section 6.08 shall be the Eighth
Precinct.



   4.   The Fourth Ward as described in Section 6.08 shall be the Ninth
Precinct.



CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT



 

7.01  Purpose
 
7.05  Operating Budget Preparation


7.02  Finance Officer
 
7.06  Budget Amendments


7.03  Cash Control
 
7.07  Accounting


7.04  Fund Control
 
7.08  Financial Reports



 



7.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules
and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.



7.02    FINANCE OFFICER.



The Clerk is the finance and accounting officer of the City and is
responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.



7.03    CASH CONTROL.



To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following
shall apply:



   1.   Deposit of Funds.  All moneys or fees collected for any
purpose by any City officer shall be deposited through the office of the
finance officer.  If any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid
to the officer by check drawn by the finance officer and approved by the
Council only upon such officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto
as required by law, ordinance or Council directive. 



   2.   Deposits and Investments.  All moneys belonging to the City
shall be promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in
amounts not exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the
Council or invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy
and State law, including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of
the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)



7.04    FUND CONTROL.



There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in
accordance with the following: 



   1.   Revenues.  All moneys received by the City shall be credited
to the proper fund as required by law, ordinance or resolution.



   2.   Expenditures.  No disbursement shall be made from a fund
unless such disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was
properly budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council. 



   3.   Emergency Fund.  No transfer may be made from any fund to the
Emergency Fund.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])



   4.   Debt Service Fund.  Except where specifically prohibited by
State law, moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt
Service Fund to meet payments of principal and interest.  Such transfers
must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])



   5.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund.  Except where specifically
prohibited by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the
Capital Improvements Reserve Fund.  Such transfers must be authorized by the
original budget or a budget amendment.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4])



   6.   Utility and Enterprise Funds.  A surplus in a Utility or
Enterprise Fund may be transferred to any other City fund, except the
Emergency Fund and Road Use Tax Funds, by resolution of the Council.  A
surplus may exist only after all required transfers have been made to any
restricted accounts in accordance with the terms and provisions of any
revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the Utility or Enterprise
Fund.  A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the operating account or
the unrestricted retained earnings calculated in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles in excess of:



      A.   The amount of the expense of disbursements for operating
and maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three (3) months,
and



      B.   The amount necessary to make all required transfers to
restricted accounts for the succeeding three (3) months.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5])



   7.   Balancing of Funds.  Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the
close of each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.



7.05    OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.



The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
the following:



   1.   Proposal Prepared.  The finance officer is responsible for
preparation of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council
and adoption by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and
Council.



   2.   Boards and Commissions.  All boards, commissions, and other
administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and
administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the finance officer
for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such form as
required by the Council.



   3.   Submission to Council.  The finance officer shall submit the
completed budget proposal to the Council each year at such time as directed
by the Council.



   4.   Resolution Establishing Maximum Property Tax Dollars.  The
Council shall adopt a resolution establishing the total maximum property tax
dollars that may be certified for levy that includes taxes for City
government purposes under Code of Iowa Section 384.1, for the City's trust
and agency fund under Code of Iowa Section 384.6, Subsection 1, for the
City's emergency fund under Code of Iowa Section 384.8, and for the levies
authorized under Code of Iowa Section 384.12, Subsections 8, 10, 11, 12, 13,
17, and 21, but excluding additions approved at election under Code of Iowa
Section 384.12, Subsection 19.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.15A)



      A.   The Council shall set a time and place for a public
hearing on the resolution before the date for adoption of the resolution and
shall publish notice of the hearing not less than 10 nor more than 20 days
prior to the hearing in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having
general circulation in the City.



      B.   If the City has an internet site, the notice shall also
be posted and clearly identified on the City's internet site for public
viewing beginning on the date of the newspaper publication or public posting,
as applicable.  Additionally, if the City maintains a social media account
on one or more social media applications, the public hearing notice or an
electronic link to the public hearing notice shall be posted on each such
account on the same day as the publication of the notice.  All of the
following shall be included in the notice:



         (1)   The sum of the current fiscal year's actual
property taxes certified for levy under the levies specified in this
subsection and the current fiscal year's combined property tax levy rate for
such amount that is applicable to taxable property in the City other than
property used and assessed for agricultural or horticultural purposes.



         (2)   The effective tax rate calculated using the sum of
the current fiscal year's actual property taxes certified for levy under the
levies specified in this subsection, applicable to taxable property in the
City other than property used and assessed for agricultural or horticultural
purposes.



         (3)   The sum of the proposed maximum property tax
dollars that may be certified for levy for the budget year under the levies
specified in this subsection and the proposed combined property tax levy rate
for such amount applicable to taxable property in the City other than
property used and assessed for agricultural or horticultural purposes.



         (4)   If the proposed maximum property tax dollars
specified under Subparagraph (3) exceed the current fiscal year's actual
property tax dollars certified for levy specified in Subparagraph (1), a
statement of the major reasons for the increase.



      Proof of publication shall be filed with and preserved by the
County Auditor.  The Department of Management shall prescribe the form for
the public hearing notice for cities and the form for the resolution to be
adopted by the Council under Paragraph C of this subsection.



      C.   At the public hearing, the Council shall receive oral or
written objections from any resident or property owner of the City.  After
all objections have been received and considered, the Council may decrease,
but not increase, the proposed maximum property tax dollar amount for
inclusion in the resolution and shall adopt the resolution and file the
resolution with the County Auditor as required under Code of Iowa Section
384.16, Subsection 3.



      D.   If the sum of the maximum property tax dollars for the
budget year specified in the resolution under the levies specified in this
subsection exceeds 102 percent of the sum of the current fiscal year's actual
property taxes certified for levy under the levies specified in this
subsection, the Council shall be required to adopt the resolution by a
two-thirds majority of the membership of the Council.



      E.   If the City has an internet site, in addition to filing
the resolution with the Auditor under Code of Iowa Section 384.16, Subsection
3, the adopted resolution shall be posted and clearly identified on the
City's internet site for public viewing within 10 days of approval by the
Council.  The posted resolution for a budget year shall continue to be
accessible for public viewing on the internet site along with resolutions
posted for all subsequent budget years.



   5.   Council Review.  The Council shall review the proposed budget
and may make any adjustments it deems appropriate in the budget before
accepting such proposal for publication, hearing, and final adoption.



   6.   Notice of Hearing.  Following, and not until adoption of the
resolution required under Subsection 4 of this section, the Council shall set
a time and place for public hearing on the budget to be held before March 31
and shall publish notice of the hearing not less than 10 nor more than 20
days before the hearing.  A summary of the proposed budget and a description
of the procedure for protesting the City budget under Section 384.19 of the
Code of Iowa, in the form prescribed by the Director of the Department of
Management, shall be included in the notice.  Proof of publication of the
notice under this subsection and a copy of the resolution adopted under
Subsection 4 of this section must be filed with the County Auditor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])



   7.   Copies of Budget on File.  Not less than 20 days before the
date that the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less
than 10 days before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a
sufficient number of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of
taxpayers and organizations, and have them available for distribution at the
offices of the Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])



   8.   Adoption and Certification.  After the hearing, the Council
shall adopt, by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and
the Clerk shall certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to
the County Auditor and the County Board of Supervisors.  The tax levy
certified may be less than, but not more than, the amount estimated in the
proposed budget submitted at the final hearing or the applicable amount
specified in the resolution adopted under Subsection 4 of this section.  Two
copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax certificate must
be transmitted to the County Auditor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])



(Ord. 1477 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



7.06    BUDGET AMENDMENTS.



A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes effective
July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and purpose
specified therein until amended as provided by this section.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)



   1.   Program Increase.  Any increase in the amount appropriated to
a program must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner
as the original budget.



(IAC, 545-2.2[384, 388])



   2.   Program Transfer.  Any transfer of appropriation from one
program to another must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the
same manner as the original budget. 



(IAC, 545-2.3[384, 388])



   3.   Activity Transfer.  Any transfer of appropriation from one
activity to another activity within a program must be approved by resolution
of the Council. 



(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])



   4.   Administrative Transfers.  The finance officer shall have the
authority to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated
within a specific activity without prior Council approval. 



(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])



7.07    ACCOUNTING.



The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:



   1.   Books of Original Entry.  There shall be established and
maintained books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash
received and disbursed.



   2.   General Ledger.  There shall be established and maintained a
general ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for
recording unappropriated surpluses.



   3.   Checks.  Two signatures are required on all City checks. 
Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by any two of the following:  the
Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem, City Clerk and Deputy City Clerk, following Council
approval, except as provided by subsection 5 hereof.



   4.   Budget Accounts.  There shall be established such individual
accounts to record receipts by source and expenditures by program and
activity as will provide adequate information and control for budgeting
purposes as planned and approved by the Council.  Each individual account
shall be maintained within its proper fund and so kept that receipts can be
immediately and directly compared with revenue estimates and expenditures can
be related to the authorizing appropriation.  No expenditure shall be posted
except to the appropriation for the function and purpose for which the
expense was incurred.



   5.   Immediate Payment Authorized.  The Council may by resolution
authorize the Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due,
which if not paid promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late
payment or additional interest cost.  Any such payments made shall be
reported to the Council for review and approval with and in the same manner
as other claims at the next meeting following such payment.  The resolution
authorizing immediate payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized
and may include but is not limited to payment of utility bills, contractual
obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest.



   6.   Utilities.  The finance officer shall perform and be
responsible for accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities.



7.08    FINANCIAL REPORTS.



The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports:



   1.   Monthly Reports.  There shall be submitted to the Council each
month a report showing the activity and status of each fund, program,
sub-program and activity for the preceding month.



   2.   Annual Report.  Not later than December 1 of each year there
shall be published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding
fiscal year of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and
all expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt
limit of the City for the current fiscal year.  A copy of the annual report
must be filed with the Auditor of State not later than December 1 of each
year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)



CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS



 

8.01  Purpose
 
8.06  Applications


8.02  Definitions
 
8.07  Approval


8.03  Period of Partial Exemption
 
8.08  Exemption Repealed


8.04  Amounts Eligible for Exemption
 
8.09  Dual Exemptions Prohibited


8.05  Limitations
 



 



8.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from
property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the
new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities,
warehouses and distribution centers.



8.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the
first year for which the exemption is received.



   2.   “Distribution center” means a building or structure used
primarily for the storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment
to retail outlets.  Distribution center does not mean a building or
structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily
by a manufacturer to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process,
used primarily for the storage of petroleum products, or used for the retail
sale of goods.



   3.   “New construction” means new buildings and structures and
includes new buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to
existing buildings and structures.  New construction does not include
reconstruction of an existing building or structure which does not constitute
complete replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an
existing building or structure unless the reconstruction of an existing
building or structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the
reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for
the manufacturing and processing of specific products and the reconstruction
is required for the owner of the building or structure to continue
competitively to manufacture or process those products, which determination
shall receive prior approval from the City Council of the City upon the
recommendation of the Iowa Department of Economic Development.



   4.   “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of
buildings devoted primarily to research and development activities,
including, but not limited to, the design and production or manufacture of
prototype products for experimental use, and corporate research services
which do not have a primary purpose of providing on-site services to the
public.



   5.   “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public
warehouse for the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the
Code of Iowa, except that it does not mean a building or structure used
primarily to store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at
retail.



8.03    PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION.



The actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of
industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses and
distribution centers is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation
for a period of five (5) years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)



8.04    AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION.



The amount of actual value added which is eligible to be exempt from taxation
shall be as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)



   1.   For the first year, seventy-five percent (75%) 



   2.   For the second year, sixty percent (60%)



   3.   For the third year, forty-five percent (45%) 



   4.   For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%) 



   5.   For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%)



8.05    LIMITATIONS.



The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction
constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall
not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced
below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of
the new construction added.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)



8.06    APPLICATIONS.



An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value
added for which an exemption is claimed.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)



   1.   The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of
the property with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in
which the value added is first assessed for taxation.



   2.   Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by
the Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the
nature of the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary
by the Director of Revenue.



8.07    APPROVAL.



A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior approval
for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction.  If the City
Council resolves to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold
a public hearing thereon.  Thereafter, at least thirty (30) days after such
hearing the City Council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax
exemption for new construction if the new construction is in conformance with
City zoning.  Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption
from taxation until the new construction has been completed and found to be
qualified real estate.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)



8.08    EXEMPTION REPEALED.



When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of the exemption granted
by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the City Council may
repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their
expiration.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)



8.09    DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED.



A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the
property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property
tax exemption authorized by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)



CHAPTER 9
URBAN RENEWAL



 



EDITOR’S NOTE


The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.


ORDINANCE NO.
 
ADOPTED
 
NAME OF AREA


1057
 
May 12, 1994
 
Grinnell Urban Renewal Area


1059
 
June 6, 1994
 
Amended Ordinance 1057


1247
 
April 18, 2005
 
Amended Ordinance 1057


1280
 
October 16, 2006
 
Amended Ordinances 1057 and 1247


1332
 
November 16, 2009
 
Amended Ordinances 1057, 1247 and 1280


1361
 
February 20, 2012
 
Amended Ordinances 1057, 1247, 1280 and 1332


1373
 
November 19, 2012
 
Amended Ordinances 1057, 1247, 1280 1332 and 1361


1393
 
March 17, 2014
 
Amended Ordinances 1057, 1247, 1280, 1332, 1361 and 1373


1418
 
February 1, 2016
 
Amended Ordinances 1057, 1247, 1280, 1332, 1361, 1373 and 1393


 
 
 
 
 




 



CHAPTER 10
URBAN REVITALIZATION



 



EDITOR’S NOTE


The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City
and remain in full force and effect.


ORDINANCE NO.
 
ADOPTED
 
NAME OF AREA


1347
 
August 2, 2010
 
Urban Revitalization Area of the City of Grinnell


1382
 
October 21, 2013
 
Amendment No. 2 to the Urban Revitalization Area of the City of Grinnell


1383
 
October 21, 2013
 
2013 Central Urban Revitalization Area of the City of Grinnell


1400
 
July 21, 2014
 
Amendment No. 3 to the Urban Revitalization Area of the City of Grinnell


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 




 



CHAPTER 15
MAYOR



 

15.01  Term of Office
 
15.04  Compensation


15.02  Powers and Duties
 
15.05  Voting


15.03  Appointments
 



 



15.01    TERM OF OFFICE.



The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)



15.02    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:



   1.   Chief Executive Officer.  Act as the chief executive officer
of the City and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all departments
of the City, except for supervisory duties delegated to the City Manager,
give direction to department heads concerning the functions of the
departments, and have the power to examine all functions of the municipal
departments, their records and to call for special reports from department
heads at any time. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])



   2.   Proclamation of Emergency.  Have authority to take command of
the police and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination
that a time of emergency or public danger exists.  Within the City limits,
the Mayor has all the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])



   3.   Special Meetings.  Call special meetings of the Council when
the Mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.   



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])



   4.   Mayor’s Veto.  Sign, veto or take no action on an ordinance,
amendment or resolution passed by the Council.  The Mayor may veto an
ordinance, amendment or resolution within fourteen days after passage. 
However, the Mayor may not veto an ordinance, amendment or resolution if the
Mayor was entitled to vote on such measure at the time of passage.  The
Mayor shall explain the reasons for the veto in a written message to the
Council at the time of the veto.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2])



   5.   Reports to Council.  Make such oral or written reports to the
Council as required.  These reports shall concern municipal affairs
generally, the municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for
Council action.



   6.   Negotiations.  Represent the City in all negotiations properly
entered into in accordance with law or ordinance.  The Mayor shall not
represent the City where this duty is specifically delegated to another
officer by law, ordinance, or Council direction.



   7.   Contracts.  Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts
on behalf of the City.



   8.   Professional Services.  Upon order of the Council, secure for
the City such specialized and professional services not already available to
the City.  In executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in
accordance with the Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State. 



   9.   Licenses and Permits.  Sign all licenses and permits which
have been granted by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance
to be issued by another municipal officer.



   10.   Nuisances.  Issue written order for removal, at public
expense, any nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.



   11.   Absentee Officer.  Make appropriate provision that duties of
any absentee officer be carried on during such absence.



15.03    APPOINTMENTS.



The Mayor shall appoint the Mayor Pro Tem, and the Mayor also shall appoint,
with Council approval, the following officials:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)



   1.   Library Board of Trustees



   2.   Park Board



   3.   Recreation Board



   4.   Historic Preservation Commission



   5.   Civil Service Commission



   6.   Renaissance Board



   7.   Human Rights Commission



   8.   Veterans Memorial Commission



   9.   Low Rent Housing Commission



15.04    COMPENSATION.



The salary of the Mayor is six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) per year, payable
in equal monthly installments.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



15.05    VOTING.



So long as the City is governed by the Mayor-Council form of government
composed of a Mayor and a Council consisting of two Council members elected
at large, and one Council member from each of four wards, the Mayor may vote
to break a tie vote on motions not involving ordinances, resolutions or
appointments made by the Council alone.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)



CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM



 

16.01  Vice President of Council
 
16.03  Voting Rights


16.02  Powers and Duties
 
16.04  Compensation



 



16.01    VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.



The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall
serve as vice president of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])



16.02    POWERS AND DUTIES.



Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall
perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the Mayor
to perform such duties.  In the exercise of the duties of the office the
Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ or discharge from
employment, officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint,
employ or discharge without the approval of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])



16.03    VOTING RIGHTS.



The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])



16.04    COMPENSATION.



If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s
absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days or more,
the Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined
by the Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s
duties and upon the compensation of the Mayor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



CHAPTER 17
COUNCIL



 

17.01  Number and Term of Council
 
17.04  Council Meetings


17.02  Powers and Duties
 
17.05  Appointments


17.03  Exercise of Power
 
17.06  Compensation



 



17.01    NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.



The Council consists of two Council Members elected at large and one Council
Member from each of four wards as established by the Code of Ordinances,
elected for overlapping terms of four years.



17.02    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the
following:



   1.   General.  All powers of the City are vested in the Council
except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])



   2.   Wards.  By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into
wards based upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards
or create new wards. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])



   3.   Fiscal Authority.  The Council shall apportion and appropriate
all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and
order payment thereof.  It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement or repairs which
may be specially assessed.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38[1])



   4.   Public Improvements.  The Council shall make all orders for
the construction of any improvements, bridges or buildings.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])



   5.   Contracts.  The Council shall make or authorize the making of
all contracts.  No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
approved by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 26.10)



   6.   Employees.  The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the
number, duties, term of office and compensation of employees or officers not
otherwise provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   7.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers.  By ordinance, the
Council shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and
other elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor
does not become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and
the Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of
any elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of
a regular City election.  A change in the compensation of Council members
becomes effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the
Council members elected at the election next following the change in
compensation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



17.03    EXERCISE OF POWER.



The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment or an ordinance in the following manner:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])



   1.   Action by Council.  Passage of an ordinance, amendment or
resolution requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. 
Passage of a motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council.  A
resolution must be passed to spend public funds in excess of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) on a public improvement project, or to accept
public improvements and facilities upon their completion.  Each Council
member’s vote on a measure must be recorded.  A measure which fails to
receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)



   2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto.  Within thirty (30) days after the
Mayor’s veto, the Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less
than two-thirds of all of the members of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])



   3.   Measures Become Effective.  Measures passed by the Council
become effective in one of the following ways:



      A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes
effective when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published,
unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])



      B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective
immediately upon signing.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])



      C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of
the motion by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])



      D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution
and the Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution
becomes effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment
becomes a law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published,
unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])



      E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment
or resolution, a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the
date of passage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance
or a summary of the ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after
the date of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within
the ordinance or amendment.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])



“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the
Council including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but
does not include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason
of a conflict of interest.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)



17.04    COUNCIL MEETINGS.



Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions
regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section 5.06 of
this Code of Ordinances.  Additional particulars relating to Council
meetings are the following:



   1.   Regular Meetings.  Regular meetings of the Council shall be
held on the first and third Mondays of each month during the year, commencing
at 7:00 p.m.  An exception shall be made to this meeting time when a holiday
falls on a Monday, at which time the Council shall meet the following Tuesday
at 7:00 p.m.



   2.   Special Meetings.  Special meetings shall be held upon call of
the Mayor or upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council. 
A special meeting fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be collected by
the City for meetings requested by members of the public for specific
purposes other than regular Council business.  This fee shall be paid by the
requesting party, and shall cover the costs of recording and printing the
agenda and minutes and related administrative costs.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])



   3.   Quorum.  A majority of all Council members is a quorum.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])



   4.   Rules of Procedure.  The Council shall determine its own rules
and maintain records of its proceedings.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])



   5.   Compelling Attendance.  Any three members of the Council can
compel the attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned or duly
called meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend
at once. 



17.05    APPOINTMENTS.



The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers,
duties, compensation and term of office:



   1.   City Manager



   2.   City Clerk



   3.   Deputy City Clerk



   4.   City Attorney



   5.   Planning and Zoning Commission



   6.   Two members of Airport Zoning Commission



   7.   Zoning Board of Adjustment



   8.   Two members of Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment



17.06    COMPENSATION.



The salary of each Council member is twenty-four hundred dollars ($2400.00)
per year, payable in equal monthly installments.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK



 

18.01  Appointment and Compensation
 
18.08  Records


18.02  Powers and Duties: General
 
18.09  Attendance at Meetings


18.03  Publication of Minutes
 
18.10  Issue Licenses and Permits


18.04  Recording Measures
 
18.11  Notify Appointees


18.05  Publication
 
18.12  Elections


18.06  Authentication
 
18.13  City Seal


18.07  Certify Measures
 
18.14  Deputy Clerk



 



18.01    APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.



At its first meeting in January following the regular City election the
Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk to serve for a term of
two years.  The Clerk shall receive such compensation as established by
resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])



18.02    POWERS AND DUTIES:  GENERAL.



The Clerk, or in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk
has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of
Ordinances and the law.



18.03    PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.



The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and within
fifteen (15) days following a regular or special meeting shall cause the
minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published.  Such publication shall
include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall
show the gross amount of the claims.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])



18.04    RECORDING MEASURES.



The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and
record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the
Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether the
measure was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 & 2])



18.05    PUBLICATION.



The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings
and official notices requiring publication as follows:



   1.   Time.  If notice of an election, hearing, or other official
action is required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be
published at least once, not less than four (4) nor more than twenty (20)
days before the date of the election, hearing or other action, unless
otherwise provided by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])



   2.   Manner of Publication.  A publication required by this Code of
Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and
having general circulation in the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])



18.06    AUTHENTICATION.



The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s
signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])



18.07    CERTIFY MEASURES.



The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district,
building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or
limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the
City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)



18.08    RECORDS.



The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:



   1.   Ordinances and Codes.  Maintain copies of all effective City
ordinances and codes for public use.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])



   2.   Custody.  Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping
of all writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless
otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   3.   Maintenance.  Maintain all City records and documents, or
accurate reproductions, for at least five (5) years except that ordinances,
resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption
or replacement of public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least
eleven (11) years following the final maturity of the bonds or obligations. 
Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or
accurate reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall be
maintained permanently.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])



   4.   Provide Copy.  Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a
copy of any record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when
it may be necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s
duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee
set by Council resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other
authorized officer, affix the seal of the City to those public documents or
instruments which by ordinance and Code of Ordinances are required to be
attested by the affixing of the seal.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7[5])



   5.   Filing of Communications.  Keep and file all communications
and petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally.  The Clerk
shall endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered
in such communications and petitions.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.09    ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.



At the direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of
committees, boards and commissions.  The Clerk shall record and preserve a
correct record of the proceedings of such meetings.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.10    ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS.



The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this
Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which
shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt
number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit and purpose
for which issued.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.11    NOTIFY APPOINTEES.



The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to
offices in the City government of their positions and the time at which they
shall assume the duties of their offices.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.12    ELECTIONS.



The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with
Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.




(Ord. 1404 - Oct. 14 Supp.)




18.13    CITY SEAL.



The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the
Clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which it may be necessary
or proper to authenticate. 



18.14    DEPUTY CLERK.



The Council shall appoint a Deputy City Clerk who shall perform such duties
as may be prescribed by the Council or by the Clerk, and in the Clerk’s
absence, the Deputy Clerk shall have the full authority and power to act as
Clerk.



CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER



 

19.01  Appointment
 
19.03  Duties of Treasurer


19.02  Compensation
 



 



19.01    APPOINTMENT.



The City Clerk is the Treasurer and performs all functions required of the
position of Treasurer.



19.02    COMPENSATION.



The Clerk receives no additional compensation for performing the duties of
the Treasurer.



19.03    DUTIES OF TREASURER.



The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   Custody of Funds.  Be responsible for the safe custody of all
funds of the City in the manner provided by law, and Council direction.



   2.   Record of Fund.  Keep the record of each fund separate.



   3.   Record Receipts.  Keep an accurate record of all money or
securities received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the
date, from whom, and for what purpose received.



   4.   Record Disbursements.  Keep an accurate account of all
disbursements, money or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what
fund paid.



   5.   Special Assessments.  Keep a separate account of all money
received by the Treasurer from special assessments.



   6.   Deposit Funds.  Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the
Treasurer’s custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in
depositories selected by the Council.



   7.   Reconciliation.  Reconcile depository statements with the
Treasurer’s books and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash
and investments of each fund and amounts received and disbursed.



   8.   Debt Service.  Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and
record all payments of interest and principal.



   9.   Other Duties.  Perform such other duties as specified by the
Council by resolution or ordinance.



CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY



 

20.01  Appointment and Compensation
 
20.06  Provide Legal Opinion


20.02  Attorney for City
 
20.07  Attendance at Council Meetings


20.03  Power of Attorney
 
20.08  Prepare Documents


20.04  Ordinance Preparation
 
20.09  Representation of City Employees


20.05  Review and Comment
 
20.10  Assistant City Attorney



 



20.01    APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.



The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve for a
term of two years.  The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.02    ATTORNEY FOR CITY.



The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters affecting
the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court,
tribunal, commission or board.  The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend
all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.03    POWER OF ATTORNEY.



The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to
all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the
prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound
upon the same.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.04    ORDINANCE PREPARATION.



The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances which the Council may desire
and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances
before their final passage by the Council and publication.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.05    REVIEW AND COMMENT.



The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council giving an
opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to
or coming under the City Attorney’s notice.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.06    PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.



The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City
contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
Mayor, Council or City Manager.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.07    ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.



The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the
Mayor or Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.08    PREPARE DOCUMENTS.



The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms
and other writings which may be required for the use of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.09    REPRESENTATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES.



The City Attorney shall, if directed by the Council, appear to defend any
City officer or employee in any cause of action arising out of or in the
course of the performance of the duties of such person’s office or
employment.  The City Attorney also may appear on behalf of any City officer
or employee before any court or tribunal for the purely private benefit of
such officer or employee.



20.10    ASSISTANT CITY ATTORNEY.



The Council shall appoint an Assistant City Attorney, who shall perform such
duties as may be prescribed by the Council and by the City Attorney, and in
the City Attorney’s absence, the Assistant City Attorney shall have the
full power and authority to act as City Attorney.


Grinnell, IA Code of Ordinances


CHAPTER 21
CITY MANAGER



 

21.01  Appointment and Compensation
 
21.03  Powers and Duties Generally


21.02  Administrative Responsibility
 
21.04  City Elections



 



21.01    APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.



The Council shall appoint, by majority vote, a City Manager to serve at the
discretion of the Council, subject to the terms and conditions of any
existing agreement or pursuant to a contract executed by and between the City
Council and the City Manager.  The City Manager shall receive such annual
salary as the Council shall from time to time establish by resolution or
under the terms and conditions of any contract entered into between the City
Council and the Manager.



(Ord. 1346 – Aug. 10 Supp.)



21.02    ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY.



The City Manager is directly responsible to the Council for the
administration of municipal affairs as directed by that body.  All City
departmental administration requiring the attention of the Council shall be
brought before the Council by the Manager.  Council involvement in
administration initiated by the Council must be coordinated through the
Manager.



21.03    POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.



The powers and duties of the City Manager include the following:



   1.   To supervise enforcement and execution of the City laws.



   2.   To attend all meetings of the Council unless excused by the
Council.



   3.   To recommend to the Council such measures as may be necessary
or expedient for the good government and welfare of the City.



   4.   To have the general supervision and direction of the
administration of the City government.



   5.   To supervise and direct the official conduct of all officers,
departments and employees of the City, specifically including but not limited
to the finance and/or administrative officer, police, City Clerk, fire,
street, sanitation, and water treatment departments.  To effectuate this
responsibility, and subject to the exceptions set out herein, the City
Manager shall have the power and authority to employ such assistants,
supervisors, and other employees of the City for which the Council has
approved the position generally, and to discharge said assistants or
employees found incompetent or derelict in their duties (subject to civil
service rules that may apply).  The City Manager may delegate this power and
authority to subordinate officers and departments heads to such extent that
the Manager deems appropriate.  The power to hire and discharge shall not
apply to the position of City Clerk or City Attorney, but the City Manager
shall report to and advise the Council on the performance of the persons
filling those positions and make such recommendations with regard to their
employment as seems appropriate.



   6.   To supervise the performance of all contracts for work to be
done for the City, supervise all purchases of material and supplies, and see
that such material and supplies are received, and are of the quality and
character called for by the contract.



   7.   To supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance
and management of all City property, capital improvements, and undertakings
of the City, including the making and preservation of all surveys, maps,
plans, drawings, specifications, and estimates for capital improvements.



   8.   To cooperate with any administrative agency and make
recommendations to the Council for joint or cooperative activities with said
agencies.



   9.   To provide for and cause records to be kept of the issuance and
revocation of licenses and permits authorized by City law and to sign same
when authorized by this Code.



   10.   To keep the Council fully advised of the financial and other
conditions of the City, and of its future needs.



   11.   To conduct the business affairs of the City and cause accurate
records to be kept by modern and efficient accounting methods.



   12.   To make to the Council periodic itemized financial reports in
writing.



   13.   To investigate, summarily and without notice, the affairs and
conduct of any department, agency, officer, or employee under the Manager's
supervision, and compel the production of evidence and attendance of
witnesses.



   14.   To perform such other duties as the Council may direct.



21.04    CITY ELECTIONS.



The City Manager shall not take part in any election for City officers other
than casting a vote, and shall not appoint a Council Member to any other City
office or employment.



CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES



 

22.01  Public Library
 
22.07  Nonresident Use


22.02  Library Trustees
 
22.08  Expenditures


22.03  Qualifications of Trustees
 
22.09  Annual Report


22.04  Organization of the Board
 
22.10  Injury to Books or Property


22.05  Powers and Duties
 
22.11  Theft


22.06  Contracting with Other Libraries
 
22.12  Notice Posted



 



22.01    PUBLIC LIBRARY.



The public library for the City is known as the Drake Community Library. It
is referred to in this chapter as the Library.



(Ord. 1472 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



22.02    LIBRARY TRUSTEES.



The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
consists of seven resident members.  All members are to be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council. 



22.03    QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.



All members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the
City.  Members shall be over the age of eighteen (18) years.



22.04    ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.



The organization of the Board shall be as follows:



   1.   Term of Office.  All appointments to the Board shall be for
six years, except to fill vacancies.  Each term shall commence on July 1. 
Appointments shall be made every two years of one-third the total number or
as near as possible, to stagger the terms.



   2.   Vacancies.  The position of any Trustee shall be vacated if
such member moves permanently from the City and shall be deemed vacated if
such member is absent from six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the Board,
except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the City. 
Vacancies in the Board shall be filled in the same manner as an original
appointment except that the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for
which the appointment is made. 



   3.   Compensation.  Trustees shall receive no compensation for
their services. 



22.05    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:



   1.   Officers.  To meet and elect from its members a President, a
Vice President, a Secretary, and such other officers as it deems necessary. 
The City Treasurer shall serve as Board Treasurer, but shall not be a member
of the Board.



   2.   Physical Plant.  To have charge, control and supervision of
the Library, its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.



   3.   Charge of Affairs.  To direct and control all affairs of the
Library.



   4.   Hiring of Personnel.  To employ a Library Director, and
authorize the Library Director to employ such assistants and employees as may
be necessary for the proper management of the Library, and fix their
compensation; provided, however, that prior to such employment, the
compensation of the Library Director, assistants and employees shall have
been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the Board voting in
favor thereof.



   5.   Removal of Personnel.  To remove the Library Director, by a
two-thirds vote of the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the
assistants or employees for misdemeanor, incompetence or inattention to duty,
subject however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.



   6.   Purchases.  To select, or authorize the Library Director to
select, and make purchases of Library materials, furniture, fixtures,
stationery and supplies for the Library within budgetary limits set by the
Board.



   7.   Use by Nonresidents.  To authorize the use of the Library by
nonresidents and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service
exists.



   8.   Rules and Regulations.  To make and adopt, amend, modify or
repeal rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances
and the law, for the care, use, government and management of the Library and
the business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.



   9.   Expenditures.  To have exclusive control of the expenditure of
all funds allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys
available by gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of
all other moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals
collected under the rules of the Board.



   10.   Gifts.  To accept gifts of real property, personal property,
or mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take
the title to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and
bills of sale for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds
received by them from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.



   11.   Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts.  To enforce
the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests
accepted by the City by action against the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Ch. 661)



   12.   Record of Proceedings.  To keep a record of its proceedings.



   13.   Historical Associations and Other Entities.  To have
authority to make agreements with historical associations and other entities
where such exist, and with other relevant persons and organizations, and to
set apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into
the possession of such association or other entity.  The Trustees are
further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and materials for the
preservation and protection of such articles as are in their judgment of a
historical and educational nature and pay for the same out of funds allocated
for Library purposes.



22.06    CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.



The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the
following:



   1.   Contracting.  The Board may contract with any other boards of
trustees of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation,
private or semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning,
township, or County, or with the trustees of any County library district for
the use of the Library by their respective residents. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 & Ch. 28E)



   2.   Termination.  Such a contract may be terminated at any time by
mutual consent of the contracting parties.  It also may be terminated by a
majority vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting
parties.  Such a termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors
by the governing body of a contracting party on a written petition of not
less than five percent (5%) in number of the electors who voted for governor
in the territory of the contracting party at the last general election.  The
petition must be presented to the governing body not less than forty (40)
days before the election.  The proposition may be submitted at any election
provided by law that is held in the territory of the party seeking to
terminate the contract. 



22.07    NONRESIDENT USE.



The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of
the City or County in any one or more of the following ways:



   1.   Lending.  By lending the books or other materials of the
Library to nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of
the City, or County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee. 



   2.   Depository.  By establishing depositories of Library books or
other materials to be loaned to nonresidents. 



   3.   Bookmobiles.  By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling
library so that books or other Library materials may be loaned to
nonresidents. 



   4.   Branch Library.  By establishing branch libraries for lending
books or other Library materials to nonresidents. 



22.08    EXPENDITURES.



All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of
the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library.  Expenditures
shall be paid for only on orders of the Board.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5)



22.09    ANNUAL REPORT.



The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of
the fiscal year.  This report shall contain statements as to the condition
of the Library, the number of items added, the number circulated, the amount
of fines collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of
the Library during the year, together with such further information as may be
required by the Council.



22.10    INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.



It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear,
deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any library
materials or other property belonging to the Library.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



22.11    THEFT.



No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with
the intent to deprive the Library thereof.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)



22.12    NOTICE POSTED.



There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices
informing the public of the following:



   1.   Failure to Return.  Failure to return Library materials for
two months or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library
materials, or failure to return Library equipment for one month or more after
the date the person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence of
intent to deprive the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the
mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that such material or
equipment is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been made to
reclaim the materials or equipment. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)



   2.   Detention and Search.  Persons concealing Library materials
may be detained and searched pursuant to law. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)



CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION



 

23.01  Planning and Zoning Commission
 
23.04  Compensation


23.02  Term of Office
 
23.05  Powers and Duties


23.03  Vacancies
 



 



23.01    PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission, consists of seven members appointed by the Council.  The
Commission members shall be residents of the City and shall not hold any
elective office in the City government.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 & 392.1)



23.02    TERM OF OFFICE.



The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five years. 
The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one
year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



23.03    VACANCIES.



If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or otherwise,
a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner
as the original appointee.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



23.04    COMPENSATION.



All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



23.05    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:



   1.   Selection of Officers.  The Commission shall choose annually
at its first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and
another as Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the
Chairperson during the Chairperson’s absence or disability.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



   2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations.  The Commission shall adopt such
rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem
necessary.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



   3.   Zoning.  The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers
and duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and
other related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council
amendments, supplements, changes or modifications, all as provided by Chapter
414 of the Code of Iowa. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)



   4.   Review and Comment on Plats.  All plans, plats, or re-plats of
subdivision or re-subdivisions of land embraced in the City or adjacent
thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other
portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the public in the City,
shall first be submitted to the Commission and its recommendations obtained
before approval by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



   5.   Fiscal Responsibilities.  The Commission shall have full,
complete and exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the City all
sums of money appropriated to it, and to use and expend all gifts, donations
or payments whatsoever which are received by the City for City planning and
zoning purposes. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



   6.   Limitation on Entering Contracts.  The Commission shall have
no power to contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended
appropriation as approved by the Council for the present year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



CHAPTER 24
PARK BOARD



(Repealed by Ord. 1298 – Sep. 08 Supp.)



CHAPTER 25
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD



 

25.01  Parks and Recreation Board Created
 
25.05  Meetings


25.02  Membership
 
25.06  Duties of Board


25.03  Officers; Duties of Officers
 
25.07  Gifts and Donations


25.04  Director
 



 



25.01    PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD CREATED.



A Parks and Recreation Board is hereby created to advise the City Council in
matters of community recreational facilities, park development and the
overall presentation of the City’s park system.  The Board shall also plan
and review City-operated recreation programs and shall encourage privately
operated recreation programs for the leisure time enjoyment of Grinnell area
residents.



25.02    MEMBERSHIP.



The Parks and Recreation Board shall consist of seven members, all eligible
electors and residents of the City, appointed by the Mayor with the approval
of the Council.  The overlapping terms of the Board shall be for three years
except where appointment is made to fill an unexpired term.  Vacancies shall
be filled in the same manner as the original appointments.  If a vacancy
exists on such date and an appointment is made to fill that vacancy, the
appointment shall be made for the unexpired term associated with that
vacancy.  Members shall serve without compensation, but may receive
reimbursement for their actual expenses.  Each member shall be assigned one
of the following functional areas to oversee and report back to the Board as
necessary:



   Swimming pool, aquatics and athletics.



   Alternative transportation routes and recreation trails.



   Vegetation management, turf management, tree maintenance, and park and
grounds maintenance.



   Community wellness and children’s activities.



   Public information and donor and volunteer development.



   Special planting projects, community beautification and volunteer
development.



   Senior activities, Central Park, and volunteer development.



25.03    OFFICERS; DUTIES OF OFFICERS.



   1.   Selection.  The officers of the Board shall be the Chairperson
and Vice Chairperson who shall be elected at the first meeting of the Board
in July of each even-numbered year.  Officers shall serve two-year terms.



   2.   Duties.  The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and
decide on all points of order and procedure.  In the absence of the
Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson shall be the presiding officer and assume
all responsibilities of the Chairperson.



25.04    DIRECTOR.



The Parks and Recreation Director shall be appointed by the City Manager
after consultation with the Parks and Recreation Board.  As a part of that
consultation, the Board shall be involved in the review of all applications
for the position and shall advise the City Manager of their opinion regarding
the various candidates.  If the Board does not wish to be involved in the
review of applications, they shall advise the City Manager as to the type of
involvement they wish to have as a Board.  The City Manager shall make the
final selection of the Director.  The Parks and Recreation Director shall
have the following duties in addition to any other duties and obligations set
out in the job description for the position or as may be from time to time
designated by the City Manager or by the Parks and Recreation Board with the
concurrence of the City Manager.



   1.   To attend all meetings of the Parks and Recreation Board, to
take part in discussion of the Board, and to keep the Board informed of the
activities of the Parks and Recreation Department, and other matters relevant
to the maintenance and operation of the department.



   2.   To inform the City Manager of the recommendations of the Board
so that recommendations can be acted upon by the Council and/or the City
Manager.



   3.   To serve as a Secretary to the Board (the Director may assign
another recreation department employee to actually record minutes and to do
related work) and shall be responsible for preparing the agenda for all Board
meetings, giving advanced public notice of Board meetings, and preparing the
minutes of the Board proceedings.



   4.   To provide background information on agenda topics, assist
citizens to bring ideas forward to the Board, provide information about
methods to improve operations, and to provide a monthly report of the
activities of the Director and the other staff.



   5.   To serve as the coordinator with other City departments,
boards, and commissions, to insure timely, effective, and efficient provision
of services to citizens and fellow employees.



25.05    MEETINGS.



The Board shall hold regular monthly meetings at a date, time, and place as
determined by the Board.  Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson
or in the absence of the Chairperson by the Vice Chairperson.  All meetings
shall be open to the public.  A quorum shall consist of four members of the
Board.



25.06    DUTIES OF BOARD.



The duties of the Parks and Recreation Board shall be to make recommendations
to the Council in regard to:



   1.   The budget providing for the operations of the Parks and
Recreation Department.  Including the swimming pool, parks and public
grounds maintenance, cemetery, recreation programs, community wellness
activities, city employee wellness and safety programs, community
beautification efforts, and other park and recreation activities which the
department may become involved.



   2.   The establishment of fees, rules and policies for the
activities, facilities, equipment and grounds of the Parks and Recreation
Department.



   3.   The planning and implementation of park and recreation
improvements.



   4.   Park presentation (maintenance of the buildings and equipment,
health and appearance of plantings).



   5.   Long-term capital improvements program for park and recreation
facilities.



   6.   To promote park and recreation activities that will benefit all
the citizens of the Grinnell area.



25.07    GIFTS AND DONATIONS.



All grants, gifts, and donations which are received by the City and
subsequently designated to be used for park and recreation purposes only,
shall be placed in a special park and recreation fund to be expended in a
manner recommended by the Board and authorized by the Council.



(Ch. 25 - Ord. 1298 – Sep. 08 Supp.)



CHAPTER 26
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION



 

26.01  Purpose and Intent
 
26.03  Structure of the Commission


26.02  Definitions
 
26.04  Powers of the Commission



 



26.01    PURPOSE AND INTENT.



The purposes of this chapter are to:



   1.   Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare
of the public through the recognition, enhancement and perpetuation of sites
and districts of historical and cultural significance;



   2.   Safeguard the City’s historic, aesthetic and cultural
heritage by preserving sites and districts of historic and cultural
significance;



   3.   Stabilize and improve property values;



   4.   Foster pride in the legacy of beauty and achievements of the
past;



   5.   Protect and enhance the City’s attractions to tourists and
visitors and the support and stimulus to business thereby provided;



   6.   Strengthen the economy of the City;



   7.   Promote the use of sites and districts of historic and cultural
significance as places for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people
of the City.



26.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Commission” means the Grinnell Historic Preservation
Commission, as established by this chapter.



   2.   “Historic district” means an area which contains a
significant portion of buildings, structures or other improvements which,
considered as a whole, possess integrity of location, design, setting,
materials, workmanship, feeling and association, and which area as a whole:



      A.   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type,
period or method of construction, or represents the work of a master, or
possesses high artistic values, or represents a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or



      B.   Is associated with events that have made significant
contributions to the broad patterns of our local, state or national history;
or



      C.   Possesses a coherent and distinctive visual character or
integrity based upon similarity of scale, design, color, setting,
workmanship, materials or combinations thereof which is deemed to add
significantly to the value and attractiveness of properties within such area;
or



      D.   Is associated with the lives of persons significant in
our past; or



      E.   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information
important in prehistory or history.



   3.   “Historic site” means a structure or building which:



      A.   Is associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or



      B.   Is associated with the lives of persons significant in
our past; or



      C.   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type,
period or method of construction or represents the work of a master, or
possesses high artistic values, or represents a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or



      D.   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information
important in prehistory or history.



26.03    STRUCTURE OF COMMISSION. 



   1.   The Commission consists of five (5) members who are residents
of the City.



   2.   Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council.  Members shall demonstrate a positive
interest in historic preservation, possessing interest or expertise in
architecture, architectural history, historic preservation, city planning,
building rehabilitation, conservation in general or real estate.



   3.   The Commission members are appointed for staggered terms of
three (3) years.  Members may serve for more than one term.  Each member
shall serve until the appointment of a successor.



   4.   Vacancies occurring in the Commission, other than expiration of
term of office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term of the
member replaced.



   5.   Members shall serve without compensation.



   6.   A simple majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business.



   7.   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson who shall preside over
all Commission meetings and elect a Secretary who shall be responsible for
maintaining written records of the Commission’s proceedings.



   8.   The Commission shall meet as needed.



26.04    POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.



   1.   The Commission may conduct studies for the identification and
designation of historic districts and sites meeting the definitions
established by this chapter.  (The necessary inventory forms and procedures
for their completion are available from the State Bureau of Historic
Preservation.)  The Commission may proceed at its own initiative or upon a
petition from any person, group or association.  The Commission shall
maintain records of all studies and inventories for public use.



   2.   The Commission may make a recommendation to the State Bureau of
Historic Preservation for the listing of an historic district or site in the
National Register of Historic Places and may conduct a public hearing thereon.



   3.   The Commission may investigate and recommend to the Council the
adoption of ordinances designating historic sites and historic districts if
they qualify as defined herein.



   4.   In addition to those duties and powers specified above, the
Commission may, with Council approval,



      A.   Cooperate with Federal, State and local governments in
the pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation;



      B.   Provide information for the purpose of historic
preservation to the Council; and



      C.   Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive
program on historic properties within its jurisdiction.



CHAPTER 27
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION



 

27.01  Purpose
 
27.06  Chairperson


27.02  Appointment and Term
 
27.07  Clerk


27.03  Qualifications
 
27.08  Records


27.04  Human Rights Commission
 
27.09  Rooms and Supplies


27.05  Compensation
 
27.10  Powers and Duties



 



27.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the appointment, powers and
duties of a Civil Service Commission in accordance with the requirements of
State law.



27.02    APPOINTMENT AND TERM.



A Civil Service Commission consisting of three members shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the Council for staggered terms of four years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.1)



27.03    QUALIFICATIONS.



Commissioners must be citizens of Iowa, eligible electors and residents of
the City preceding their appointment.  No person while on said Commission
shall hold or be a candidate for any office of public trust.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)



27.04    HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION.



Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 27.03, when a human rights
commission has been established, the director thereof shall ex officio be a
member, without vote, of the Civil Service Commission.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)



27.05    COMPENSATION.



Civil Service Commissioners shall serve without compensation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)



27.06    CHAIRPERSON.



The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)



27.07    CLERK.



The City Clerk shall be clerk of the Commission.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)



27.08    RECORDS.



The Civil Service Commission shall keep a record of all its meetings and also
a complete individual service record of each civil service employee which
record shall be permanent and kept up to date.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)



27.09    ROOMS AND SUPPLIES.



The Council shall provide suitable rooms in which the Commission may hold its
meetings and supply the Commission with all necessary equipment and a
qualified shorthand reporter or an electronic voice recording device to
enable it to properly perform its duties.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.5)



27.10    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The Commission shall administer the civil service procedure as contained in
Chapter 400, Code of Iowa, and amendments thereto and shall have, exercise
and perform all powers and duties as provided thereby. 



CHAPTER 28
AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION



 

28.01  Airport Zoning Commission
 
28.03  Removal; Vacancies


28.02  Terms of Office
 
28.04  Powers and Duties



 



28.01    AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION.



There shall be an Airport Zoning Commission consisting of five members, two
of whom shall be selected by the Board of Supervisors of the County, two of
whom shall be selected by the Council, and one additional member to act as
Chairperson shall be selected by a majority vote of the members selected by
the County and City as herein provided.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 329.9)



28.02    TERMS OF OFFICE.



The terms of the members of the Commission shall be six years.  Appointments
shall be made every two years of one-third the total number or as near as
possible, to provide for staggered terms.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 329.9)



28.03    REMOVAL; VACANCIES.



Members of the Commission may be removed for cause by the appointing
authority upon written charges after public hearing. Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term of any member whose office becomes vacant in
the same manner in which said member was selected.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 329.9)



28.04    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The Commission shall have all the powers, duties and authority vested in it
by the laws of the State, now in effect or which may be hereafter enacted,
and by resolution and ordinances of the County and City.



CHAPTER 29
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION



 



29.01  Purpose
 
29.09  Discriminatory Credit Practices


29.02  Definitions
 
29.10  Aiding, Abetting, Compelling and Coercing


29.03  Human Rights Commission
 
29.11  Retaliation


29.04  Powers and Responsibilities of the Commission
 
29.12  Interference, Coercion and Intimidation


29.05  Discriminatory Employment Practices
 
29.13  Procedures and Enforcement


29.06  Discriminatory Public Accommodation Practices
 
29.14  Exceptions for Retirement Plans, Life, Disabilityand Health Benefits


29.07  Discriminatory Housing Practices
 
29.15  Rule of Construction


29.08  Discriminatory Education Practices
 
 




 



29.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Human Rights Commission
consistent with the Iowa Civil Rights Act (Chapter 216, Code of Iowa); to
recognize the authority of the Iowa Civil Rights Commission and foster use of
its procedures and programs; to increase awareness, understanding and
appreciation of diversity within the community; and to promote the interests,
rights and privileges of all residents by proclaiming a public policy of
nondiscrimination which secures freedom from discriminatory practices,
protects human dignity and ensures the full productive capacities of all for
the safety, health and general welfare of Grinnell. The City of Grinnell is
fundamentally concerned about the practice or policy of discriminating
against individuals and families for reasons of age, color, race, ethnicity,
national origin, ancestry, creed, religion, disability, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, organizational affiliation, marital status,
familial status, or because a person receives public assistance.  Such
discrimination threatens not only the rights and privileges of individual
residents but also the foundations and institutions of a democracy.



29.02    DEFINITIONS.



For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings.  Any term not defined herein shall be defined as in the
Code of Iowa.



   1.   “Age” means the chronological age of any person who has
reached the age of eighteen or is considered by law to be an adult.



   2.   “Anti-nepotism policy” means a policy that disallows
favoritism or patronage granted to relatives.



   3.   “City Attorney” means the duly appointed attorney for the
City or such person designated by the City Attorney.



   4.   “Commission” means the Grinnell Human Rights Commission.



   5.   “Commissioner” means a member of the Grinnell Human Rights
Commission.



   6.   “Complainant” means a person who has filed a report of
discrimination as provided for by this chapter.



   7.   “Complaint” means a report of discrimination as provided
for by this chapter.



   8.   “Court” means the Poweshiek County District Court of the
State of Iowa or any judge of the court if the court is not in session at
that time.



   9.   “Covered multifamily dwelling” means any of the following:



      A.   A building consisting of four or more dwelling units if
the building has one or more elevators.



      B.   The ground floor units of a building consisting of four
or more dwelling units.



   10.   “Credit transaction” means any open or closed-end credit
transaction including, but not limited to, a loan, retail installment
transaction, credit card issue or charge, whether for personal or for
business purposes, in which a service, finance or interest charge is imposed
or which provides for repayment in scheduled payments, when such credit is
extended in the regular course of any trade or commerce.



   11.   “Dependent” means any person, regardless of age, who
resides in a household and who derives primary care or support from that
household.



   12.   “Disability” means the physical or mental impairment of a
person which substantially limits one or more major life activities, a record
of such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment. 
Disability also refers to the condition of a person with a positive Human
Immunodeficiency Virus test result, a diagnosis of Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome, a diagnosis of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome-related complex
or any other condition related to Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome.  The
inclusion of a condition related to a positive Human Immunodeficiency Virus
test result in the meaning of “disability” under the provisions of this
chapter does not preclude the application of the provisions of this chapter
to conditions resulting from other contagious or infectious diseases.



   13.   “Dwelling” means any improved or unimproved real estate
which is used or intended for use as a residence or sleeping place for one or
more persons.



   14.   “Educational institution” includes any preschool,
elementary, secondary, community college, area education agency, or
post-secondary college or university, and their governing boards.



   15.   “Employee” means any natural person employed in this city,
for wages, by an employer.



   16.   “Employer” means a person that employs for wages a natural
person whose employment or any part thereof is within the City.



   17.   “Employment agency” means any person undertaking to
procure employees or opportunities to work for any other person, and who
receives a fee or other consideration for this service.



   18.   “Ethnicity” includes, but is not limited to, the
identification of a person with a cultural, racial, national, tribal,
religious, linguistic, or geographically defined group.



   19.   “Familial status” means the presence of:



      A.   One or more individuals under the age of eighteen
domiciled with one of the following:



         (1)   A parent or another person having custody of the
individual or individuals.



         (2)   The designee of the parent or the other person
having custody of the individual or individuals, with the written permission
of the parent or other person.



         (3)   A person who is pregnant or is in the process of
securing legal custody of the individual or individuals.



      OR



      B.   A person domiciled with and caring for another adult with
physical or mental disabilities.



   20.   “Household” means a residential dwelling regularly used by
its occupants as a permanent place of abode, which is made one’s home as
opposed to one’s place of business and which has housekeeping, sleeping and
cooking facilities intended for use by its occupants only.



   21.   “Marital status” means the state of being married, single,
divorced, separated or widowed.



   22.   “Married” means two persons joined together in a committed
relationship legally recognized by civil ceremony or religious sanction.



   23.   “Organizational affiliation” means the voluntary
identification and association with an organization, e.g., labor group or
political party, or the choice to not so identify or affiliate.



   24.   “Person” means one or more individuals, partnerships,
associations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, receivers, the
City or any board, commission, department, or agency thereof, and all other
governmental units conducting any activity in the City or any other legal
entity.



   25.   “Post-finding mediation” means a voluntary dialogue, after
finding of probable cause, between the complainant and the respondent with
the assistance of a representative of the Commission, who may be a non-member
of the Commission.  The purpose of such mediation is to determine remedies
to the discriminatory or unfair practices, and attempt to prevent any future
violations by the respondent.  The role of the representative of the
Commission is to advocate for an appropriate remedy for the complainant and
advance the public interest in eliminating any discriminatory practice.



   26.   “Post-finding negotiation” means a voluntary dialogue and
negotiation, which takes place after a finding of probable cause, between the
respondent and the Commission, or a representative or representatives of the
Commission, with the goal of determining remedies to the discriminatory or
unfair practices and preventing any future violations by the respondent. 
The role of the representative of the Commission is to advocate for an
appropriate remedy for the complainant and advance the public interest in
eliminating any discriminatory practice.  Such negotiation shall only be
necessary if the complainant chooses not to participate in post-finding
mediation.



   27.   “Pre-finding mediation” means a voluntary dialogue and
negotiation between the complainant and the respondent with the assistance of
an impartial third party, the mediator, to take place before any finding of
blame or probable cause, with the goal of resolving the complaint to the
satisfaction of both parties.



   28.   “Public accommodation” means each and every place,
establishment or facility of whatever kind, nature or class that caters or
offers services, facilities or goods to the general public.  Each and every
place, establishment or facility that caters or offers services, facilities
or goods to the general public shall be deemed a public accommodation if the
accommodation receives any substantial governmental support or subsidy. 
Public accommodation shall not mean any bona fide private club or other
place, establishment or facility which is by its nature distinctly private,
except that, when such distinctly private place, establishment or facility
caters or offers services, facilities or goods to the general public, it
shall be deemed a public accommodation during such period.  Public
accommodation includes each state and local government unit or tax-supported
district of whatever kind, nature, or class that offers services, facilities,
benefits, grants or goods to the public.



   29.   “Public assistance” means income and support derived from
any tax- supported federal, state or local funds, including, but not limited
to, Social Security, Supplemental Security Income, temporary aid to needy
families, food stamps and unemployment compensation.



   30.   “Residential real estate transaction” means to make or
purchase loans or provide other financial assistance to purchase, construct,
improve, repair or maintain a dwelling, or to secure residential real estate,
and to sell, broker or appraise residential real estate.



   31.   “Respondent” means a person who is alleged to have
committed an act prohibited by this chapter and against whom a complaint has
been filed.



   32.   “Retaliate” means any act directed at a complainant or
other person with the intent of affecting that person unfavorably because of
his or her formal or informal efforts to secure or aid in securing compliance
with this chapter.



   33.   “Sex” includes, but is not limited to, a category into
which human beings are placed, based on the perceived or actual physical
presence of reproductive organs representing the biological divisions of
male, female, intersex, transgendered, or in surgical transition.



   34.   “Sexual orientation” means actual or perceived
heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality.



29.03    HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION.



The City hereby establishes the Grinnell Human Rights Commission (hereinafter
the Commission) as authorized under chapter 29 of the Grinnell City Code and
the Code of Iowa (See Chapter 216).  The Commission shall be governed by the
following provisions:



   1.   The Commission shall consist of five residents of the City
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and majority approval of the City
Council.  The term of appointment shall be three years from January 1st of
the year in which the appointment is made.  Vacancies shall be filled in the
same manner for the remainder of the unexpired term.  Whenever possible,
appointments should represent the diversity of people in Grinnell and should
also represent areas of expertise in the law, education, mediation,
interpersonal relationships and other areas that will aid the Commission in
its primary goals of education and the investigation and resolution of
complaints.



   2.   The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation,
provided that they may receive actual and necessary expenses incurred, within
the limits established under city policies.



   3.   The Commission shall elect from its membership, at its first
meeting of the calendar year, its Chairperson, Vice-chairperson and
Secretary, each to serve for a term of one year.  The Commission shall fill
vacancies among its officers for the remainder of the unexpired term.



   4.   The Commission shall cooperate with the Iowa Civil Rights
Commission, the United States Civil Rights Commission, the Federal Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission and other agencies with similar purposes. 
The Commission shall provide for the execution within the City of the
policies and principles embodied in the Iowa Civil Rights Act and the Federal
Civil Rights Act.



(Ord. 1464 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



29.04    POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COMMISSION.



It is each Commissioner’s responsibility to take an active role in the work
of the Commission.  This shall include reviewing human rights complaints and
the investigative file, attending Commission meetings, and planning and
attending community/educational functions.  The Commission shall have the
following powers and responsibilities:



   1.   Study and Remedy.



      A.   Investigate and study the existence, character, causes
and extent of discrimination in employment practices, public accommodations
or services, open housing, education and credit practices, and attempt to
eliminate such discrimination by education and mediation.



      B.   Issue such publications and reports of investigations and
research which, in the judgment of the Commission, shall tend to promote
goodwill among the various racial, religious and ethnic groups of the City
and which shall tend to minimize or eliminate discrimination in employment
practices, public accommodations or services, open housing, education and
credit practices because of age, color, race, ethnicity, national origin,
ancestry, creed, religion, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, organizational affiliation, marital status, familial status, or
whether a person receives public assistance .



      C.   Cooperate, within the limits of any appropriations made
for its operation, with other agencies or organizations, both public and
private, whose purposes are not inconsistent with those of this chapter, in
the planning and conducting of programs designed to eliminate racial,
religious, cultural and inter-group tensions.



   2.   Education.



      A.   Plan, conduct and assist organizations (e.g., schools,
businesses, religious groups, civic associations, libraries and museums) in
programs designed to increase community awareness, appreciation of diversity
and the full securing of the rights of all residents.



      B.   Plan, conduct and assist other organizations in cultural
events designed to promote the dignity and human rights of all individuals
and families and to foster understanding of human diversity.



      C.   Increase understanding of diversity within the community
by encouraging the participation of residents in study circles and
small-group deliberations, with the goal of addressing discriminatory
practices in an open and democratic way.



   3.   Investigation and Resolution of Complaints.



      A.   Receive, investigate, process complaints, hold hearings
and pass upon charges or complaints alleging discriminatory practices, and
provide appropriate remedies where discrimination has been found to exist,
all as provided in the by-laws.



      B.   Seek a temporary injunction in District Court against a
respondent when it appears that a complainant may suffer irreparable injury
as a result of an alleged violation of this chapter.



      C.   Issue subpoenas and order discovery to aid in
investigation of allegations of discrimination.



   4.   Reporting.



      A.   Prepare and transmit to the Mayor and the Council from
time to time, but not less often than once each year, reports describing its
proceedings, investigations, hearings conducted and the outcome thereof,
decisions rendered and other work performed by the Commission.



      B.   Make recommendations to the Mayor and the Council for
such further legislation concerning discrimination as it may deem necessary
and desirable.



29.05    DISCRIMINATORY EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.



   1.   It is a discriminatory practice, unless based upon the nature
of the occupation, for any person to refuse to hire, accept, register,
classify or refer for employment, to discharge any employee, or to otherwise
discriminate in employment against any applicant for employment or any
employee because of the age, color, race, ethnicity, national origin,
ancestry, creed, religion, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, marital status, familial status, or organizational affiliation, or
because such applicant or employee receives public assistance.



   2.   It is a discriminatory practice for any labor organization, or
its employees, agents or members, to refuse to admit to membership any
applicant, to expel any member or to otherwise discriminate against any
applicant for membership or any member in the privileges, rights or benefits
of such membership because of age, color, race, ethnicity, national origin,
ancestry, creed, religion, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, organizational affiliation, marital status, familial status, or
because such applicant or member receives public assistance.



   3.   It is a discriminatory practice, unless based on the nature of
the occupation, for any employer, employment agency, labor organization, or
their employees, agents or members, to directly or indirectly advertise or in
any other manner indicate or publicize that individuals of any particular
age, color, race, ethnicity, national origin, ancestry, creed, religion,
disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status,
familial status, organizational affiliation, or because such individuals
receive public assistance, are unwelcome, objectionable, not acceptable or
not solicited for employment or membership.



   4.   It is a discriminatory practice for any person to solicit or
require as a condition of employment of any employee or prospective employee
a test for the presence of the antibody to the Human Immunodeficiency Virus
or a test for indicators of any other infectious disease.  It shall also be
a discriminatory practice to affect the terms, conditions or privileges of
employment, or to terminate the employment of any employee solely as a result
of testing positive for the presence of the antibody to the Human
Immunodeficiency Virus or the presence of indicators of any other infectious
disease.  An agreement between an employer, employment agency, labor
organization, or their employees, agents or members, and an employee or
prospective employee concerning employment, pay or benefits to an employee or
prospective employee in return for being tested for the presence of the
antibody to the Human Immunodeficiency Virus or the presence of indicators of
any other infectious disease, is prohibited.



   The prohibitions of this subsection do not apply if the epidemiologist
of the State of Iowa determines and the Director of Public Health declares,
through the utilization of guidelines established by the Centers for Disease
Control of the United States Department of Health and Human Services, that a
person with a condition related to Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome or
other infectious disease poses a significant risk of transmission of the
Human Immunodeficiency Virus or other infectious agent to other persons in a
specific occupation.



   5.   An employer, employment agency, or their employees, servants or
agents, may offer employment or advertise for employment to only persons with
disabilities.



   6.   Employment policies relating to pregnancy and childbirth shall
be governed by the following:



      A.   A written or unwritten employment policy or practice that
excludes from employment applicants or employees because of the employee’s
or applicant’s pregnancy is a prima facie violation of this chapter.



      B.   Disabilities caused or contributed to by the employee’s
pregnancy, miscarriage, legal abortion, childbirth and recovery are, for all
job-related purposes, temporary disabilities and shall be treated as such
under any health or temporary disability insurance or sick leave plan
available in connection with employment.



      C.   Written and unwritten employment policies and practices
involving matters such as the commencement and duration of leave, the
availability of extensions, the accrual of seniority, and other benefits and
privileges, reinstatement and payment under any health or temporary
disability insurance or sick leave plan, formal or informal, shall be applied
to a disability due to the employee’s pregnancy, legal abortion,
miscarriage, or childbirth, on the same terms and conditions as they are
applied to other temporary disabilities.



   7.   This section shall not prohibit discrimination on the basis of
age if the person subject to the discrimination is under the age of eighteen
years, unless that person is considered by law to be an adult.



   8.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a state or
federal program designed to benefit a specific age classification that serves
a bona fide public purpose shall be permissible.



   9.   This section shall not apply to:



      A.   The employment of individuals for work within the home of
the employer if the employer or members of the employer’s family reside
therein during such employment.



      B.   The employment of individuals to render personal service
to the person of the employer or members of the employer’s family.



      C.   Any bona fide religious institution or its educational
facility, association, corporation or society with respect to any
qualifications for employment based on religion when such qualifications are
related to a bona fide religious purpose.



      D.   A religious qualification for instructional personnel or
an administrative officer, serving in a supervisory capacity of a bona fide
religious educational facility or religious institution, shall be presumed to
be a bona fide occupational qualification.



      E.   Anti-nepotism policies.



29.06    DISCRIMINATORY PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION PRACTICES.



   1.   It is a discriminatory practice for any owner, lessee, sub
lessee, proprietor, manager or superintendent of any public accommodation or
any agent or employee thereof:



      A.   To refuse or deny to any person or to otherwise
discriminate against any person because of color, race, ethnicity, national
origin, ancestry, creed, religion, disability, sex, sexual orientation,
gender identity, marital status, familial status, organizational affiliation,
or because such person receives public assistance, the accommodations,
advantages, facilities, services, or privileges thereof, or in the furnishing
of such accommodations, advantages, facilities, services or privileges.



      B.   To directly or indirectly advertise or in any other
manner indicate or publicize that the patronage of persons of any particular
color, race, ethnicity, national origin, ancestry, creed, religion,
disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, organizational
affiliation, marital status, familial status, or because such persons receive
public assistance, is unwelcome, objectionable, not acceptable or not
solicited.



   2.   This section shall not apply to:



      A.   Any bona fide religious institution with respect to any
qualifications the institution may impose based on religion when such
qualifications are related to a bona fide religious purpose.



      B.   The rental or leasing to transient individuals of less
than six rooms within a single housing accommodation by the occupant or owner
of such housing accommodation if the occupant or owner or members of that
person’s family reside therein.



29.07    DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES.



   1.   It is a discriminatory practice for any person, owner, or
person acting for an owner of rights to housing or real property, with or
without compensation, including, but not limited to, persons licensed as real
estate brokers or salespersons, attorneys, auctioneers, agents or
representatives by power of attorney or appointment, or any person acting
under court order, deed of trust or will:



      A.   To refuse to sell, rent, lease, assign, sublease, refuse
to negotiate, or to otherwise make unavailable, or deny any real property or
dwelling, or any part, portion, or interest in the real property or dwelling
to any person because of color, race, ethnicity, national origin, ancestry,
creed, religion, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity,
organizational affiliation, marital status, familial status, or because such
person receives public assistance.



      B.   To condition the terms or privileges of the sale, rental,
lease assignment or sublease of any real property or dwelling, or any part,
portion, or interest in the real property or dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection with the real property or dwelling
because of the person’s color, race, ethnicity, national origin, ancestry,
creed, religion, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity,
organizational affiliation, marital status, familial status, or because such
person receives public assistance.



      C.   To directly or indirectly advertise, or in any other
manner indicate or publicize that the purchase, rental, lease, assignment or
sublease of any real property or dwelling, or any part, portion or interest
in the real property or dwelling, by persons of any particular color, race,
ethnicity, national origin, ancestry, creed, religion, disability, sex,
sexual orientation, gender identity, organizational affiliation, marital
status, familial status, or because such persons receive public assistance is
unwelcome, objectionable, unacceptable or not solicited.



      D.   To discriminate against the lessee or purchaser of any
real property or dwelling, or any part, portion or interest of the real
property or dwelling, or any prospective lessee or purchaser of the real
property or dwelling, because of the color, race, ethnicity, national origin,
ancestry, creed, religion, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, organizational affiliation, marital status, familial status of
persons, who may from time to time be present in or on the lessee’s or
owner’s premises for lawful purposes at the invitation of the lessee or
owner as friends, guests, visitors, relatives or in any similar capacity, or
because such persons receive public assistance.



      E.   To induce or attempt to induce another person to sell or
rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry
into a neighborhood of a person of a particular color, race, ethnicity,
national origin, ancestry, creed, religion, disability, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, organizational affiliation, marital status,
familial status, or a person who receives public assistance.



      F.   To represent to a person of a particular color, race,
ethnicity, national origin, ancestry, creed, religion, disability, sex,
sexual orientation, gender identity, organizational affiliation, marital
status, familial status, or to a person who receives public assistance, that
a dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when the dwelling
is available for inspection, sale or rental.



      G.   To deny another person access to, or membership or
participation in a multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against a person
in terms or conditions of access, membership or participation in such
organization because of color, race, ethnicity, national origin, ancestry,
creed, religion, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity,
organizational affiliation, marital status, familial status, or because such
person receives public assistance.



      H.   To deny in the sale or rental or otherwise make
unavailable a dwelling to a person because of a disability of the person, a
disability of a person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is sold, rented or made available; and/or because of a disability of
a person associated with that person.



      I.   To condition the terms or privileges of sale or rental of
a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with
the dwelling because of a disability of that person, a disability of a person
residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented
or made available, and/or because of a disability of a person associated with
that person.



   2.   For the purposes of subsection 1 (I) of this section only,
discrimination includes either of the following circumstances:



      A.   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with a
disability, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by the person if the modifications are necessary to afford the
person full enjoyment of the premises. In the case of a rental, a landlord
may, where reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on
the renter’s agreement to restore the interior of the premises to the
condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear
excepted.



      B.   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules,
policies, practices or services, when the accommodations are necessary to
afford the person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.



      C.   In connection with the design, construction, and
maintenance of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after
January 1, 1992, it is a discriminatory practice to fail to design and
construct those dwellings in a manner that meets the following requirements:



         (1)   The public use and common use portions of the
dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities.



         (2)   All doors designed to allow passage into and
within all premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by persons with disabilities in wheelchairs.



         (3)   All premises within the dwellings contain the
following features of adaptive design:



            (a)   An accessible route into and through the
dwelling,



            (b)   Light switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations,



            (c)   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow
later installation of grab bars,



            (d)   Kitchens and bathrooms so that a person in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.



   3.   A person whose business includes engaging in residential real
estate-related transactions shall not discriminate against a person in making
such transactions available or in the terms or conditions of such a
transaction because of color, race, ethnicity, national origin, ancestry,
creed, religion, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity,
marital status, familial status, organizational affiliation, or because a
person receives public assistance.



   4.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:



      A.   Any bona fide religious institution with respect to any
qualifications it may impose based on religion, when the qualifications are
related to a bona fide religious purpose unless the religious institution
owns or operates property for a commercial purpose or membership in the
religion is restricted on account of color, race, ethnicity, national origin,
or ancestry.



      B.   Discrimination on the basis of familial status involving
dwellings provided under any state or federal program specifically designed
and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the State or Federal
program that the Commission determines to be consistent with determinations
made by the United States Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and
housing communities consisting of dwellings intended for and occupied solely
by persons fifty-five years of age or older.



      C.   The rental or leasing of a dwelling in a building which
contains dwellings for not more than two families living independently of
each other, if the owner resides in one of the dwellings. This exception does
not apply to the advertising of the dwelling.



      D.   The rental or leasing of less than four rooms within a
single dwelling by the occupant or owner of the dwelling, if the occupant or
owner resides in the dwelling. This exception does not apply to the
advertising of the dwelling.



      E.   The rental or leasing of a dwelling in a building which
contains dwellings for not more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner resides in one of the dwellings for which the owner
qualifies for the Homestead Tax Credit under Iowa Code Section 425.1. This
exception does not apply to the advertising of the dwelling.



      F.   Discrimination on the basis of sex involving the rental,
leasing or subleasing of a dwelling within which residents of both sexes
would be forced to share a living area and/or share a common bathroom
facility on the same floor of the building.



   5.   The provisions of this section do not prohibit a person engaged
in the business of furnishing appraisals of real estate from taking into
consideration factors other than color, race, ethnicity, national origin,
ancestry, creed, religion, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, organizational affiliation, marital status, familial status or
whether a person receives public assistance, in appraising real estate.



29.08    DISCRIMINATORY EDUCATION PRACTICES.



   1.   Educational institutions shall not discriminate on the basis of
a person’s color, race, ethnicity, national origin, ancestry, creed,
religious belief, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity,
marital status, familial status, organizational affiliation, or whether a
person receives public assistance, in any program or activity.  Such
discriminatory practices shall include, but not be limited to, the following
practices:



      A.   Exclusion of a person or persons from participation in,
denial of the benefits of, or subjection to discrimination in any academic,
extracurricular, research, occupational training or other program or
activity, except athletic programs;



      B.   Denial of comparable opportunity in intramural and
interscholastic athletic programs; and,



      C.   The application of any rule concerning the actual or
potential parental, familial or marital status of a person, or the exclusion
of any person from any program or activity because of pregnancy or related
conditions dependent upon the physician’s diagnosis and certification.



   2.   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting:



      A.   Separate toilet facilities, locker rooms or living
facilities for the different sexes so long as comparable facilities are
provided.



      B.   Any bona fide religious institution from imposing
qualifications based on religion, when such qualifications are related to a
bona fide religious purpose.



      C.   Any institution from admitting students of only one sex.



29.09    DISCRIMINATORY CREDIT PRACTICES.



   1.   It is a discriminatory practice for any:



      A.   Creditor to refuse to enter into a consumer credit
transaction or impose finance charges or other terms or conditions more
onerous than those regularly extended by that creditor to consumers of
similar economic backgrounds because of age, color, race, ethnicity, national
origin, ancestry, creed, religion, physical disability, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, marital status, or familial status.



      B.   Person authorized or licensed to do business in this
state pursuant to the Code of Iowa (see Chapters 524, 533, 534, 536 or 536A)
to refuse to loan or extend credit, or to offer credit life, credit health,
or credit accident insurance, or to impose terms or conditions more onerous
than those regularly extended to persons of similar economic backgrounds
because of age, color, race, ethnicity, national origin, ancestry, creed,
religion, physical disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity,
marital status, or familial status.



      C.   Creditor to refuse to offer credit life, credit health or
credit accident insurance based upon the age or physical disability of the
consumer.  It shall not be a discriminatory practice if such denial is based
solely upon bona fide underwriting considerations not prohibited by Iowa Code
Title XIII, subtitle 1.



   2.   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to narrow
or restrict any other provisions of this chapter.



29.10    AIDING, ABETTING, COMPELLING AND COERCING.



It is a discriminatory practice for any person to intentionally aid, abet,
compel or coerce another person to engage in any of the practices declared
discriminatory by this chapter.



29.11    RETALIATION.



It is a discriminatory practice for any person to discriminate or retaliate
against another person in any of the rights protected against discrimination
by this chapter because such person has lawfully opposed any practice
forbidden under this chapter, obeys the provisions of this chapter, or has
filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any proceeding under this chapter.



29.12    INTERFERENCE, COERCION AND INTIMIDATION.



It is a discriminatory practice for any person to coerce, intimidate,
threaten or interfere with another person in the exercise or enjoyment of any
right granted or protected by this chapter, on account of the person having
aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any
right granted or protected by this chapter.



29.13    PROCEDURES AND ENFORCEMENT.



See Section VI of the By-Laws: HUMAN RIGHTS PROCEDURES IN RESPONSE TO A
COMPLAINT.



29.14    EXCEPTIONS FOR RETIREMENT PLANS, LIFE, DISABILITY AND HEALTH
BENEFITS.



   1.   The provisions of this chapter relating to discrimination
because of age do not apply to the involuntary retirement of a person that is
in compliance with Federal and State laws, rules, and regulations.



   2.   An employee welfare plan:



      A.   May provide life, disability or health insurance benefits
that vary by age based on actuarial differences if the employer contributes
equally for all the participating employees, or



      B.   May provide for employer contributions differing by age
if the benefits for all the participating employees do not vary by age.



29.15    RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.



This chapter shall be construed broadly to effectuate its purposes.  Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to include participation in acts which are
prohibited by law.



CHAPTER 30
VETERANS MEMORIAL COMMISSION



 

30.01  Memorial Building Commission
 
30.03  Compensation and Vacancies


30.02  Qualification and Appointment
 
30.04  Powers and Duties



 



30.01    MEMORIAL COMMISSION.



The Veterans Memorial Building shall be under the management and control of a
commission of five (5) members which shall be known as the Veterans Memorial
Commission.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 37.9)



30.02    QUALIFICATION AND APPOINTMENT.



Each Commissioner shall be an honorably discharged soldier, sailor, marine,
airman or Coast Guard member and a resident of the City.  The Commissioners
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council for
staggered three-year terms.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 37.10)



30.03    COMPENSATION AND VACANCIES.



Commission members shall serve without compensation, but may receive
reimbursement for their actual expenses.  A vacancy on the Commission shall
be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the balance of
the unexpired term.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



30.04    POWERS AND DUTIES.



The Commission shall manage and control the Memorial Building, shall make and
establish rules and regulations for its use and management, and shall have,
exercise and perform all of the powers and duties granted to the Commission
as contained in Chapter 37 of the Code of Iowa and amendments thereto.



CHAPTER 31
LOW RENT HOUSING COMMISSION



 

31.01  Establishment
 
31.03  Duties and Responsibilities


31.02  Compensation
 



 



31.01    ESTABLISHMENT.



The Low Rent Housing Commission consists of five (5) members appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council for staggered terms of two (2)
years.  A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as
the original appointment for the balance of the unexpired term.  The Mayor
shall designate a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among the
commissioners.



31.02    COMPENSATION.



Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be
entitled to the necessary expenses, including traveling expenses, incurred in
the discharge of a duty.



31.03    DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



The Commission shall exercise all powers of a municipal housing agency as
provided in Section 403A.5 of the Code of Iowa.



CHAPTER 32
RENAISSANCE BOARD



 

32.01  Purpose
 
32.04  Reports and Meetings


32.02  Renaissance Board Created
 
32.05  Rules


32.03  Organization of the Board
 
32.06  Limit of Chapter



 



32.01    PURPOSE.



On March 24, 1994, the Council adopted an Urban Renewal Plan for the City. 
The Grinnell Urban Renewal Area encompasses the Central Business District of
the City and adjoining commercial area, which together are generally known as
the downtown business district.  The Council finds that the urban renewal
plan states, in part, “The primary goal of the plan is to stimulate,
through public involvement and commitment, private investments in commercial,
industrial and residential development and to create a sound economic base
that will serve as the foundation for future growth and development.”  The
Council also finds that fostering strength and economic vitality in the
downtown business district is in the public interest and meets the primary
goal of the Urban Renewal Plan.  This chapter is enacted for the purpose of
establishing a Grinnell Renaissance Board as a branch of City government with
duties and responsibilities as established by this chapter.



32.02    RENAISSANCE BOARD CREATED.



The Grinnell Renaissance Board is hereby created to advise the Council on
various approaches and strategies for revitalizing the City’s Central
Business District as identified in the primary goal of the Urban Renewal
Plan.  By way of general direction but not of limitation or restriction, the
Council believes that the vision of the Grinnell Renaissance Board for
downtown Grinnell should include but not be limited to a vital and vigorous
blend of unique shopping, entertainment, social, cultural and service
experiences to instill a sense of pride and ownership in the residents of
Grinnell and admiration in visitors coming to this community.  By way of
general direction and not of limitation, the Council believes that the
mission of the Grinnell Renaissance Board should include enhancing downtown
Grinnell through a focused and vigorous development of retail and service
activity.  The primary focus shall be recruitment of new business and
revitalization and expansion of existing business.  The Renaissance Board
should seek to identify opportunities and challenges, lead planning and goal
setting, marshal support of every kind, and create financial incentives
spurring this development.  Special attention should be given to enhancing
historic preservation, parking, public amenities, safety, and traffic flows
of this center of the community.  To address these and other issues which
the Board may identify in its own vision and mission statement, the Board is
given the authority and power within the limitation of City budgets and other
guidelines as may be identified by the Council to hire appropriate staff and
provide the necessary tools to address the general objective of this chapter.



32.03    ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.



The Board shall consist of seventeen (17) members appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the Council.  Members shall be appointed for overlapping
terms of three years.  In making appointments to the Board, the Mayor and
Council shall take care that downtown property owners, downtown
entrepreneurs, downtown professionals and downtown service people are
represented among the members of the Board.  In order to assure
representation from this group of people, the general policy of requiring
members of committees, boards and commissions to be residents of the City is
waived.  Members of the Renaissance Board need not live within the City but
must own property, operate a business or hold a regular job within the
City.  The Mayor shall designate the first Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson.  The term of office for Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall
be one year, and after the initial term the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson
shall be selected by members of the Renaissance Board.  Board members shall
serve without compensation but may receive their actual expenses.  Vacancies
shall be filled in the same manor as original appointments.  Board terms
shall begin July 1 and end June 30. 



32.04    REPORTS AND MEETINGS.



As a municipal board created by the Council, the Board and any subcommittees
created by the Board have the duty and responsibility of complying with all
open meeting laws, gift laws and other regulations set out in the Code of
Iowa and in this Code of Ordinances.  To that end the Board shall prepare an
agenda for any of its meetings or meetings of its subcommittee.  Such
agendas shall identify the time, date and place of the meeting and the
general topics to be addressed at the meeting.  Copies of agendas shall be
provided to the Clerk and to the appropriate news media no less than
twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time of the meeting.  Minutes shall be
kept of all meetings of the Board or its subcommittees.  Copies of these
minutes shall be provided to the Clerk for retention as may be provided by
Federal, State or municipal requirements.  Copies of these minutes may be
provided to the Mayor and Council members as requested by them.  The
Renaissance Board shall adopt bylaws to address its conduct and procedures. 
The Board shall make quarterly written reports of its activities to the
Council.  The Board may from time to time provide other reports as it deems
advisable.  The Council may also request other reports as it may deem
appropriate.  The Board’s revenues and expenditures shall be reported
monthly by the Clerk in the manner of other departmental revenues and
expenditures.  A copy of these reports shall be provided to each member of
the Board and shall be included in the Clerk’s report to the Council.



32.05    RULES.



The Board shall have power to make rules and regulations for the conduct of
the renaissance programs, subject to the approval of the rules by the
Council.  Such rules shall be on file at the office of the Clerk and shall
otherwise be posted or publicized in a manner to provide adequate notice to
the using public.



32.06    LIMIT OF CHAPTER.



Unless specifically changed by amendment of the Council, this chapter shall
expire on December 31, 2016.  At that time the Renaissance Board shall be
abolished, and its powers, duties and responsibilities shall terminate.  Any
budget or funds which at that time are unused or any purchases or other
commitments which have not been completed shall immediately come under the
authority and control of the City Council, to be handled as may be
appropriate and as may be directed by the Council. 



(Ord. 1355 – Nov. 11 Supp.)



CHAPTER 35
POLICE DEPARTMENT



 

35.01  Department Established
 
35.06  Police Chief: Duties


35.02  Organization
 
35.07  Departmental Rules


35.03  Peace Officer Qualifications
 
35.08  Summoning Aid


35.04  Required Training
 
35.09  Taking Weapons


35.05  Compensation
 



 



35.01    DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



The police department of the City is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.



35.02    ORGANIZATION.



The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement
officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by
the Council.



35.03    PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.



In no case shall any person be hired as a law enforcement officer unless such
person meets the minimum qualification standards established by the Iowa Law
Enforcement Academy. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)



35.04    REQUIRED TRAINING.



All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law
at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of
employment.  Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training
as required by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])



(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)



35.05    COMPENSATION.



Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.



35.06    POLICE CHIEF:  DUTIES.



The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval
of the Council. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   General.  Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by
law or ordinance.



   2.   Enforce Laws.  Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations
and bring all persons committing any offense before the proper court.



   3.   Writs.  Execute and return all writs and other processes
directed to the Police Chief.



   4.   Accident Reports.  Report all motor vehicle accidents
investigated to the State Department of Transportation. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)



   5.   Prisoners.  Be responsible for the custody of prisoners,
including conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.



   6.   Assist Officials.  When requested, provide aid to other City
officers, boards and commissions in the execution of their official duties.



   7.   Investigations.  Provide for such investigation as may be
necessary for the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law
or ordinance.



   8.   Record of Arrests.  Keep a record of all arrests made in the
City by showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law
or City ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the
disposition of the charge.



   9.   Reports.  Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an
annual report as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor
or Council.



   10.   Command.  Be in command of all officers appointed for police
work and be responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles,
equipment and materials of the department.



35.07    DEPARTMENTAL RULES.



The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code of
Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary
for the operation of the department.



35.08    SUMMONING AID.



Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as
the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the
arrest.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)



35.09    TAKING WEAPONS.



Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items
which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have
within such person’s control to be disposed of according to law. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)



CHAPTER 36
RESERVE PEACE OFFICERS



 

36.01  Establishment of Force
 
36.07  No Reduction of Regular Force


36.02  Training
 
36.08  Compensation


36.03  Status of Reserve Officers
 
36.09  Benefits When Injured


36.04  Carrying Weapons
 
36.10  Liability and False Arrest Insurance


36.05  Supplementary Capacity
 
36.11  No Participation in Pension Fund or Retirement System


36.06  Supervision of Officers
 



 



36.01    ESTABLISHMENT OF FORCE.



A force of reserve peace officers is hereby established.  A reserve peace
officer is a volunteer, non-regular, sworn member of the Police Department
who will serve with or without compensation and has regular police powers
while functioning as the Police Department’s representative, and will
participate on a regular basis in the agency’s activities, including those
of crime prevention and control, preservation of the peace and enforcement of
the law.



36.02    TRAINING.



Training for individuals appointed as reserve peace officers shall be
provided by instructors in a community college or other facility, including a
law enforcement agency, selected by the individual and approved by the law
enforcement agency and the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.  All standards and
training required under Chapter 80D of the Code of Iowa constitute the
minimum standards for reserve peace officers.  Upon satisfactory completion
of training, the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy shall certify the individual as
a reserve peace officer.  There shall be no exemptions from the personal and
training standards provided for in this chapter.



36.03    STATUS OF RESERVE OFFICERS.



Reserve peace officers shall serve as peace officers on the orders and at the
discretion of the Police Chief.  While in the actual performance of official
duties, reserve peace officers shall be vested with the same rights,
privileges, obligations and duties as any other peace officer.



36.04    CARRYING WEAPONS.



A member of the reserve force shall not carry a weapon in the line of duty
until he or she has been approved by the Council and certified by the Iowa
Law Enforcement Academy Council.  After approval and certification, a
reserve peace officer may carry a weapon in the line of duty only when
authorized by the Police Chief. 



36.05    SUPPLEMENTARY CAPACITY.



Reserve peace officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the
regular force and shall not assume full-time duties of regular peace officers
without first complying with all the requirements of regular peace officers.



36.06    SUPERVISION OF OFFICERS.



Reserve peace officers shall be subordinate to the Police Chief, shall not
serve as peace officers unless under the direction of the Police Chief, and
shall wear a uniform prescribed by the Police Chief, unless that superior
officer designates alternate apparel for use when engaged in assignments
involving special investigations, civil process, court duties, jail duties
and the handling of mental patients.  The reserve peace officer shall not
wear an insignia of rank.



36.07    NO REDUCTION OF REGULAR FORCE.



There shall be no reduction of the authorized size of the regular law
enforcement department of the City because of the establishment or
utilization of reserve peace officers.



36.08    COMPENSATION.



While performing official duties, each reserve peace officer shall be
considered an employee of the City and shall be paid a minimum of $1.00 per
year.  The Council may provide additional monetary assistance for the
purchase and maintenance of uniforms and equipment used by reserve peace
officers.



36.09    BENEFITS WHEN INJURED.



Hospital and medical assistance and benefits, as provided in Chapter 85 of
the Code of Iowa, shall be provided by the Council to members of the reserve
force who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties.



36.10    LIABILITY AND FALSE ARREST INSURANCE.



Liability and false arrest insurance shall be provided by the City to members
of the reserve force while performing official duties in the same manner as
for regular peace officers.



36.11    NO PARTICIPATION IN PENSION FUND OR RETIREMENT SYSTEM.



This chapter shall not be construed to authorize or permit a reserve peace
officer to become eligible for participation in a pension fund or retirement
system created by the laws of the State and of which regular peace officers
may become members.



CHAPTER 37
FIRE DEPARTMENT



 



37.01  Establishment and Purpose
 
37.09  Accidental Injury Insurance


37.02  Organization
 
37.10  Liability Insurance


37.03  Approved by Council
 
37.11  Calls Outside Fire District


37.04  Training
 
37.12  Mutual Aid


37.05  Compensation
 
37.13  Authority to Cite Violations


37.06  Fire Chief: Duties
 
37.14  Emergency Rescue Service


37.07  Obedience to Fire Chief
 
37.15  Fire Alarm Monitoring Panel


37.08  Constitution
 
37.16  Departmental Rules




 



37.01    ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.



The Grinnell Fire Department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish
fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire
prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there
is no other established agency.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)



37.02    ORGANIZATION.



The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and
personnel as may be authorized by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



37.03    APPROVED BY COUNCIL.



No person having otherwise qualified shall be appointed to the department
until such appointment is submitted to and approved by a majority of the
Council members.



37.04    TRAINING.



All members of the department shall meet the minimum training standards
established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in
regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])



37.05    COMPENSATION.



Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



37.06    FIRE CHIEF:  DUTIES.



The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or
ordinance, including but not limited to the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   Enforce Laws.  Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire
prevention and the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of
fires.



   2.   Technical Assistance.  Upon request, give advice concerning
private fire alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and
exits and development of fire emergency plans.



   3.   Authority at Fires.  When in charge of a fire scene, direct an
operation as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue
operation, investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas
leak, or other hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary
in the reasonable performance of the department’s duties.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)



   4.   Control of Scenes.  Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel
from approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle,
vessel or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the
Fire Department.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)



   5.   Authority to Barricade.  When in charge of a fire scene, place
or erect ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street,
alley, right-of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or
emergency so as to prevent accidents or interference with the fire fighting
efforts of the Fire Department, to control the scene until any required
investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the fire or
other emergency.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)



   6.   Command.  Be charged with the duty of maintaining the
efficiency, discipline and control of the Fire Department.  The members of
the Fire Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the
Fire Chief.



   7.   Property.  Exercise and have full control over the disposition
of all fire apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or
belonging to the Fire Department.



   8.   Notification.  Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or
property damage in excess of $200,000 has occurred as a result of a fire, or
if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division
immediately.  For all other fires causing an estimated damage of $50.00 or
more or emergency responses by the Fire Department, file a report with the
Fire Marshal’s Division within ten (10) days following the end of the
month.  The report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the
name of the owners and occupants of the property at the time of the fire, the
value of the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of
the fire as determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics, and
circumstances concerning the fire incidents. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)



   9.   Right of Entry.  Have the right, during reasonable hours, to
enter any building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the
purpose of making such investigation or inspection which under law or
ordinance may be necessary to be made and is reasonably necessary to protect
the public health, safety and welfare.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)



   10.   Recommendation.  Make such recommendations to owners,
occupants, caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire
hazards. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)



   11.   Assist State Fire Marshal.  At the request of the State Fire
Marshal, and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of
duties by investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.4)



   12.   Records.  Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department
personnel, fire fighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and
apparatus, the number of responses to alarms, their cause and location, and
an analysis of losses by value, type and location of buildings.



   13.   Reports.  Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an
annual report of the status and activities of the department as well as such
other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.



37.07    OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.



No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Chief.



37.08    CONSTITUTION.



The Grinnell Volunteer Fire Department is recognized by the City as an
association of the firefighters.  The Grinnell Volunteer Fire Department
shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they deem calculated to accomplish
the object contemplated.  Any portion of the constitution and bylaws that
regulates the acceptance of and recruitment of volunteers must be approved by
the Council.



37.09    ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE.



The Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for
worker’s compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of
hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention for firefighters injured in
the performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or outside the
corporate limits of the City.  All firefighters shall be covered by the
contract. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)



37.10    LIABILITY INSURANCE.



The Council shall contract to insure against liability of the City or members
of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of and
resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the
corporate limits of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)



37.11    CALLS OUTSIDE FIRE DISTRICT.



The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the
Fire District if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists and
that such action will not endanger persons and property within the Fire
District.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])



37.12    MUTUAL AID.



Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department may enter
into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments. 
Copies of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])



37.13    AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.



Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa
may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for
violations of state and/or local fire safety regulations. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)



37.14    EMERGENCY RESCUE SERVICE.



The department is authorized to provide emergency ambulance or rescue
services, and the accidental injury and liability insurance provided for
herein shall include such operation.



37.15    FIRE ALARM MONITORING PANEL.



In order to establish a reasonable and orderly system for the placement of a
fire alarm monitoring panel in the fire station, the following regulations
apply:



   1.   The City shall have sole authority to install and maintain a
fire alarm monitoring panel in the Grinnell Fire Station.



   2.   Charges for connection to the fire alarm monitoring panel and
yearly maintenance charges must first be approved by motion of the Council.



   3.   The Fire Chief may set standards for alarm devices terminating
and giving signal at the fire station and may limit the number of fire alarm
systems so terminating.  Subject to such right of limitation by the Fire
Chief, any alarm reporting system shall be allowed to connect into the
central monitoring panel at the fire station, if it is deemed compatible by
the Fire Chief in view of the manufacturer’s specifications.



   4.   The Council deems it a privilege to have an alarm device
connected to the monitoring panel of the fire station, and this privilege may
be withdrawn upon notice by the Fire Chief to the owner or lessee if such
device does not perform within the bounds of the established standards.



   5.   Any person using an automatic alarm system which does not
terminate and signal at the fire station shall give the Fire chief written
notice of its location and mode of alarm before making it effective.



37.16    DEPARTMENTAL RULES.



The Fire Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code of
Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary
for the operation of the department.



CHAPTER 38
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS



 

38.01  Purpose
 
38.05  Notifications


38.02  Definitions
 
38.06  Police Authority


38.03  Cleanup Required
 
38.07  Liability


38.04  Liability for Cleanup Costs
 



 



38.01    PURPOSE.



In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety and welfare from
the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are
promulgated to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal and
cleanup of hazardous substance spills within the City limits.



38.02    DEFINITIONS.



For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect,
control, identify, analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove or dispose of a
hazardous substance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])



   2.   “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the
actual, imminent or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous
substance onto the land, into a water of the State or into the atmosphere
which creates an immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety
or to the environment.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])



   3.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of
substances that presents a danger to the public health or safety and
includes, but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or
flammable, or that is an irritant or that generates pressure through
decomposition, heat, or other means.  “Hazardous substance” may include
any hazardous waste identified or listed by the administrator of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as
amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic
pollutant listed under section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous substance designated under
Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January
1, 1977, or any hazardous material designated by the Secretary of
Transportation under the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])



   4.   “Responsible person” means a person who at any time
produces, handles, stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a
hazardous substance, the release of which creates a hazardous condition,
including bailees, carriers, and any other person in control of a hazardous
substance when a hazardous condition occurs, whether the person owns the
hazardous substance or is operating under a lease, contract, or other
agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous substance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])



38.03    CLEANUP REQUIRED.



Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping,
spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the hazardous
substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the
environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters,
including ground waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to
be remedied by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as
feasible to an acceptable, safe condition.  The costs of cleanup shall be
borne by the responsible person.  If the responsible person does not cause
the cleanup to begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and
circumstances of the incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give
reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition, said
notice setting a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the
City will proceed to procure cleanup services and bill the responsible person
for all costs associated with the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished
within the deadline.  In the event that it is determined that immediate
cleanup is necessary as a result of the present danger to the public health,
safety and welfare, then no notice shall be required and the City may proceed
to procure the cleanup and bill the responsible person for all costs
associated with the cleanup.  If the bill for those services is not paid
within thirty (30) days, the City Attorney shall proceed to obtain payment by
all legal means.  If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the
City to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the Council and
immediately seek any State or Federal funds available for said cleanup.



38.04    LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.



The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City for all of the
following:



   1.   The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents
of the City as a result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up
a hazardous substance involved in a hazardous condition.



   2.   The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the
City in mitigating and/or limiting the effects of a hazardous condition. 
This can include (but is not limited to) cost for evacuating people,
materials and equipment used, personnel cost and replacement of damaged
equipment.



   3.   The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to,
destruction of, or loss of City property, including parks and roads,
resulting from a hazardous condition caused by that person, including the
costs of assessing the injury, destruction or loss.



   4.   The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or
the agents of the City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous
condition caused by that person.



(Ord. 1325 – Nov. 09 Supp.)



38.05    NOTIFICATIONS.



   1.   A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or
disposing of a hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of
Natural Resources and the Police Chief of the occurrence of a hazardous
condition as soon as possible but not later than six (6) hours after the
onset of the hazardous condition or discovery of the hazardous condition. 
The Police Chief shall immediately notify the Department of Natural
Resources. 



   2.   Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall
notify the Police Chief, who shall then notify the Department of Natural
Resources.



38.06    POLICE AUTHORITY.



If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer or an
authorized representative may:



   1.   Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site
of a hazardous condition, and



   2.   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of
a hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.



No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under
this section.



38.07    LIABILITY.



The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries,
or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the
responsible person as defined in Section 38.02(4).



CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE



 

40.01  Assault
 
40.04  Unlawful Assembly


40.02  Harassment
 
40.05  Failure to Disperse


40.03  Disorderly Conduct
 
40.06  Disorderly House



 



40.01    ASSAULT.



No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:



   1.   Pain or Injury.  Any act which is intended to cause pain or
injury to, or which is intended to result in physical contact which will be
insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to
execute the act.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])



   2.   Threat of Pain or Injury.  Any act which is intended to place
another in fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful,
injurious, insulting, or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to
execute the act.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])



However, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts, and such
other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other
activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable
incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk
or serious injury or breach of the peace, the act is not an assault. 
Provided, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts is employed
by a school district or accredited nonpublic school, or is an area education
agency staff member who provides services to a school or school district, and
intervenes in a fight or physical struggle, or other disruptive situation
that takes place in the presence of the employee or staff member performing
employment duties in a school building, on school grounds or at an official
school function regardless of the location, the act is not an assault,
whether the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is
between students or other individuals if the degree and the force of the
intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the
safety of those assembled.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)



40.02    HARASSMENT.



No person shall commit harassment.



   1.   A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate,
annoy or alarm another person, the person does any of the following:



      A.   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph,
writing or via electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a
manner likely to cause the other person annoyance or harm.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)



      B.   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary
device in or near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or
railroad car, or boat occupied by the other person.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)



      C.   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or
to be delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or
consent.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)



      D.   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a
law enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity,
knowing that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a
criminal act, knowing the same did not occur.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)



   2.   A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and
without legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with
the intent to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person.  As used in
this section, unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact”
means an encounter in which two or more people are in visual or physical
proximity to each other.  “Personal contact” does not require a physical
touching or oral communication, although it may include these types of
contacts.



40.03    DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



No person shall do any of the following:



   1.   Fighting.  Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any
public place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that
participants in athletic contests may engage in such conduct which is
reasonably related to that sport.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1])



   2.   Noise.  Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any
residence or public building which causes unreasonable distress to the
occupants thereof. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[2])



   3.   Abusive Language.  Direct abusive epithets or make any
threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is
likely to provoke a violent reaction by another.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[3])



   4.   Disrupt Lawful Assembly.  Without lawful authority or color of
authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct
intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[4])



   5.   False Report of Catastrophe.  By words or action, initiate or
circulate a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe,
knowing such report to be false or such warning to be baseless.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[5])



   6.   Disrespect of Flag.  Knowingly and publicly use the flag of
the United States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a
symbol of the United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that
such use will provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. 
As used in this subsection:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[6])



      A.   “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external
appearance.



      B.   “Defile” means to intentionally make physically
unclean.



      C.   “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material
designed to be flown from a pole or mast.



      D.   “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so
as to make imperfect.



      E.   “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate
or trample.



      F.   “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or
intentionally cause a machine, vehicle or animal to tread upon.



   7.   Obstruct Use of Street.  Without authority or justification,
obstruct any street, sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent
to prevent or hinder its lawful use by others.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[7])



   8.   Funeral or Memorial Service.  Within 1,000 feet of the
building or other location where a funeral or memorial service is being
conducted, or within 1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial:



      A.   Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable
distress to the persons attending the funeral or memorial service or
participating in the funeral procession.



      B.   Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture
that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a
violent reaction by another.



      C.   Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral
procession, or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral,
memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.



   This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during,
and within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession,
or burial.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)





(Ord. 1416 - Oct. 15 Supp.)




40.04    UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.



It is unlawful for three or more persons to assemble together, with them or
any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any of
them will commit a public offense.  No person shall willingly join in or
remain part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to
believe it is such.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2)



40.05    FAILURE TO DISPERSE.



A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or
persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to
disperse.  No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to
obey.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3) 



40.06    DISORDERLY HOUSE.



   1.   "Disorderly House" defined: For the purpose of this section,
the term "disorderly house" shall mean and include any building, house,
enclosure or place in or upon which occurs any of the following prohibited
activities:



      A.   Acts of public disorder as defined in Chapter 723 of the
Iowa Code;



      B.   The open storage, use or consumption of a controlled
substance as defined in Chapter 124 of the Iowa Code, under which possession
of such substance would be an offense;



      C.   Gambling in violation of Chapter 99B of the Iowa Code;



      D.   Dispensing, selling, or consumption of an alcoholic
beverage in violation of Chapter 123 of the Iowa Code;



      E.   Acts of prostitution, pimping, or pandering as defined in
Chapter 725 of the Iowa Code;



      F.   The use or exploding of display or consumer fireworks in
violation of the provisions set forth in section 41.12 of this Code.



   2.   Prohibited: No person shall permit or suffer to continue,
without taking legal steps to prevent the same, a disorderly house upon any
premises owned by the person, or in the person's possession.



   3.   Authority to Restore Order and Disperse. Upon issuance of a
complaint for a violation of this section, any peace officer of the City
shall have authority to restore order upon the subject premises, up to and
including ordering the dispersal of person(s), not domiciled at the site,
from the subject premises. Any person who fails or refuses to obey and abide
by such an order shall be guilty of a violation of this section.



   4.   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished in accordance with section 1.14 of this Code.



(Ord. 1454 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



 

41.01  Distributing Dangerous Substances
 
41.08  Barbed Wire and Electric Fences


41.02  False Reports to or Communications with Public Safety Entities
 
41.09  Discharging Weapons


41.03  Refusing to Assist Officer
 
41.10  Throwing and Shooting


41.04  Harassment of Public Officers and Employees
 
41.11  Urinating and Defecating


41.05  Interference with Official Acts
 
41.12  Fireworks


41.06  Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators
 
41.13  Illegal Inhalants


41.07  Antenna and Radio Wires
 
41.14  Removal of an Officer's Communication or Control Device



 



41.01    DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.



No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any
corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person
delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes
reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or
animals from the place where the substance is deposited.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)



41.02    FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.



No person shall do any of the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)



   1.   Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire
department, a law enforcement authority or other public safety entity,
knowing that the information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a
criminal act knowing the act did not occur.



   2.   Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that
he or she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency
information or assistance. 



   3.   Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement
officer who enters the information on a citation.



41.03    REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.



Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to
render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make
an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required.  No person shall unreasonably and without lawful
cause, refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)



41.04    HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or
employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)



41.05    INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.



No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to be
a peace officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider under Chapter 147A
of the Code of Iowa, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, or a person
performing bailiff duties pursuant to Section 602.1303[4] of the Code of
Iowa, in the performance of any act that is within the scope of the lawful
duty or authority of that officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider,
or firefighter, or person performing bailiff duties, or shall knowingly
resist or obstruct the service or execution by any authorized person of any
civil or criminal process or order of any court.  The terms "resist" and
"obstruct" as used in this section do not include verbal harassment unless
the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and apparent
intention to execute a verbal threat physically. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)



(Ord. 1440 - Dec. 17 Supp.)



41.06    ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.



No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice
box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked or inoperable,
outside of any buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person
allow any such refrigerator, ice box, or similar container to remain outside
of the buildings on premises in the person’s possession or control,
abandoned or unattended and so accessible to children.  If, in the
determination of the Fire Chief, said refrigerator, ice box or similar
container constitutes a hazard, the doors may be removed or secured and the
City shall not be held liable for any damages done while mitigating the
hazard.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)



41.07    ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.



It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio
wires or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground or public building without written consent of the
Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])



41.08    BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.



It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose
land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless
such land consists of ten (10) acres or more and is used as agricultural land.



41.09    DISCHARGING WEAPONS. 



   1.   It is unlawful for a person to discharge a rifle, shotgun,
revolver, pistol, gun or other firearm of any kind within the City limits
except by written consent of the Council.  This section does not apply to
peace officers acting in the course of their duties or to any ceremonies
conducted by official veterans’ organizations such as, but not limited to,
Veterans Day and veterans’ rights ceremonies.



   2.   No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless
manner.



41.10    THROWING AND SHOOTING.



It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks or missiles of any kind
or to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB guns
or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, public way, public ground or public building, without written
consent of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])



41.11    URINATING AND DEFECATING.



It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk,
street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building,
including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway,
doorway or window thereof, or onto any public or private land.



41.12    FIREWORKS.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)



   1.   Definitions.  For purposes of this section:



      A.   "Consumer fireworks" means the following fireworks, as
described in Chapter 3 of the American Pyrotechnics Association ("APA")
Standard 87-1:



         (1)   First-class consumer fireworks:



            a.   Aerial shell kits and reloadable tubes;



            b.   Chasers;



            c.   Helicopters and aerial spinners;



            d.   Firecrackers;



            e.   Mine and shell devices;



            f.   Missile-type rockets;



            g.   Roman candles;



            h.   Sky rockets and bottle rockets;



            i.   Multiple tube devices under this paragraph
which are manufactured in accordance with APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.5.



         (2)   Second-class consumer fireworks:



            a.   Cone fountains;



            b.   Cylindrical fountains;



            c.   Flitter sparklers;



            d.   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices,
including multiple tube ground and hand-held sparkling devices that are
manufactured in accordance with APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.5;



            e.   Ground spinners;



            f.   Illuminating torches;



            g.   Toy smoke devices that are not classified as
novelties pursuant to APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.2;



            h.   Wheels;



            i.   Wire or dipped sparklers that are not
classified as novelties pursuant to APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.2.



      B.   "Display fireworks" includes any explosive composition,
or combination of explosive substances, or article prepared for the purpose
of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion,
deflagration, or detonation, and includes fireworks containing any explosive
or flammable compound, or other device containing any explosive substance. 
"Display fireworks" does not include novelties or consumer fireworks
enumerated in Chapter 3 of the APA Standard 87-1.



      C.   "Novelties" includes all novelties enumerated in Chapter
3 of the APA Standard 87-1, and that comply with the labeling regulations
promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission.



   2.   Display Fireworks.  It is unlawful for any person to use or
explode any display fireworks; provided, the City Council may, upon
application in writing, grant a permit for the display of display fireworks
by municipalities, fair associations, amusement parks, and other
organizations or groups of individuals approved by the City when the display
fireworks will be handled by a competent operator, but no such permit shall
be required for the display of display fireworks at the Iowa State
Fairgrounds by the Iowa State Fair Board, at incorporated county fairs, or at
district fairs receiving State aid.  No permit shall be granted hereunder
unless the operator or sponsoring organization has filed with the City
evidence of insurance in the following amounts:



      A.   Personal Injury:   $250,000 per person.



      B.   Property Damage:   $50,000



      C.   Total Exposure:   $1,000,000



   3.   Consumer Fireworks.  It is unlawful for any person to use or
explode consumer fireworks within the City.



   4.   Novelties.  This section does not apply to novelties.



   5.    Sale.  Sale of consumer fireworks is limited to the following:



      A.   Fireworks Wholesalers (Sprinklers required) are allowed
in M-2 - Heavy Industrial Districts only 



      B.   Fireworks Sales in permanent structures (sprinklers
required) are allowed in M-2 - Heavy Industrial Districts only.



      C.   Fireworks Sales in temporary structures are allowed in
M-1 - Light Industrial Districts and M-2 - Heavy Industrial Districts only.



      D.   Firework Sales Community Group are allowed in M-1 - Light
Industrial Districts and M-2 - Heavy Industrial Districts only.



      E.   Fireworks Sales Retailer (sprinklers required) are
allowed in C-1 - General Commercial Districts, M-1 - Light Industrial
Districts and M-2 - Heavy Industrial Districts only.



   M-1 and M-2 Zoning Districts as defined by Section 165.19 and 165.20,
and is subject to the Code of Iowa and regulations of the State Fire Marshal.



(Ord. 1444 - Dec. 17 Supp.)



41.13    ILLEGAL INHALANTS.



No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication,
euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses or
the nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes from any model
glue or cement, hair spray, inhalers and other solvents or chemicals having
the property of releasing toxic vapors; however, this section does not apply
to the inhalation of any medicine or anesthesia for medical or dental
purposes. 



41.14    REMOVAL OF AN OFFICER'S COMMUNICATION OR CONTROL DEVICE.



No person shall knowingly or intentionally remove or attempt to remove a
communication device or any device used for control from the possession of a
peace officer or correctional officer, when the officer is in the performance
of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that
officer and the person knew or should have known the individual to be an
officer.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.12)




(Ord. 1385 - Dec. 13 Supp.)



CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY



 

42.01  Trespassing
 
42.04  Unauthorized Entry


42.02  Criminal Mischief
 
42.05  Fraud


42.03  Defacing Proclamations or Notices
 
42.06  Theft



 



42.01    TRESPASSING.



It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the property of
another.  As used in this section, the term “property” includes any
land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle or other temporary or permanent
structure whether publicly or privately owned.  The term “trespass”
means one or more of the following acts:



(Code of Iowa Sec. 716.7 and 716.8)



   1.   Entering Property Without Permission.  Entering upon or in
property without the express permission of the owner, lessee, or person in
lawful possession with the intent to commit a public offense or to use,
remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place thereon or therein anything
animate or inanimate.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])



   2.   Entering or Remaining on Property.  Entering or remaining upon
or in property without justification after being notified or requested to
abstain from entering or to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee,
or person in lawful possession, or by any peace officer, magistrate, or
public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance of the
property.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])



   3.   Interfering with Lawful Use of Property.  Entering upon or in
property for the purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering with the
lawful use of the property by others.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2c])



   4.   Using Property Without Permission.  Being upon or in property
and wrongfully using, removing therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or
placing thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate, without the implied
or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2d])



None of the above shall be construed to prohibit entering upon the property
of another for the sole purpose of retrieving personal property which has
accidentally or inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the
property of another, provided that the person retrieving the property takes
the most direct and accessible route to and from the property to be
retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is possible, and does not unduly
interfere with the lawful use of the property.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[3])



42.02    CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.



It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally
damage, deface, alter or destroy property.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



42.03    DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.



It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down,
or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law
of the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement or
notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or
by order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



42.04    UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY.



No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building,
premises or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said
building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public.  When
open to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also
constitutes an unauthorized entry.



42.05    FRAUD.



It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8) 



42.06    THEFT.



It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of
the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1) 



CHAPTER 43
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA



 

43.01  Purpose
 
43.04  Determining Factors


43.02  Controlled Substance Defined
 
43.05  Possession of Drug Paraphernalia


43.03  Drug Paraphernalia Defined
 
43.06  Manufacture, Delivery or Offering For Sale



 



43.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with intent to
use, manufacture and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.



43.02    CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED.



The term “controlled substance” as used in this chapter is defined as the
term “controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform Controlled
Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is
hereafter amended.



43.03    DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED.



The term “drug paraphernalia” as used in this chapter means all
equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for
use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing,
containing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.  It includes, but is not
limited to:



   1.   Growing Kits.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for
use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any
species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.



   2.   Processing Kits.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for
use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or
preparing controlled substances.



   3.   Isomerization Devices.  Isomerization devices used, intended
for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance.



   4.   Testing Equipment.  Testing equipment used, intended for use,
or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength,
effectiveness or purity of controlled substances.



   5.   Scales.  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or
designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.



   6.   Diluents.  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose, used, intended for
use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances.



   7.   Separators; Sifters.  Separation gins and sifters used,
intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in
otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana.



   8.   Mixing Devices.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and
mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding
controlled substances.



   9.   Containers.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other
containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small
quantities of controlled substances.



   10.   Storage Containers.  Containers and other objects used,
intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled
substances.



   11.   Injecting Devices.  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other
objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting
controlled substances into the human body.



   12.   Ingesting-Inhaling Device.  Objects used, intended for use,
or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin,
marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:



      A.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic
pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured
metal bowls;



      B.   Water pipes;



      C.   Carburetion tubes and devices;



      D.   Smoking and carburetion masks;



      E.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning
materials, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand;



      F.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



      G.   Chamber pipes;



      H.   Carburetor pipes;



      I.   Electric pipes;



      J.   Air driven pipes;



      K.   Chillums;



      L.   Bongs;



      M.   Ice pipes or chillers.



43.04    DETERMINING FACTORS.



In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be considered in
addition to all other logically relevant factors:



   1.   Statements.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of
the object concerning its use.



   2.   Prior Convictions.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or
of anyone in control of the object under any State or federal law relating to
any controlled substance.



   3.   Proximity To Violation.  The proximity of the object, in time
and space, to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.



   4.   Proximity To Substances.  The proximity of the object to
controlled substances.



   5.   Residue.  The existence of any residue of controlled
substances on the object.



   6.   Evidence of Intent.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the
intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to
persons whom he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the
object to facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.



   7.   Innocence of an Owner.  The innocence of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not
prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as
drug paraphernalia.



   8.   Instructions.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with
the object concerning its use.



   9.   Descriptive Materials.  Descriptive materials accompanying the
object which explain or depict its use.



   10.   Advertising.  National and local advertising concerning its
use.



   11.   Displayed.  The manner in which the object is displayed for
sale.



   12.   Licensed Distributor or Dealer.  Whether the owner, or anyone
in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items
to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco
products.



   13.   Sales Ratios.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio
of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.



   14.   Legitimate Uses.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses
for the object in the community.



   15.   Expert Testimony.  Expert testimony concerning its use.



43.05    POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.



43.06    MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY OR OFFERING FOR SALE.



It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver,
manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia,
intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or
knowing that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation
of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.



CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION



 

45.01  Persons Under Legal Age
 
45.03  Open Containers in Motor Vehicles


45.02  Public Consumption or Intoxication
 



 



45.01    PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.



As used in this section, "legal age" means twenty-one (21) years of age or
more.



   1.   Social Host.  A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who
otherwise has control over, property that is not a licensed premises shall
not knowingly permit any person, knowing or having reasonable cause to
believe the person to be under the age of eighteen, to consume or possess on
such property any alcoholic beverage.  The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to a landlord or manager of the property or to a person under
legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic beverage in connection with
a religious observance, ceremony, or rite.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47)




   2.   Purchase, Consume, or Possess.  A person or persons under
legal age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase, consume, or individually
or jointly have alcoholic beverages in their possession or control; except in
the case of any alcoholic beverage given or dispensed to a person under legal
age within a private home and with the knowledge, presence and consent of the
parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal purposes or as administered to
the person by either a physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except
to the extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages
during the regular course of the person's employment by a liquor control
licensee, or wine or beer permittee under State laws.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])




3.   Misrepresentation of Age.  A person under legal age shall not
misrepresent the person's age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to
purchase any alcoholic beverage from any liquor control licensee or wine or
beer permittee.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])




(Ord. 1456 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



45.02    PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.



   1.   As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:



      A.   “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5
of the Code of Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section
232.19 of the Code of Iowa.



      B.   “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood,
breath, or urine to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a
qualified person using devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of
Public Safety.



      C.   “Peace Officer” means the same as defined in Section
801.4 of the Code of Iowa.



      D.   “School” means a public or private school or that
portion of a public or private school which provides teaching for any grade
from kindergarten through grade twelve.



   2.   A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or
beer upon the public streets or highways.  A person shall not use or consume
alcoholic liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor
control license.  A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors,
wine or beer on public school property or while attending any public or
private school-related function.  A person shall not be intoxicated or
simulate intoxication in a public place. 



   3.   When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public
intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person
that the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own
expense.  If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for
testing a sample of a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood
alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be
offered the person arrested.  In a prosecution for public intoxication,
evidence of the results of a chemical test performed under this subsection is
admissible upon proof of a proper foundation.  The percentage of alcohol
present in a person’s blood, breath, or urine established by the results of
a chemical test performed within two hours after the person’s arrest on a
charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of alcohol
present at the time of arrest.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)



45.03    OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.



(See Section 62.01 of this Code of Ordinances.)



CHAPTER 46
MINORS



 

46.01  Curfew
 
46.03  Contributing to Delinquency


46.02  Cigarettes and Tobacco
 



 



46.01    CURFEW.



   1.   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to regulate, by the
establishment of a curfew, the hours minors can be or remain upon the alleys,
streets, public places and other places of business and amusement in the
City.  The Council finds that the incidence of juvenile crime, vandalism and
general delinquency, despite other efforts to control the same, have
increased alarmingly.  The Council feels that the community sense of the
proper time for cessation of outdoor activities by minors on the streets of
the City is reflected in the curfew hours set forth in this section, which
are the danger hours for nocturnal crime and for gatherings of minors with
the attendant potential risks incident to immaturity and apparent lack of
parental supervision.  The Council is undaunted in its feeling that the City
is a stable family community.  Parental responsibility for the whereabouts
of children is the norm.  However, the degree of juvenile crime and
delinquency has increased so alarmingly that the Council feels legal
sanctions must be imposed and enforced in the hope of encouraging more
parental supervision and control where lacking and with the hope of deterring
juvenile crime and delinquency which inevitably occurs regardless of parental
supervision or the lack thereof.  It is the hope and sense of the Council
that this section will ultimately benefit not only the minors of this
community but the public good, safety and welfare of all citizens of the City.



   2.   Definitions.  The following words, terms and phrases, when
used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
For use in this section, the following terms are defined:



      A.   “Minor” means any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years who has not obtained his or her legal majority.



      B.   “Parent” means any person having legal custody of a
minor as a natural or adoptive parent, as a legal guardian, as a person who
stands in loco parentis, or as a person to whom legal custody has been given
by order of the court.



      C.   “Remain” means to stay behind, tarry or to stay
unnecessarily upon the street or other places prohibited herein, including
the congregating of groups totaling three or more persons in which any minor
involved would not be using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such
as mere transportation from one point to another.



      D.   “Street” means a way or place of whatever nature,
including sidewalks, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for
purposes of vehicular or pedestrian travel.  The term includes legal
right-of-way, including but not limited to cartways, traffic lanes, curbs,
sidewalks or other legal rights-of-way, whether paved or unpaved.



   3.   Curfew Established.  It is unlawful for any person seventeen
(17) years of age or less (under 18 years of age) to be or remain in or on
any alley, street, public place or places of business or amusement within the
limits of the City between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day.  This subsection does not apply to the following cases:



      A.   When a minor is accompanied by such minor’s parent.



      B.   When a minor is accompanied by an adult authorized by a
parent of the minor to take the parent’s place in accompanying said minor
for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area.



      C.   When the minor is exercising First Amendment rights
protected by the constitutions of the United States and the State, such as
the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly.



      D.   When the minor is traveling between such minor’s home
or place of residence and the place where any recognized church, municipal or
school function is being held.



      E.   When a minor is traveling between such minor’s home or
place of residence and the place of such minor’s employment.



      F.   In the case of an emergency where the minor’s presence
away from home or place of residence is necessary to protect life, limb or
property.



      G.   When the minor is located in a motor vehicle which is
traveling in a direct route through the city from a place of origin located
outside the City limits, to a place of destination also located outside the
City limits.



      H.   Interstate travel beginning or ending in the City.



      I.   When a minor is attending an activity at The Galaxy.



   4.   Parental Responsibility.  It is unlawful for a parent,
guardian or other person having legal custody of a minor or being charged by
the parent or parents of a minor with care and custody of a minor to permit
or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be or remain upon any
street, alley, public place or place of any other business or amusement in
violation of the curfew hours established by this section.  The term
“knowingly” includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be
expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent’s
legal custody.  It shall be no defense that a parent was completely
indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of said minor.



   5.   Responsibility of Places of Business or Amusement.  It is
unlawful for any person operating a place of business or amusement to allow
or permit any minor to be on or remain in any place of business or amusement
operated by the person in violation of the City curfew hours set forth in
this section.



   6.   Police Procedures.



      A.   A police officer, on finding or having attention called
to any minor in violation of this section, shall take the minor to the police
station, where a parent of the minor shall immediately be notified to come
for said minor.  In the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth
certificate or a valid driver’s license, a police officer having reason to
believe a minor is in violation of this section shall in the first instance
use best judgment in determining age.



      B.   Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the
light of experience and may provide that the police officer may deliver to a
parent thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances, for example, a minor
of tender age near home whose identity and address may readily be ascertained
or are known.



      C.   When a parent, immediately called upon taking a minor
into custody comes to the police station to take charge of the minor, and the
appropriate information has been recorded by the police department, the minor
shall be released to the custody of the parent.  If the parent cannot be
located, fails to come to the police station, or refuses to assume custody of
the minor, the minor shall be released to juvenile authorities except, when
approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the minor may temporarily be
entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other responsible person who will on
behalf of a parent assume the responsibility of caring for the minor pending
the availability or arrival of a parent.



46.02    CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.



It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to smoke, use,
possess, purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes.  Possession of
tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or
cigarettes by a person under eighteen years of age shall not constitute a
violation of this section if said person possesses the tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as
part of the person's employment and said person is employed by a person who
holds a valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully
offers for sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)





(Ord. 1401 - Oct. 14 Supp.)




46.03    CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.



It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under eighteen (18)
years of age to commit any act of delinquency.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)



CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS



 

47.01  Purpose
 
47.07  Public Meetings and Concerts


47.02  Use of Drives Required
 
47.08  Shelter Rentals


47.03  Fires
 
47.09  Motorized Vessels on Lakes


47.04  Littering
 
47.10  Exceptions


47.05  Parks Closed
 
47.11  Smoking and the Use of Tobacco, Nicotine Products, and Vaporizers
Prohibited


47.06  Camping
 
 



 



47.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park facilities
by the general public by establishing rules and regulations governing the use
of park facilities.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)



47.02    USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED.



No person shall drive any car, cycle or other vehicle, or ride or lead any
horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or
roadways therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the
City.



47.03    FIRES.



No fires shall be built, except in a place provided therefor, and such fire
shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be immediately
used by some other party.



47.04    LITTERING.



No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter or foreign
substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that purpose.



47.05    PARKS CLOSED.



   1.   It is unlawful, subject to any exception set forth herein, for
any person to be in any park or other municipally owned or operated
recreational area of the City between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 4:30 a.m.,
if the park or municipally owned or operated recreational area has been
posted as closed during such time period. 



   2.   Specific hours established for Skate Park located in Bailey
Park.  The Skate Park hours are from sunrise to 8:30 p.m. daily.  No
exceptions.



(Ord. 1407 - Aug. 15 Supp.)



47.06    CAMPING.



No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in portions prescribed
or designated by the Council, and the City may refuse camping privileges or
rescind any and all camping privileges for cause.



47.07    PUBLIC MEETINGS AND CONCERTS.



No person or organization shall call or hold any public meeting or give any
concert, exhibition or public entertainment of any kind in any park without
prior consent of the Council.



47.08    SHELTER RENTALS.



Shelter houses located in the City parks may be reserved by rental. 
Reservation procedures shall be determined by the Council.  Fees to be paid
shall be established by resolution of the Council.  It is the intent of the
City that a written confirmation of the rental will be given to the renter,
and that the renter must have this confirmation in his or her possession when
the renter claims the rental of the shelter, and a sign will also be posted
on the shelter advising of the date and times for which the shelter is
rented.  Posting shall be conspicuous and designed to reasonably inform the
public of the rental.  It is understood that due to weather conditions or
other actions beyond the control of the City, the posting may not remain on
the shelter.  If the posting is not visible, this does not in any way void
the rental of the shelter.  Individuals or groups who have rented the
shelter shall have first priority exclusive use of the shelter during the
times stated on the rental notice.  Persons interfering with the rental of
the shelter shall be in violation of this section.



47.09    MOTORIZED VESSELS ON LAKES.



Motorized vessels, other than those powered by electric trolling motors, are
not allowed on the waters of Lake Nyanza or on the waters of Arbor Lake.



47.10    EXCEPTIONS.



An exception to the prohibited uses set out in this chapter may be granted to
certain groups or persons by the Recreation Director if such use will not
cause undue damage to the parks or recreation facilities; or interfere with
the use of such facilities by other persons.  Any request for an exception
shall be made in writing and any exception granted by the Recreation Director
shall be granted in writing, dated and signed.



47.11    SMOKING AND THE USE OF TOBACCO, NICOTINE PRODUCTS, AND VAPORIZERS
PROHIBITED. 



   1.   Smoking and the use of any tobacco product, or electronic
smoking device, by any person, in any publicly owned outdoor park or outdoor
recreational facility is prohibited at all times.  For use in this Section,
the following terms are defined:



      A.   "Publicly owned outdoor park or outdoor recreation
facility" means any publicly owned outdoor park or facility including any
park, playground, athletic field or complex, skate park, aquatic area,
shelter, and any restroom or parking areas associated with these items.



      B.   "Tobacco product" means any cigarette or tobacco product
as defined in Chapter 453 of the Iowa Code.



      C.   "Nicotine product" means any product containing nicotine
including look alike products where the original would include tobacco or
nicotine, including products that are dissolvable, spit less, snus, or for
chewing.



      D.   "Smoking" means inhaling or exhaling from any lighted or
heated pipe cigar, cigarette, or any other lighted or heated tobacco, plant
material, liquid, oils, nicotine, or other chemicals that may be inhaled or
exhaled by the user.



      E.   "Electronic smoking device" means any device, including
but not limited to, e-cigarettes, e-pens, e-hookah, e-cigars, and vape pens
used to vaporize plant material, liquids, oils, nicotine, or other chemicals,
that may be inhaled by users.



   2.   This section does not apply to the use of FDA approved products
for the purpose of tobacco cessation. 



   3.   Any violation of this provision, section or paragraph of this
ordinance shall be subject to a civil citation as defined in Chapter 3.04 of
this Code of Ordinances and be scheduled a $100 fine.  Each occurrence shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 1460 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE



 

50.01  Definition of Nuisance
 
50.08  Request for Hearing


50.02  Nuisances Enumerated
 
50.09  Abatement in Emergency


50.03  Other Conditions
 
50.10  Abatement by City


50.04  Nuisances Prohibited
 
50.11  Collection of Costs


50.05  Nuisance Abatement
 
50.12  Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement


50.06  Notice to Abate: Contents
 
50.13  Failure to Abate


50.07  Method of Service
 



 



50.01    DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.



Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to
interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is
a nuisance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)



50.02    NUISANCES ENUMERATED.



The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions which are
deemed to be nuisances in the City:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)



   1.   Offensive Smells.  Erecting, continuing or using any building
or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture,
which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or
other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or
property of individuals or the public.



   2.   Filth or Noisome Substance.  Causing or suffering any offal,
filth or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the
prejudice of others.



   3.   Impeding Passage of Navigable River.  Obstructing or impeding
without legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor or
collection of water.



   4.   Water Pollution.  Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or
impure the water of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the
same from its natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.



   5.   Blocking Public and Private Ways.  Obstructing or encumbering,
by fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places or burying grounds.



   6.   Billboards.  Billboards, signboards and advertising signs,
whether erected and constructed on public or private property, which so
obstruct and impair the view of any portion or part of a public street,
avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track
as to render dangerous the use thereof.  (See also Section 62.08)



   7.   Storing of Flammable Junk.  Depositing or storing of flammable
junk, such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in
such articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of
fireproof construction.  (See also Chapter 51)



   8.   Air Pollution.  Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly
ash.



   9.   Weeds, Brush.  Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush or
other vegetation in the City so as to constitute a health, safety or fire
hazard.



   10.   Dutch Elm Disease.  Trees infected with Dutch Elm Disease. 
(See also Chapter 151)



   11.   Airport Air Space.  Any object or structure hereafter erected
within one thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly
established airport or landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial
navigation including take-off and landing, unless such object or structure
constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the same is
located.



   12.   Houses of Ill Fame.  Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose
of prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the
Code of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as
defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or
houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are
carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.



50.03    OTHER CONDITIONS.



The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other conditions which are deemed to be nuisances:



   1.   Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51)



   2.   Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)



   3.   Trees (See Chapter 151)



50.04    NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance,
public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter
or State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)



50.05    NUISANCE ABATEMENT.



Whenever the Mayor or other authorized municipal officer finds that a
nuisance exists, such officer shall cause to be served upon the property
owner a written notice to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time after
notice. †



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.06    NOTICE TO ABATE:  CONTENTS.  The notice to abate shall contain:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



   1.   Description of Nuisance.  A description of what constitutes
the nuisance.



   2.   Location of Nuisance.  The location of the nuisance.



   3.   Acts Necessary to Abate.  A statement of the act or acts
necessary to abate the nuisance.



   4.   Reasonable Time.  A reasonable time within which to complete
the abatement.



   5.   Assessment of City Costs.  A statement that if the nuisance or
condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within
the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against such
person.



50.07    METHOD OF SERVICE.



The notice may be sent by certified mail to the property owner or by personal
service by a City police officer.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.08    REQUEST FOR HEARING.



Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the City
Manager as to whether a nuisance exists.  A request for a hearing must be
made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time stated in the
notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it
must be abated as ordered.  The hearing will be before the City Manager at a
time and place fixed by the City Manager.  The findings of the City Manager
shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered
abated within a reasonable time under the circumstances.



50.09    ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY.



If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing
maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may perform any action
which may be required under this chapter without prior notice.  The City
shall assess the costs as provided in Section 50.11 after notice to the
property owner under the applicable provisions of Sections 50.05, 50.06 and
50.07 and hearing as provided in Section 50.08.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.10    ABATEMENT BY CITY.



If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to
abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping
an accurate account of the expense incurred.  The itemized expense account
shall be filed with the Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the
City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.11    COLLECTION OF COSTS.



The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense incurred by certified
mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate,
and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one month,
the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs
shall then be collected with, and in the same manner, as general property
taxes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.12    INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT.



If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00), the City may permit the assessment to be paid in
up to ten (10) annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with
the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited property
under State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)



(Ord. 1368 – Dec. 12 Supp.)



50.13    FAILURE TO ABATE.



Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or refuse to
abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified in
the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of Ordinances.



 


Notes

† 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  A suggested form of notice for the abatement of
nuisances is included in the appendix of this Code of Ordinances.  Caution
is urged in the use of this administrative abatement procedure, particularly
where cost of abatement is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to
whether or not a nuisance does in fact exist.  If compliance is not secured
following notice and hearings, we recommend you review the situation with
your attorney before proceeding with abatement and assessment of costs. 
Your attorney may recommend proceedings in court under Chapter 657 of the
Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.



CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES



 

51.01  Definitions
 
51.05  Exceptions


51.02  Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited
 
51.06  Notice to Abate


51.03  Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance
 
51.07  Right to Hearing


51.04  Stage of Vehicle Repair
 



 



51.01    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any
other non-ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper,
trash, rubber, debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled
vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or
appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or
discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or
hardware.  Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is
not considered junk.



   2.   “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage
with the County Treasurer or unlicensed and which has any of the following
characteristics:



      A.   Broken Glass.  Any vehicle with a broken or cracked
windshield, window, headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken
glass.



      B.   Broken, Loose or Missing Part.  Any vehicle with a
broken, loose or missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel or trunk
lid.



      C.   Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects.  Any vehicle
which has become the habitat for rats, mice, or snakes, or any other vermin
or insects.



      D.   Flammable Fuel.  Any vehicle which contains gasoline or
any other flammable fuel.



      E.   Inoperable.  Any motor vehicle which lacks an engine or
two or more wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle
totally inoperable, or which cannot be moved under its own power or has not
been used as an operating vehicle for a period of thirty (30) days or more.



      F.   Defective or Obsolete Condition.  Any other vehicle
which, because of its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way
constitutes a threat to the public health and safety.



Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding
that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.



   3.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street,
excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks, and includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile,
truck, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination
thereof.



51.02    JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any
private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk
vehicle.



51.03    JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.



It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private
property, unless excepted by Section 51.05, constitutes a threat to the
health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of
Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa.  If any junk or junk vehicle is kept upon
private property in violation hereof, the owner of or person occupying the
property upon which it is located shall be prima facie liable for said
violation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])



51.04    STAGE OF VEHICLE REPAIR.



If a vehicle is being repaired within the City limits, such vehicle shall be
licensed according to Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa.  If such vehicle is
being repaired, it shall be located only upon a hard surface constructed of
concrete or asphalt, for not to exceed thirty (30) days.



51.05    EXCEPTIONS.



   1.   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to a vehicle stored
within a garage or other enclosed structure.



   2.   Any business holding a wrecked or demolished vehicle is granted
sixty (60) days to complete all repairs or same shall be removed.



51.06    NOTICE TO ABATE.



Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in
violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five (5) days initiate
abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])



51.07    RIGHT TO HEARING.



   1.   The registered owner or person having a legal entitlement to
possession of the vehicle, pursuant to this chapter, has a right to an
administrative hearing before the City Manager to determine whether there is
probable cause to impound the vehicle or abate the nuisance, provided the
registered owner or person having legal entitlement to possession of the
vehicle files a written demand with the Clerk’s office within ten (10) days
of the date of notice.  Failure to request a hearing within such period or
to attend a scheduled hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such
hearing.



   2.   An informal hearing shall be conducted by the City Manager
within a reasonable time period but not to exceed fifteen (15) business days,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and City holidays, from the date of the receipt
of a written demand for hearing.  Such a hearing may be continued from time
to time for good cause.  The sole issue before the City Manager shall be
whether there is probable cause to abate the nuisance or impound the vehicle
in question.  The burden of proof for establishing whether there was
probable cause regarding the vehicle in question will be on the party causing
the vehicle to be impounded.  The jurisdiction of the City Manager shall be
limited to deciding only whether there was probable cause with regard to the
vehicle or whether there was no probable cause to impound the vehicle or
abate the nuisance.



   3.   In the event the City Manager determines there was probable
cause to abate the nuisance, the registered owner or person having legal
entitlement to possession of the vehicle is responsible for payment of all
charges attributable to the hearing, if any.  If the City Manager determines
there was no probable cause in the matter, the City Manager shall order the
action ceased.



   4.   The proceedings at the administrative hearing in front of the
City Manager shall be tape recorded, and such tape recording shall serve as
the official record of the administrative hearing for appeal purposes.  The
City Manager shall retain the tape recording.  The decision of the City
Manager shall in no way affect any criminal proceedings in connection with
the vehicle in question.  Criminal charges, if any, may only be challenged
in the appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.  The decision of the
City Manager shall be final and may only be appealed to the district court.



CHAPTER 52
GRASS AND WEEDS



 

52.01  Property Maintenance
 
52.04  Failure to Comply


52.02  Maximum Height
 
52.05  Prohibited Acts


52.03  Failure to Maintain
 



 



52.01    PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.



The abutting property owner shall maintain all vegetation on the owner’s
property and on all property outside of the lot and property lines and inside
the curb lines, to the center of the adjoining right-of-way.  Where private
property abuts a frontage road right-of-way, said property owner shall
maintain all areas between the traveled or paved portion of the frontage road
to the highway.



52.02    MAXIMUM HEIGHT.



All weeds, grasses, vines, brush or other vegetation that exceeds a maximum
height of eight (8) inches, or that creates a health, safety, or fire hazard,
as determined by the City Manager, shall be cut or destroyed.  Cultivated
vegetable gardens, flower gardens, herb gardens or areas planted and
maintained as natural prairie shall be exempt from the requirements of this
section as long as they are properly cultivated and maintained so as to
control noxious weeds or other vegetation which would not ordinarily be
considered a part of such garden or prairie area.  In order to identify
areas which are intended to be developed or have been developed as natural
prairie/exotic grass or wildflower areas, owners of such areas shall submit a
written application asking for permission to establish and maintain said
prairie/exotic grasses or wild flower mixtures at the office of the Clerk. 
The application must contain the following:



   1.   A drawing of the entire property where the prairie/exotic
grasses or wild flowers will be planted, and identifying the areas to be
planted.



   2.   A copy of the actual mix used, the name of the company
producing the mix and a certification of the mixture.



After receipt of the completed application, the Council, at a public meeting,
shall approve, disapprove or approve the application with modifications.



52.03    FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.



If the owner or person in possession or control of any lands within the City
fails to cut or destroy weeds, grasses, vines, brush, or other vegetation,
the City Manager shall cause to be served in writing to the property owner as
shown by records in the office of the County Auditor, a notice containing the
following:



   1.   The required time to comply with the provisions of this chapter.



   2.   The manner of compliance if other than cutting above the
surface of the ground.



52.04    FAILURE TO COMPLY.



If the property owner or person in control of the property fails to comply
with the notice to cut or destroy, the City Manager shall cause the
vegetation to be cut or destroyed and the cost of the work done, the cost of
serving notice and of any special proceedings shall be certified to the
County Treasurer for collection in the manner provided for general property
taxes.



52.05    PROHIBITED ACTS.



The abutting property owner is prohibited from placing or causing to be
placed any grass clippings, leaves, vines, brush, or other vegetation in any
ditch, waterway, gutter, or street, so as to obstruct the storm sewer
drainage system of the City.  This provision shall be construed to prohibit
a lawn mower from being discharged directly onto the surfaced area of any
street.



CHAPTER 53
NOISE CONTROL



 




(Repealed by Ord. No. 1377 - Dec. 13 Supp.)




CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL



 

55.01  Definitions
 
55.08  Rabies Vaccination


55.02  Standards of Care
 
55.09  Owner’s Duty


55.03  Abandonment of Cats and Dogs
 
55.10  Confinement


55.04  Keeping of Livestock and Bees
 
55.11  At Large: Impoundment


55.05  At Large Prohibited
 
55.12  Disposition of Animals


55.06  Damage or Interference
 
55.13  Pet Awards Prohibited


55.07  Annoyance or Disturbance
 



 



55.01    DEFINITIONS.



The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.



   1.   “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any
medium including but not limited to print, radio, television, sign, display,
label, tag or articulation.



   2.   “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)



   3.   “At large” means off the premises of the owner and on other
premises against the wishes of the person in possession of such other
premises, or upon the public streets, alleys, public grounds, school grounds
or parks within the City.  An animal is not deemed to be at large if:



      A.   The animal is on the owner’s property or a neighbor’s
property with that neighbor’s consent; or



      B.   The animal is confined in a cage or motor vehicle; or



      C.   The animal is restrained by a leash of sufficient
strength to control its action; or



      D.   The animal is actively engaged in obedience training and
under continual control of the owner or trainer, provided that the owner or
trainer is conducting the training in an open area, is not endangering other
users or animals in the area, has the animal within 30 yards and under
continual voice control, and has in possession a leash appropriate to control
the animal.



      E.   The animal is a draft animal engaged in drawing vehicles
or conveyances.



   4.   “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the
following:



      A.   The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.



      B.   A recruitment for employment or membership in an
organization.



      C.   A solicitation to make an investment.



      D.   An amusement or entertainment activity.



   5.   “Fair” means any of the following:



      A.   The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State
Fair Board pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event
conducted by a fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.



      B.   An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.



      C.   An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or
concession booths.



   6.   “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill”
as defined in Section 99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.



   7.   “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine,
caprine, equine, ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas and emus; farm
deer as defined in Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa; or poultry.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)



   8.   “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or
harboring an animal.



   9.   “Pet” means a living dog, cat or an animal normally
maintained in a small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not
limited to a rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch,
tropical fish, goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko or iguana.



55.02    STANDARDS OF CARE.



All owners and keepers of any animal shall comply with the following
standards of care.  Failure to comply with any standards shall be a
violation of this chapter.



   1.   It is the duty of each person keeping an animal, and no person
keeping an animal shall fail in that duty, to provide adequate food, which
shall mean providing at intervals appropriate for the species a quantity of
wholesome food stuff, suitable for the physical condition and age of the
animal, served in a clean receptacle or container, sufficient to maintain an
adequate level of nutrition for such animal.



   2.   It is the duty of each person keeping an animal, and no person
keeping an animal shall fail in that duty, to provide adequate outdoor
shelter for such animal when it is kept outdoors, tangle-free, which shall
mean a structurally sound, weather- proof, properly ventilated shelter which
provides access to shade from direct sunlight and regress from exposure to
weather conditions.  The shelter should be appropriate for the particular
species and breed.



   3.   It is the duty of each person keeping animal, and no person
keeping an animal shall fail in that duty, to provide adequate indoor shelter
for such animal when it is kept indoors, which shall mean a properly
ventilated and illuminated facility, sufficiently regulated by heating or
cooling to protect the animal from extremes of temperatures, and to provide
for its health and comfort.  It should be appropriate for the particular
species and breed.



   4.   It is the duty of each person keeping an animal, and no person
keeping an animal shall fail in that duty, to provide adequate sanitation,
which shall mean periodic cleaning or sanitizing housing facilities, and any
area where the animal is confined or restrained to remove excreta and other
waste materials and dirt, so as to minimize vermin infestation, odors and
disease hazards.  Leachate from animal wastes and vermin infestation shall
not extend beyond the property lines.



   5.   It is the duty of each person keeping an animal, and no person
keeping an animal shall fail in that duty, to provide adequate space, which
shall mean primary enclosures and housing facilities which shall be
constructed and maintained so as to provide sufficient space to allow each
animal to make normal postural and social adjustments with adequate freedom
of movement to maintain physical condition.  The space shall be appropriate
for the particular species.



   6.   It is the duty of each person keeping an animal, and no person
keeping an animal shall fail in that duty, to provide adequate veterinary
care, which shall mean that a sick, diseased, or injured animal shall be
provided with a proper program of care by a veterinarian, or humanely
euthanized.  All animals shall be provided with proper immunizations and
preventive health care including parasite control.  Should any peace officer
encounter any animal that is a danger to the health and/or well-being of any
person, or legally restrained animal, the peace officer shall capture or
destroy the offending animal and see that the animal or remains are impounded
or disposed of properly, or submitted for disease testing at an appropriate
institution, veterinary or laboratory.



   7.   It is the duty of each person keeping an animal, and no person
keeping an animal shall fail in that duty, to provide adequate water, which
shall mean reasonable access to a supply of clean, fresh, potable water,
provided in a sanitary manner.  If potable water is not accessible to the
animal at all times, it shall be provided daily, for such duration and of
sufficient quantity as appropriate to the species.



   8.   It is the duty of each person keeping an animal, and no person
keeping an animal shall fail in that duty, to keep the animal clean and to
provide proper grooming as appropriate for the species.



   9.   No person shall leave an animal unattended in, or tethered to,
a standing or parked motor vehicle, in a manner that endangers the health or
safety of the animal.  Peace officers may use reasonable means, including
reasonable force, to remove an animal from a motor vehicle when there is an
apparent violation of this section.



   10.   When it becomes necessary for a police officer to take an
animal to a veterinarian for treatment, the cost of said treatment shall be
paid by the City and the City shall claim reimbursement from the person
judged to be responsible.



It is the duty of any person having knowledge of or observing animal abuse,
cruelty or neglect to report such to a local enforcement agency.



55.03    ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.



A person who has ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the
cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another person
who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or
dog to an animal shelter or pound.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)



55.04    KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK AND BEES. 



   1.   Permit Required.  It is unlawful for any person to keep or
maintain livestock or bees in the City within five hundred (500) feet of any
public building or private dwelling without having first obtained a permit
issued by the Council after public hearing.  The applicant requesting a
permit shall supply to the City the names and addresses of owners of property
within 500 feet of the applicant’s property where the livestock will be
kept.  The City will be responsible for notifying neighboring property
owners of the public hearing.  The applicant shall pay a permit fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover the costs of the hearing.  The permit fee
pertaining to this section shall be altered or amended only by the Council. 
The permit fee and the public hearing requirement shall be waived for newly
annexed properties for which permits shall be automatically granted on
application.  No permit shall be issued for any hog confinement operation.



   2.   Contents of Application for Permit.  The application for
permit shall contain the following information, and shall serve as a basis
for the permit.



      A.   Name of owner(s), and location of property where
livestock is to be kept.



      B.   The type of livestock and the maximum number of each type
of animal to be kept.



      C.   Description of the accommodations for the livestock,
including land area, and/or buildings to be used for keeping the animals.



   3.   Validity.  The permit shall be valid as long as the
information in the application is accurate.  At any time the information in
the application is no longer accurate, the permit shall be void and a new
permit shall be required. 



   4.   Exemptions.  Farms with more than fifty percent (50%) of the
land in the farm unit outside the corporate limits are exempt from this
section.  Section 55.02 shall apply to all farms and portions of farms lying
within the corporate limits. 



55.05    AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at large within the
corporate limits of the City.



55.06    DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.



It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to
pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference
with, the premises.



55.07    ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.



It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow or permit such dog to cause
serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or persons by frequent and
habitual howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise; or, by running after or
chasing persons, bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles.



55.08    RABIES VACCINATION.



Every owner of a cat or dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such
animal.  It is unlawful for any person to own or have a cat or dog in said
person’s possession, six months of age or over, which has not been
vaccinated against rabies.  Dogs kept in kennels and not allowed to run at
large are not subject to these vaccination requirements.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)



55.09    OWNER’S DUTY.



It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat or other animal which has bitten
or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to
report this act to a local health or law enforcement official.  It is the
duty of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health
the existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)



55.10    CONFINEMENT.



If a local board of health receives information that an animal has bitten a
person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall
order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs.  If the
owner fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall
be apprehended and impounded by such board, and after ten (10) days the board
may humanely destroy the animal.  If such animal is returned to its owner,
the owner shall pay the cost of impoundment.  This section does not apply if
a police service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting
in the performance of its duties has bitten a person.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)



55.11    AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT.



Animals found at large in violation of this chapter shall be seized and
impounded at the impoundment facilities utilized by the City, or at the
discretion of the peace officer, the owner may be served a summons to appear
before a proper court to answer charges made thereunder.



55.12    DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.



When an animal has been apprehended and impounded, written notice shall be
provided to the owner within two (2) days after impoundment, if the owner’s
name and current address can reasonably be determined by accessing a tag or
other device that is on or part of the animal.  Impounded animals may be
recovered by the owner upon payment of impounding costs as established by the
impoundment facility, and if an unvaccinated and/or unlicensed cat or dog, by
having it immediately vaccinated and/or licensed.  If the owner fails to
redeem the animal within seven (7) days from the date that the notice is
mailed, or if the owner cannot be located within seven days, the animal shall
be disposed of in accordance with law or destroyed by euthanasia.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37, 351.41)



55.13    PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.



(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717.E)



   1.   Prohibition.  It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or
advertise that a pet may be awarded as any of the following:



      A.   A prize for participating in a game.



      B.   A prize for participating in a fair.



      C.   An inducement or condition for visiting a place of
business or attending an event sponsored by a business.



      D.   An inducement or condition for executing a contract which
includes provisions unrelated to the ownership, care or disposition of the
pet.



   2.   Exceptions.  This section does not apply to any of the
following:



      A.   A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code
of Iowa if the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a
pet on the premises of the pet shop.



      B.   Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers
of America; the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated
with outdoor recreation, hunting or fishing, including but not limited to the
Iowa Sportsmen’s Federation.



CHAPTER 56
CAT AND DOG LICENSES REQUIRED



 

56.01  Annual License Required
 
56.04  License Records


56.02  License Fees
 
56.05  Immunization


56.03  License Tags
 



 



56.01    ANNUAL LICENSE REQUIRED.



   1.   Every owner of a cat or dog over the age of six months shall
procure a cat or dog license from the Clerk on the first day of January of
each year or at any time for a cat or dog which has come into the possession
or ownership of the person or which has reached the age of six months after
said date.



   3.   The owner of a cat or dog for which a license is required shall
apply to the Clerk for said license.  The form of the application shall
state the breed, sex, age, color, markings, and name, if any, of the cat or
dog, and the address of the owner and shall be signed by the owner.  The
application shall also state the date of the most recent rabies vaccination,
the type of vaccine administered and the date the cat or dog shall be
revaccinated.  If the Council sets a lesser license fee for cats and dogs
incapable of breeding, a written certificate from a licensed veterinarian
shall also be required to prove that the cat or dog is incapable of breeding.



   4.   All licenses shall expire on January 1 of the year following
the date of issuance.



   5.   If the license tag is lost or destroyed, application must
forthwith be made for another or duplicate license.



   6.   For the purposes of this section, a person is considered to be
the owner of a cat or dog if the person harbors or lets the cat or dog
habitually remain or be fed around such person’s house.



56.02    LICENSE FEES.



The annual license fees shall be as established by resolution of the Council.



56.03    LICENSE TAGS.



Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Clerk shall issue the license. 
The license tag shall be securely fastened by the owner to a collar or
harness which shall be worn at all times by the animal for which issued.  A
license issued for one cat or dog shall not be transferable to another cat or
dog.  Upon the expiration of the license the owner shall remove said tag
from the animal.



56.04    LICENSE RECORDS.



The Clerk shall keep a book to be known as the record of licenses which shall
show:



   1.   The serial number and date of each application for a license.



   2.   The description of the cat or dog as specified in the
application, together with the name of the owner.



   3.   The date when each license tag is issued and the serial number
of each tag, the date of the most recent rabies vaccination, the type of
vaccine administered, and the date the cat or dog shall be revaccinated.



   4.   The amount of all fees paid.



   5.   Such other data as may be required by law.



56.05    IMMUNIZATION.



Before a license is issued, the owner shall furnish a veterinarian’s
certificate showing that the cat or dog for which the license is sought has
been vaccinated against rabies, and that the vaccination does not expire
within six months from the effective date of the cat or dog license.  A tag
showing evidence of proper vaccination shall at all times be attached to the
collar of the dog.



CHAPTER 57
VICIOUS DOGS AND WILD ANIMALS



 

57.01  Definitions
 
57.02  Keeping of Wild Animals or Vicious Dogs



 



57.01    DEFINITIONS.



The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.



   1.   “Vicious dog” means any dog (except one assisting a peace
officer engaged in law enforcement duties) which demonstrates any of the
following behavior and is therefore presumed vicious:



      A.   An attack which requires a defensive action by any person
to prevent bodily injury or property damage when such person is behaving
peacefully and lawfully.



      B.   An attack which results in property damage or in an
injury to a person when such a person is behaving peacefully and lawfully.



      C.   An attack on another domestic animal, livestock, or
poultry other than that of the owner of the attacking dog.



      D.   Any behavior which constitutes a threat of bodily harm to
a person when such person is behaving peacefully and lawfully.



   2.   “Wild animal” means any animal of a wild animal species
which, if not properly kept when in captivity, is known to have caused
serious injury, death, or disease to humans, or is manifestly capable of
doing so.  Examples of exemptions include (but are not limited to) the
following animals, which are not considered wild animals:  domestic ferrets,
hamsters, gerbils, guinea pigs, domestic hares, rabbits and domestic rodents,
domestic dogs and cats.



57.02    KEEPING OF WILD ANIMALS OR VICIOUS DOGS.



   1.   Permit Required.  It is unlawful for any person to keep or
maintain any wild animals or vicious dogs in the City within five hundred
(500) feet of any public building or private dwelling without having first
obtained written consent of all the owners and occupants of property residing
within a radius of 500 feet of the property and without having first obtained
a permit issued by the Council after public hearing and upon finding that the
maintenance or keeping of the wild animals or vicious dogs will not
constitute a nuisance or violate any State, City or Federal laws.  The City
may, after public hearing, revoke such a permit upon finding that the wild
animals or vicious dogs are being kept or maintained so as to constitute a
nuisance or violate any State, City or Federal laws.  Permits must be
renewed annually.  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant
requesting a permit to supply the City with the names and addresses of any
and all interested persons.  This list shall include (but is not limited to)
all owners of property within 500 feet of the applicant’s property.



   2.   Requirements for Permit.  Prior to granting such permit, the
Council shall require: 



      A.   An insurance policy or certificate of insurance issued by
an insurance company licensed to do business in the State, providing personal
liability insurance coverage as in a homeowner’s policy, with a minimum
liability amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for the
injury or death of any person, for damage to property of others or for acts
of negligence by the owner or the owner’s agents, in the negligent keeping
of such vicious animals.



      B.   The insurance policy or certificate of insurance referred
to in this section shall provide that it cannot be cancelled or terminated
until after ten (10) days’ notice to the City, by registered mail, of such
cancellation or termination.



      C.   The cancellation or other termination of any insurance
policy, issued in compliance with this section, shall automatically revoke
and terminate any license issued under Chapter 56 of this Code of Ordinances,
unless another policy, complying with this section, is provided and in effect
at the time of such cancellation or termination.  The City Manager shall
immediately issue written notification of the revocation of said certificate
and any license issued under said Chapter 56.



      D.   Permit Fee.  The permit fee pertaining to this chapter
shall be altered or amended only by the Council.  No permit shall be issued
unless or until said fee has been paid, nor shall any action be taken on
proceedings before the Council until the permit fee has been paid in full,
which fee shall be refunded if the permit is not granted.  Said permit fee
shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).



CHAPTER 58
URBAN CHICKENS



 

58.01  Definitions
 
58.07  Feed and Storage


58.02  Permit Required
 
58.08  Waste Storage and Removal


58.03  Number and Type of Chickens Allowed
 
58.09  Unlawful Acts


58.04  Zoning Districts Allowed
 
58.10  Disclaimer


58.05  Non-Commercial Use Only
 
58.11  Nuisances


58.06  Enclosures and Related Items
 
 



 



58.01    DEFINITIONS.



   1.   "Chicken" shall mean a member of the subspecies Gallus gallus
domesticus, a domesticated fowl.



   2.   "Urban Chicken" shall mean a chicken kept on a permitted tract
of land pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter.



   3.   "Permitting Officer" shall mean the City Manager or designee.



   4.   "Tract of land" shall mean a property or a zoned lot that has
one single family dwelling located on that property or zoned lot.



   5.   "Single Family Dwelling" shall mean any building that contains
only one dwelling unit used, intended, rented, leased, let or hired to be
occupied for living purposes.



   6.   "Permitted tract of land" shall mean the tract of land as
identified by the application upon which a permit is granted for keeping
chickens pursuant to this chapter.



   7.   "Permittee" shall mean an applicant who has been granted a
permit to raise, harbor or keep chickens pursuant to this chapter.



58.02    PERMIT REQUIRED.



   1.   Permit Required.  No person shall raise, harbor or keep
chickens within the City of Grinnell without a valid permit obtained from the
Permitting Officer under the provisions of this chapter.



   2.   Application.  In order to obtain a permit, an applicant must
submit a completed application on forms provided by the Permitting Officer
and paying all fees required by this chapter. The urban chicken permit shall
be valid for three (3) years and may not be sold, transferred or assigned.



   3.   Permit Fees.  Initial permit fee is $100.00.  The fee to
renew the permit is $75.00.  If the City issues the permittee a Notice of
Violation and if the permittee has not cured the violation when the property
is re-inspected, the permittee shall be assessed a re-inspection fee of
$35.00, which is due in 30 days.  If the violation has been cured, no
re-inspection fee shall be assessed.



   4.   Leg Bands Required.  The Permittee shall place and keep leg
bands on all of his chickens showing the permit number.



   5.   Requirements.  The requirements to the receipt of a permit
include:



      A.   All requirements of this chapter are met.



      B.   All fees, as may be provided for from time to time by
City Council resolution, for the permit are paid in full.



      C.   All judgments in the City's favor and against the
applicant have been paid in full.



      D.   The tract of land to be permitted shall contain only one
Single Family Dwelling occupied and used as such by the permittee.



      E.   The applicant has provided notice to the residents of all
properties located within 100 foot radius from the location of the proposed
coop of the applicant's intent to obtain a permit.



      F.   Tenant must obtain the landlord's written permission to
install a coop.



      G.   Site Plan Showing Space and Placement of Chicken
Enclosure.  The Permitting Officer shall issue a permit to keep or maintain
chickens in the City only after a site plan showing spacing and placement of
chicken enclosure has been submitted and meets the requirements of this
section.  Drainage system shall be included with design on urban chicken
permit.



   6.   Issuance of Permit.  If the Permitting Officer or designee
concludes as a result of the information contained in the application that
the requirements for a permit have been met, then the officer shall issue the
permit.



   7.   Denial, Suspension, Revocation, Non-Renewal.  The Permitting
Officer or designee may deny, suspend, revoke, or decline to renew any permit
issued for any of the following grounds:



      A.   False statements on any application or other information
or report required by this section to be given by the applicant.



      B.   Failure to pay any application, penalty, re-inspection or
reinstatement fee required by this section or City Council resolution.



      C.   Failure to correct deficiencies noted in notices of
violation in the time specified in the notice.



      D.   Failure to comply with the provisions of an approved
mitigation/remediation plan by the Permitting Officer, or designee.



      E.   Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter.



   8.   Notification.  A decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not
renew a permit shall be in writing, delivered by ordinary mail or in person
to the address indicated on the application. The notification shall specify
reasons for the action.



   9.   Effect of Revocation, etc.  When an application for a permit
is denied, or when a permit is revoked, the applicant may not re-apply for a
new permit for a period of 1 year from the date of the denial or revocation.



   10.   Appeals.  No permit may be denied, suspended, revoked, or not
renewed without notice and an opportunity to be heard given the applicant or
holder of the permit. In any instance where the Permitting Officer has
denied, revoked, suspended, or not renewed a permit, the applicant or holder
of urban chicken may appeal the decision to the City Manager, or designee
other than the Permitting Officer within ten (10) business days of receipt by
the applicant or holder of the permit of the notice of the decision. The
applicant or holder of the permit will be given an opportunity for a hearing.
The decision of the officer hearing the appeal, or any decision by the
Permitting Officer which is not appealed in accordance to this chapter shall
be deemed final action.



58.03    NUMBER AND TYPE OF CHICKENS ALLOWED.



   1.   The maximum number of chickens allowed is six (6) per tract of
land regardless of how many dwelling units are on the tract.



   2.   All such chickens must be hens; no roosters are permitted.



58.04    ZONING DISTRICTS ALLOWED. 



Chickens are permitted only on land located in residential districts as
identified on the current Official Zoning Map on file with the City of
Grinnell.



58.05    NON-COMMERCIAL USE ONLY.



A permit shall not allow the permittee to engage in chicken breeding, sale of
eggs and chickens or fertilizer production for commercial purposes.



58.06    ENCLOSURES AND RELATED ITEMS.



   1.   Chickens must be confined in a coop or fowl house not less than
18 inches in height or, in the alternative, within a fenced pen area.
Chickens must be kept within the coop, the fowl house, or the fenced pen area
at all times unless removed for a temporary time for the safety of the
chicken.



   2.   The coop, the fowl house, or the fenced pen area must be of
such a design to be reasonably expected to prevent entry by dogs, cats, or
other animals and shall be completely enclosed. The coop or fowl house must
be used for chickens only and must be well ventilated.



   3.   The coop, the fowl house, or the fenced pen area shall have a
minimum of four (4) square feet of floor area for each chicken but shall not
be any larger than twelve (12) square feet of area for each chicken.  The
coop, fowl house, or fenced pen area shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25)
feet from any habitable structure and a minimum of five (5) feet from the
habitable structure on the applicant's property.  The location of the coop,
fowl house, or fenced pen shall be in the rear yard only according to Chapter
165.13 (4) Accessory Buildings.



   4.   Coops shall be built of solid materials such as wood, metal or
plastic.



   5.   Any enclosed chicken pen shall consist of sturdy wire fencing.
The pen must be covered with wire, aviary netting, or solid roofing.



   6.   Chickens are not allowed to be free range in a fenced rear yard.



   7.   Chickens must be kept in an enclosure or fenced area at all
times. Chickens shall be secured within a henhouse or chicken tractor during
non-daylight hours.



   8.   The Permittee shall not allow the Permittee's chickens to roam
off the permitted tract of land. No dog or cat or other domesticated animal
which kills a chicken off the permitted tract of land will, for that reason
alone, not be considered a dangerous or aggressive animal or the City's
responsibility to enforce its animal control provisions.



   9.   The City shall not be liable for injury or death of chickens
caused by dogs, cats, or other animals, domestic or wild.  Any dead chicken,
not caused by slaughtering, shall be disposed of immediately upon discovering
in a manner so as to not cause a nuisance.



58.07    FEED AND STORAGE.



Chickens shall be provided with access to feed and clean water at all times.
All chicken feed shall be stored in rodent-proof containers.



58.08    WASTE STORAGE AND REMOVAL.



Any coop, fowl house, or fenced pen area must be well drained so there is no
accumulation of moisture and allows the chickens to have access to dry ground
at all times. Any coop, fowl house, or fenced pen area shall be kept clean,
sanitary and free from accumulation of chicken excrement and objectionable
odors. All droppings and body excretions shall be either placed in fly-proof
containers and double-bagged in plastic bags or, in the alternative, used as
fertilizer on the same property or, with the owner's permission, on other
property within the City, so long as the droppings and body excretions are
spread and incorporated into the soil within twenty four (24) hours.



58.09    UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep chickens in
violation of any provision of this chapter or any other provision of the
Grinnell Municipal Code.



   2.   It shall be unlawful for any owner, renter or leaseholder of
property to allow chickens to be kept on the property in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.



   3.   No person shall keep chickens inside a single family dwelling
unit, multi family dwelling unit(s) or rental unit.



   4.   No person shall slaughter any chickens within the City of
Grinnell.



   5.   No person shall keep a rooster.



   6.   No person shall keep chickens on a vacant or uninhabited tract
of land.



58.10    DISCLAIMER.



An applicant is responsible to determine whether restrictive covenants
prohibits keeping chickens on the applicant's property.  The issuance of a
permit under this section does not affect prohibitions contained in
restrictive covenants.



58.11    NUISANCES.



Any violation of the terms of this chapter that constitutes a health hazard
or that interferes with the use or enjoyment of neighboring property is a
nuisance and may be abated under the general nuisance abatement provisions of
Grinnell Municipal Code Chapter 50.



(Ch. 58 - Ord. 1381 - Dec. 13 Supp.)



CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE



 

60.01  Title
 
60.04  Power to Direct Traffic


60.02  Definitions
 
60.05  Traffic Accidents:  Reports


60.03  Administration and Enforcement
 
60.06  Parades Regulated



 



60.01    TITLE.



Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as
the “Grinnell Traffic Code.”



60.02    DEFINITIONS.



Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law,
such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by
reference.  Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)



   1.   “Central Business District” means the territory contiguous
to and including the following designated streets:



      A.   Third Avenue, from State Street to West Street.



      B.   Fourth Avenue, from State Street to West Street.



      C.   Fifth Avenue, from State Street to West Street.



      D.   Broad Street, from Third Avenue to Sixth Avenue.



      E.   Main Street, from Third Avenue to Sixth Avenue.



      F.   Park Street, from Third Avenue to Sixth Avenue.



      G.   State Street, from Third Avenue to Sixth Avenue.



      H.   West Street, from Third Avenue to Sixth Avenue.



   2.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.



   3.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or
regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.



   4.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and
including a highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district,
where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on such a highway for a
distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by dwellings or by
dwellings and buildings in use for business.



   5.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to and
including a highway for a distance of two hundred (200) feet in either
direction from a school house.



   6.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.



   7.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of
movement.



   8.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting
of a vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a peace officer or traffic control sign or signal.



   9.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not
included in the business, school or residence districts.



   10.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals,
markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or
erected for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.



   11.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any
person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway,
street, or alley.



60.03    ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor vehicles and
law of the road are enforced by the Police Department.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])



60.04    POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.



A peace officer, and, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the
fire department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws.  In the
event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])



60.05    TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: REPORTS.



The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the City
shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation.  A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)



60.06    PARADES REGULATED.



No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as provided
herein:



   1.   “Parade” Defined.  “Parade” means any march or
procession of persons or vehicles organized for marching or moving on the
streets in an organized fashion or manner or any march or procession of
persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the public as a parade.



   2.   Permit Required.  No parade shall be conducted without first
obtaining a written permit from the Council.  Such permit shall state the
time and date for the parade to be held and the streets or general route
therefor. Such written permit granted to the person organizing or sponsoring
the parade shall be permission for all participants therein to parade when
such participants have been invited by the permittee to participate
therein.  No fee shall be required for such permit.



   3.   Parade Not A Street Obstruction.  Any parade for which a
permit has been issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully
participating therein, shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets
notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.



   4.   Control By Police and Firefighters.  Persons participating in
any parade shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions
in the performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members
of the fire department.



CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES



 

61.01  Installation
 
61.04  Standards


61.02  Crosswalks
 
61.05  Obedience to Official Traffic Control Devices


61.03  Traffic Lanes
 



 



61.01    INSTALLATION.



The Council shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control devices
when and as required under this Traffic Code or under State law or emergency
or temporary traffic control devices for the duration of an emergency or
temporary condition as traffic conditions may require to regulate, guide or
warn traffic.  The Clerk shall keep a record of all such traffic control
devices.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)



61.02    CROSSWALKS.



The Council is hereby authorized to designate and maintain crosswalks by
appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic
conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or
roadway, and at such other places as traffic conditions require.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)



61.03    TRAFFIC LANES.



The Council is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street
pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent with the
traffic code of the City.  Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such
vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing
another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)



61.04    STANDARDS.



Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)



61.05    OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic
control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the
exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under
Section 321.231 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)



CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



 

62.01  Violation of Regulations
 
62.05  Tampering with Vehicle


62.02  Play Streets Designated
 
62.06  Obstructing View at Intersections


62.03  Vehicles on Sidewalks
 
62.07  Golf Carts


62.04  Clinging to Vehicle
 
 



 



62.01    VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.



Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of
a peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or
who fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa
statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road
is in violation of this section.  These sections of the Code of Iowa are
adopted by reference and are as follows:



   1.   Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration
provisions.



   2.   Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited;
exception.



   3.   Section 321.37 – Display of plates.



   4.   Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations
prohibited.



   5.   Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.



   6.   Section 321.91 – Penalty for abandonment.



   7.   Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.



   8.   Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.



   9.   Section 321.174 – Operators licensed.



   10.   Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired
license.



   11.   Section 321.180 – Instruction permits.



   12.   Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons
aged fourteen through seventeen.



   13.   Section 321.193 – Restricted licenses.



   14.   Section 321.194 – Special minor’s licenses.



   15.   Section 321.210 – Suspension.



   16.   Section 321.210A – Suspension for failure to pay fine,
penalty, surcharge, or court costs.



   17.   Section 321.210B – Nonrenewal or suspension for failure to
pay indebtedness owed to the state.



   18.   Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and
nonoperator’s identification card.



   19.   Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or
nonoperator’s identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.



   20.   Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or
nonoperator’s identification card by underage person to obtain cigarettes
or tobacco products.



   21.   Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver's license
or when disqualified – penalties.



   22.   Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.



   23.   Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.



   24.   Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.



   25.   Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.



   26.   Section 321.223 – License inspected.



   27.   Section 321.224 – Record kept.



   28.   Section 321.229 – Obedience to peace officers.



   29.   Section 321.232 – Radar jamming devices; penalty.



   30.   Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles.



   31.   Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility
devices.



   32.   Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.



   33.   Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.



   34.   Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.



   35.   Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs or
signals; unlawful possession.



   36.   Section 321.262 – Damage to vehicle.



   37.   Section 321.263 – Information and aid.



   38.   Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.



   39.   Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.



   40.   Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized
bicycles.



   41.   Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device
while driving; text-messaging.



   42.   Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.



   43.   Section 321.277A – Careless driving.



   44.   Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.



   45.   Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.



   46.   Section 321.284 – Open containers in motor vehicles –
drivers.



   47.   Section 321.284A – Open containers in motor vehicles –
passengers.



   48.   Section 321.285 – Speed restrictions.



   49.   Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.



   50.   Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated
structures.



   51.   Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways;
exceptions.



   52.   Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.



   53.   Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.



   54.   Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.



   55.   Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.



   56.   Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.



   57.   Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.



   58.   Section 321.307 – Following too closely.



   59.   Section 321.308 – Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance
requirements.



   60.   Section 321.309 – Towing; convoys; drawbars.



   61.   Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.



   62.   Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.



   63.   Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.



   64.   Section 321.314 – When signal required.



   65.   Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.



   66.   Section 321.316 – Stopping.



   67.   Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.



   68.   Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different
highways.



   69.   Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.



   70.   Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.



   71.   Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield
intersection.



   72.   Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.



   73.   Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.



   74.   Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency
vehicles.



   75.   Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.



   76.   Section 321.326 – Pedestrians on left.



   77.   Section 321.327 – Pedestrians' right-of-way.



   78.   Section 321.328 – Crossing at other than crosswalk.



   79.   Section 321.329 – Duty of driver – pedestrians crossing or
working on highways.



   80.   Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.



   81.   Section 321.331 – Pedestrians soliciting rides.



   82.   Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.



   83.   Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.



   84.   Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.



   85.   Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal of train.



   86.   Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings;
posting warning.



   87.   Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.



   88.   Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.



   89.   Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.



   90.   Section 321.353 – Stop before crossing sidewalk –
right-of-way.



   91.   Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.



   92.   Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.



   93.   Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.



   94.   Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.



   95.   Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by
hazardous material.



   96.   Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.



   97.   Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.



   98.   Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.



   99.   Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.



   100.   Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.



   101.   Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.



   102.   Section 321.372 – School buses.



   103.   Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped
vehicles.



   104.   Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.



   105.   Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.



   106.   Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.



   107.   Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.



   108.   Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.



   109.   Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized
bicycles.



   110.   Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.



   111.   Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.



   112.   Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.



   113.   Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.



   114.   Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.



   115.   Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.



   116.   Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.



   117.   Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.



   118.   Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.



   119.   Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.



   120.   Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.



   121.   Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.



   122.   Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.



   123.   Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.



   124.   Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.



   125.   Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.



   126.   Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.



   127.   Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.



   128.   Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.



   129.   Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or
permitted.



   130.   Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.



   131.   Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.



   132.   Section 321.422 – Red light in front.



   133.   Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.



   134.   Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch and control requirements.



   135.   Section 321.431 – Performance ability.



   136.   Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.



   137.   Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles and bells prohibited.



   138.   Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.



   139.   Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.



   140.   Section 321.437 – Mirrors.



   141.   Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.



   142.   Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.



   143.   Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.



   144.   Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.



   145.   Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.



   146.   Section 321.444 – Safety glass.



   147.   Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use
required.



   148.   Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.



   149.   Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety regulations.



   150.   Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation.



   151.   Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.



   152.   Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.



   153.   Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles; permits.



   154.   Section 321.457 – Maximum length.



   155.   Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.



   156.   Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.



   157.   Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.



   158.   Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.



   159.   Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight.



   160.   Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.



   161.   Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity;
reregistration.



   162.   Section 321.492 – Peace officer’s authority.



   163.   Section 321A.32 – Other violations – penalties.



(Ord. 1349 – Nov. 11 Supp.)



   164.   Section 321.449B - Texting or using a mobile telephone while
operating a commercial motor vehicle.



(Ord. 1458 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



62.02    PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED.



The Council shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play
street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway
indicating and helping to protect the same.  Whenever authorized signs are
erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person
shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers
of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area,
and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any
such street or portion thereof.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)



62.03    VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.



The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area
except at a driveway.



62.04    CLINGING TO VEHICLE.



No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all
passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation.  No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, in-line skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself
or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.



62.05    TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE.



It is unlawful for any person, either individually or in association with one
or more other persons, to willfully injure or tamper with any vehicle or
break or remove any part or parts of or from a vehicle without the consent of
the owner.



62.06    OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.



It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other object to
obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a
clear view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets.  Any
such obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty
may be abated in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.



62.07    GOLF CARTS.



   1.   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to facilitate for,
and allow, the safe operation of golf carts upon certain streets within the
city and to enact rules and regulations for the operation thereof.



   2.   Rules of Operation.  The following rules shall apply to the
operation of golf carts within the city:



      A.   Golf carts registered with the City Clerk may be operated
on city streets unless otherwise prohibited by the Code of Iowa as now
exists, or hereafter amended, or by the provisions of this chapter.



         (1)   The owner shall supply proof of liability
insurance, covering operation of the golf cart on city streets, at the time
of initial registration and each registration renewal.



         (2)   Registration renewal will be annual.



      B.   A City Certificate of Registration must be carried on the
golf cart being operated on streets under this subsection.  Registration
fees will be set by resolution of the Council.



      C.   Golf carts may be operated only by persons who possess a
valid motor vehicle operator's license issued by a state licensing authority.



      D.   Golf carts may be operated on city streets from sunrise
to sunset, regardless of whether the golf cart is equipped with lights.



      E.   Golf carts operated upon a city street shall be equipped
with a slow moving vehicle sign on the back thereof as well as a bicycle
safety flag, and all carts shall have adequate brakes.



      F.   Golf carts operated upon a city street only for the
purpose of crossing the street shall not be required to be equipped with a
slow-moving vehicle sign and a bicycle safety flag as otherwise herein
required.



      G.   Golf carts shall be driven as close as practical to the
right-hand edge of any street, except when executing a left turn.



      H.   Golf carts shall yield the right-of-way to other motor
vehicles and pedestrians at all uncontrolled intersections regardless of the
dictates of Section 321.319 of the Code of Iowa.



      I.   Golf carts shall not be operated in any park, playground
or upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of the
City.



      J.   Golf carts may be parked upon any city street within the
City of Grinnell Iowa, subject to the same terms and conditions applicable to
the parking of automobiles and other motor vehicles, with the exception that
golf carts may not park upon any street within the City of Grinnell where
their operation is otherwise prohibited by city ordinance or the provisions
of the Code of Iowa as now existing or hereafter amended.



      K.   Golf carts shall operate in single file.



      L.   No person shall ride on, and no operator shall allow a
person to ride on, a golf cart, or on any portion thereof, not designed or
intended for the conveyance of passengers.



      M.   The owner and operator of a golf cart are liable for any
injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the golf cart. 
The owner of a golf cart shall be liable for any such injury or damage only
if the owner was the operator of the golf cart at the time the injury or
damage occurred or if the operator had the owner's consent to operate the
golf cart at the time the injury or damage occurred.



   3.   Restrictions on Use.  Golf carts shall not operate on the
following city streets:



      A.   Park Street, between Third Avenue and Sixth Avenue;



      B.   Broad Street, between Third Avenue and Sixth Avenue;



      C.   Main Street, between Third Avenue and Sixth Avenue;



      D.   Third Avenue, between West Street and Park Street;



      E.   Fourth Avenue, between West Street and Park Street;



      F.   Fifth Avenue, between West Street and Park Street



      G.   Highway 146;



      H.   Highway 6.



(Ord. 1396 - Oct. 14 Supp.)



CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS



 

63.01  General
 
63.04  Special Speed Zones


63.02  State Code Speed Limits
 
63.05  Minimum Speed


63.03  Alleys, Parks, Cemeteries and Parking Lots
 



 



63.01    GENERAL.



Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful
and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper,
having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any
other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any
street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a stop
within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)



63.02    STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.



The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the Code of
Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically
designated otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.



   1.   Central Business District – twenty (20) miles per hour.



   2.   Residence or School District – twenty-five (25) miles per
hour.



   3.   Suburban District – forty-five (45) miles per hour.



63.03    ALLEYS, PARKS, CEMETERIES AND PARKING LOTS.



A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in any public alley, park,
cemetery or parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this
chapter, is unlawful.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])



63.04    SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.



In accordance with requirements of the Iowa State Department of
Transportation, or whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section
63.02 is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions
found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the
City street system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such
higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such
location.  The following special speed zones have been established:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)



   1.   Special 25 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of twenty-five
miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or
parts thereof.



      A.   Sixteenth Avenue from a point 430 feet east of Country
Club Drive to West Street.



      B.   East Street from Garfield Avenue south to 128 feet north
of Patricia Avenue.



      C.   4th Avenue from Ferguson Road to Prince Street.



   2.   Special 30 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of thirty miles
per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts
thereof.



      A.   West Street (Iowa Hwy. 146), beginning at a point 100
feet north of the north right-of-way line of Second Avenue, and continuing
north to 91 feet north of the north right-of-way line of Twelfth Avenue.

      B.   Lang Creek Avenue, beginning at the west right-of-way
line of West Street a/k/a Iowa Highway 146 continuing west to the
intersection with Brownell Parkway.



   3.   Special 35 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of thirty-five
miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or
parts thereof.



      A.   Pinder Avenue from West Street to the west right-of-way
line of the Chicago-Northwestern Railroad tracks.



      B.   Ogan Avenue from West Street to the East Street extension.



      C.   Sixteenth Avenue from the east City limits to a point 430
feet east of Country Club Drive.



      D.   1st Avenue West westbound from the west City limits
(south side of 1st Ave. near cemetery) to 118 feet west of Ferguson Road.



      E.   Ferguson Road from 380th Avenue to 1st Avenue.



      F.   Penrose Street from 810 feet north of 10th Avenue to
370th Avenue.



      G.   370th Avenue eastbound from Penrose Street to the east
City limits.



   4.   Special 40 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of forty miles
per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts
thereof.



      A.   West Street (Iowa Hwy. 146), beginning at a point 91 feet
north of the north right-of-way line of Twelfth Avenue, and continuing north
to a point 1,391 feet from the north right-of-way line of Twelfth Avenue.



      B.   Garfield Avenue at Penrose Street westbound to 1435 feet
east of East Street.



   5.   Special 45 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of forty-five
miles per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or
parts thereof.



      A.   West Street (Iowa Hwy. 146), beginning at a point 1,391
feet from the north right-of-way line of Twelfth Avenue, to a point 431 feet
north of the north right-of-way line of Sixteenth Avenue.



   6.   Special 50 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of fifty miles
per hours is unlawful on any of the follow designated streets or parts
thereof.



      A.   West Street (Iowa Hwy. 146), beginning at a point 800
feet from the north right-of-way of Ogan Avenue, to a point 730 feet south
right-of-way of the eastbound I-80 ramps.




(Ord. 1425 - Sep. 16 Supp.)




63.05    MINIMUM SPEED.



A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)



CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS



64.01    TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.



The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)



   1.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be
made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.



   2.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering
the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the
intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.



   3.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way
street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest
the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where
it enters the intersection.  A left turn from a one-way street into a
two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the
street being entered upon leaving the intersection.



The Council may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic
conditions require, that a different course from that specified above be
traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or
signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an
intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or
signs.



CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED



 

65.01  Through Streets – Stop
 
65.05  Yield Required


65.02  Stop Required
 
65.06  School Stops


65.03  Four-Way Stop Intersections
 
65.07  Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed


65.04  Three-Way Stop Intersections
 



 



65.01    THROUGH STREETS – STOP.



Every driver of a vehicle shall stop, unless a yield is permitted by this
chapter, before entering an intersection with the following designated
through streets.



   1.   Sixth Avenue, between the east City limits and Park Street.



   2.   Sixth Avenue, between West Street and the west City limits.



   3.   West Street, between the south City limits and the I-80
eastbound ramp.



   4.   West Street, between Lang Creek Avenue and Industrial Avenue.



   5.   West Street, between Industrial Avenue and First Avenue.



   6.   West Street, between First Avenue and Fourth Avenue.



   7.   West Street, between Sixth Avenue and the north City limits.



   8.   Eleventh Avenue, between West Street and the west City limits.



   9.   Penrose Street, between Garfield Avenue and Sixth Avenue



   10.   Penrose Street, between Sixth Avenue and the north City limits.



   11.   Pinder Avenue, between West Street and the East City Limit.



   12.   Fourth Avenue, between East Street and Broad Street.



   13.   East Street, between Garfield Avenue and Fourth Avenue.



   14.   First Avenue, between the west City limits and West Street.



   15.   Fourth Avenue, between Ferguson Road and West Street.



   16.   Fourth Avenue, between East Street and Penrose Street.



   17.   Fourth Avenue, between Penrose Street and Oak Street.



   18.   Eighth Avenue, between West Street and Summer Street.



   19.   Washington Avenue, between Broad Street and East Street.



   20.   First Avenue, between West Street and East Street.



   21.   Third Avenue, between East Street and Broad Street. 



   22.   Tenth Avenue, between Penrose Street and Broad Street.



   23.   Reed Street, between First Avenue and Fourth Avenue.



(Ord. 1476 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



65.02    STOP REQUIRED.



Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)



   1.   Second Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Second Avenue shall stop
at Main Street.



   2.   Second Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Second Avenue shall stop
at Park Street.



   3.   Third Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Third Avenue shall stop
at Main Street.



   4.   Fairfield Street.  Vehicles traveling on Fairfield Street
shall stop at Fifth Avenue.



   5.   Fifth Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Fifth Avenue shall stop
at East Street.



   6.   Fifth Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Fifth Avenue shall stop
at Pearl Street.



   7.   Fifth Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Fifth Avenue shall stop
at Reed Street.



   8.   Fifth Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Fifth Avenue shall stop
at Spring Street.



   9.   Fifth Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Fifth Avenue shall stop
at State Street.



   10.   Seventh Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Seventh Avenue shall
stop at Summer Street.



   11.   Tenth Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Tenth Avenue shall stop
at Broad Street.



   12.   Eleventh Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Eleventh Avenue shall
stop at Broad Street.



   13.   Twelfth Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Twelfth Avenue shall
stop at Country Club Drive.



   14.   Thirteenth Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Thirteenth Avenue
shall stop at Prairie Street.



   15.   Thirteenth Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Thirteenth Avenue
shall stop at Spencer Street.



   16.   Thirteenth Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Thirteenth Avenue
shall stop at Reed Street.



   17.   Commercial Street.  Vehicles traveling on Commercial Street
shall stop at Broad Street.



   18.   Commercial Street.  Vehicles traveling on Commercial Street
shall stop at Main Street.



   19.   High Street.  Vehicles traveling on High Street shall stop at
Fifth Avenue.



   20.   Main Street.  Vehicles traveling on Main Street shall stop at
Tenth Avenue.



   21.   Manor Drive.  Vehicles traveling on Manor Drive shall stop at
Twelfth Avenue.



   22.   Park Street.  Vehicles traveling on Park Street shall stop at
Hamilton Avenue.



   23.   Spring Street.  Vehicles traveling on Spring Street shall
stop at Second Avenue.



   24.   Summer Street.  Vehicles traveling on Summer Street shall
stop at Fifth Avenue.



   25.   Ferguson Road.  Vehicles traveling on Ferguson Road shall
stop at 380th Street.



   26.   Reed Street.  Vehicles traveling on Reed Street shall stop at
Fourteenth Avenue.



   27.   Spencer Street.  Vehicles traveling on Spencer Street shall
stop at Fourteenth Avenue.



   28.   Alley between Broad Street and Park Street shall stop at Fifth
Avenue.



   29.   Alley between Main Street and Broad Street shall stop at
Fourth Avenue.



   30.   Alley between Main Street and Broad Street shall stop at Fifth
Avenue.



   31.   Alley between West Street and Main Street shall stop at Fourth
Avenue.



   32.   Alley between West Street and Main Street shall stop at Fifth
Avenue.



   33.   Alley between Prince Street and Prairie Street shall stop at
Third Avenue.



   34.   Jewel Drive.  Vehicles traveling north on Jewel Drive shall
stop at 370th Avenue.



   35.   Seventh Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Seventh Avenue shall
stop at Broad Street.



   36.   Main Street.  Vehicles traveling on Main Street shall stop at
Eleventh Avenue.



   37.   Seventh Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Seventh Avenue shall
stop at Park Street.



   38.   Ninth Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Ninth Avenue shall stop
at Park Street.



   39.   Prince Street.  Vehicles traveling on Prince Street shall
stop at Eighth Avenue.



   40.   Main Street. Vehicles traveling on Main Street shall stop at
Sixth Avenue.



   41.   Country Club Drive.  Vehicles traveling on Country Club Drive
shall stop at Sixteenth Avenue.



   42.   Hamlin Street. Vehicles traveling on Hamlin Street shall stop
at Eighth Avenue.



   43.   Spring Street. Vehicles traveling on Spring Street shall stop
at Eighth Avenue.



   44.   Penrose Street. Vehicles traveling on Penrose Street shall
stop at Garfield Avenue.



   45.   Patricia Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Patricia Avenue shall
stop at East Street.



   46.   Michael Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Michael Avenue shall
stop at East Street.



   47.   Ogan Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Ogan Avenue shall stop at
East Street.



   48.   Hobart Street. Vehicles traveling on Hobart Street shall stop
at Eighth Avenue.



   49.   Ann Street. Vehicles traveling on Ann Street shall stop at
Eighth Avenue.



   50.   Ninth Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Ninth Avenue shall stop at
Summer Street.



   51.   Second Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Second Avenue shall stop
at Broad Street.



   52.   Third Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Third Avenue shall stop at
Broad Street.



   53.   Fourth Avenue. Vehicles traveling on Fourth Avenue shall stop
at Ferguson Road.



   54.   Waterford Road.  Vehicles traveling south on Waterford Road
shall stop at Lang Creek Avenue.



   55.   Waterford Road.  Vehicles traveling north on Waterford Road
shall stop at Stagecoach Road.



((Ord. 1449 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



65.03    FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.



Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following designated
four-way stop intersections:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)



   1.   Fourth Avenue and East Street.



   2.   Fourth Avenue and Main Street.



   3.   Fourth Avenue and Broad Street.



   4.   Fifth Avenue and Park Street.



   5.   Fifth Avenue and Main Street.



   6.   Fifth Avenue and Broad Street.



   7.   Eighth Avenue and Reed Street.



   8.   Eighth Avenue and Summer Street.



   9.   Eighth Avenue and Prairie Street.



   10.   Ninth Avenue and Broad Street.



   11.   Garfield Avenue and East Street.



   12.   Hamilton Avenue and Broad Street.



   13.   Hamilton Avenue and Main Street.



   14.   Hobart Street and Ninth Avenue.



   15.   Spencer Street and Eighth Avenue.



   16.   Washington Avenue and Main Street.



   17.   Washington Avenue and Broad Street.



   18.   Fourteenth Avenue at Prairie Street.



   19.   Third Avenue and Spring Street.



65.04    THREE-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   1.   Eighth Avenue and Sunset Street.  Vehicles approaching the
intersection of Eighth Avenue and Sunset Street from the north, east and west
shall stop before entering such intersection.



   2.   Hamilton Avenue and East Street.  Vehicles approaching the
intersection of Hamilton Avenue and East Street from the east, north and
south shall stop before entering such intersection.



65.05    YIELD REQUIRED.



Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in accordance with the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)



   1.   Broad Street.  Vehicles traveling on Broad Street shall yield
at Harrison Avenue.



   2.   Belmont Drive. Vehicles traveling on Belmont Drive shall yield
at 13th Avenue



   3.   Prince Street. Vehicles traveling on Prince Street shall yield
at 13th Avenue



   4.   Stoecker Street. Vehicles traveling on Stoecker Street shall
yield at 13th Avenue



   5.   Spring Street. Vehicles traveling on Spring Street shall yield
at 14th Avenue



   6.   Belmont Drive. Vehicles traveling on Belmont Drive shall yield
at 14th Avenue



   7.   Broad Street.  Vehicles traveling on Broad Street shall yield
at Marvin Avenue.



   8.   Main Street.  Vehicles traveling on Main Street shall yield at
Marvin Avenue.



   9.   Twelfth Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Twelfth Avenue shall
yield at Spencer Street.



   10.   Eleventh Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Eleventh Avenue shall
yield at Summer Street.



   11.   Thirteenth Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Thirteenth Avenue
shall yield at Sunset Street.



   12.   Seventh Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Seventh Avenue shall
yield at Main Street.



   13.   Ninth Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on Ninth Avenue shall yield
at Main Street.



(Ord. 1451 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



65.06    (Repealed by Ord. 1408 - Aug. 15 Supp.)



65.07    STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.



Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.



CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS



 

66.01  Temporary Embargo
 
66.04 Load Limits On Bridges


66.02  Permits for Excess Size and Weight
 
66.05 Truck Route


66.03  Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
 
 



 



66.01    TEMPORARY EMBARGO.



If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of
deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets
will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an
amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets
so designated by such signs.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 321.472)



66.02    PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.



A permit for excess size and weight authorizing the applicant to operate or
move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load
exceeding the maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets
or bridges named in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City
and for which the City is responsible for the maintenance is required as
follows:



   1.   The Public Service Director, or their authorized agent, may at
their discretion, and upon application and good cause being shown, issue a
special permit in writing authorizing the movement on city streets of
indivisible oversize and/or overweight vehicles and loads as defined in Iowa
Code Section 321.  The maximum vehicle dimensions and weight are as
specified in Sections 321.452 through 321.466 of the Iowa Code or succeeding
legislation.



   2.   Permits for excess size and weight may be issued by the City as
a single trip permits or annual permits.  All permits shall be in writing,
shall be carried in the cab of the vehicle for which the permit has been
issued, and shall be available for inspection at all times.



   3.   Fees:  The fee for the issuance of an annual permit for excess
size and weight shall be $250.00.  A fee shall not be required for
single-trip permits.



   4.   The permit holder must comply with all provisions of Chapter
321E of the Iowa Code, including requirements for escort vehicles, lights,
signs, and flags.



   5.   When in the judgment of the Public Services Director or law
enforcement official the movement of a permitted vehicle of excess size
and/or weight will be hazardous to public safety or will cause undue damage
to a specific street pavement, curb, sidewalk or other property, the permit
shall be revoked either permanently or temporarily.  The reasons for the
revocation and tenure of the revocation shall be noted in writing to the
permit holder.



   6.   The permit holder must comply with the restrictions and
requirements in regard to temporary embargos, load limits on certain streets,
load limits on bridges, truck routes and any other restrictions as designated
in this chapter.



66.03    LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.



When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs
at any time upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:



   1.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, vehicles in
excess of 10 tons are prohibited on the following roadways:



      A.   (Repealed by Ord. 1433 - Dec. 17 Supp.)



      B.   (Repealed by Ord. 1433 - Dec. 17 Supp.)



      C.   10th Avenue, between Penrose Street and West Street.



      D.   8th Avenue, between Penrose Street and West Street.



      E.   Main Street, between 6th Avenue and 11th Avenue.



      F.   Broad Street, between 6th Avenue and 11th Avenue.



      G.   Reed Street, between 6th Avenue and 11th Avenue.



66.04    LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.



Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less than
the maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving
the bridge, the Public Services Director may cause to be posted and
maintained signs on said bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the
entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limits.  No person
shall drive upon said bridge any vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, in
excess of such posted limit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)



66.05    TRUCK ROUTE.



(Reserved for Future Consideration)




(Ch. 66 - Ord. 1422 - Sep. 16 Supp.)




CHAPTER 67
ROLLER SKATES, IN-LINE SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS



 

67.01  Purpose
 
67.03  Prohibition


67.02  Definitions
 



 



67.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations governing the
operation of roller skates, in-line skates, skateboards, scooters and any
self-controlled apparatus upon the sidewalks, walkways or ramps in the C-2
Central Business District of the City.



67.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Ramp” means any sloping or inclining surface and
specifically includes any area in the C-2 District of the City which is
surfaced or paved with concrete in order to facilitate access such as (but
not limited to) a persons with disabilities accessible walkway or an access
to the gazebo stage in central park.



   2.   “Roller skates” or “in-line skates” means skates with
wheels instead of a runner.



   3.   “Scooter” means a single platform mounted on wheels and
steered by extended handles which can be propelled by human power or by
motorized power.



   4.   “Skateboard” means a single platform mounted on wheels,
which is propelled solely by human power, and which has no mechanism or other
device with which to steer or to control the movement or direction of the
platform.



67.03    PROHIBITION.



No person shall use or ride any roller skates, in-line skates, skateboards,
scooters, or any other self-controlled apparatus upon the sidewalks, walkways
or ramps in the C-2 Central Business District of the City.



CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC



68.01    ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.



Upon the following streets, alleys and City parking lots vehicular traffic,
other than permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated
direction when appropriate signs are in place.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [4]& 321.305)



(Ord. 1340 – Aug. 10 Supp.)



   1.   Alleys.



      A.   The alley between Broad Street and Park Street shall be
northbound only between Fourth Avenue and Fifth Avenue.



      B.   The alley between Main Street and Broad Street shall be
northbound only between Commercial Avenue and Fourth Avenue.



(Ord. 1314 – Sep. 09 Supp.)



      C.   The alley between West Street and Main Street shall be
southbound only between Fifth Avenue and Fourth Avenue.



      D.   The alley between West Street and Main Street shall be
southbound only between Sixth Avenue and Fifth Avenue.



(Ord. 1335 – Aug. 10 Supp.)



   2.   Streets.  None.



   3.   City Parking Lots.



      A.   The parking lot located east of the Fire Station to Hwy
146 shall be eastbound only.



(Ord. 1340 – Aug. 10 Supp.)



CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS



 



69.01  Park Adjacent to Curb
 
69.10  Oversized Vehicle Parking


69.02  Park Adjacent to Curb – One-way Street
 
69.11  Parking Limited


69.03  Angle Parking
 
69.12  Alternate Side Parking


69.04  Angle Parking – Manner
 
69.13  Snow Emergency


69.05  Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal
 
69.14  Snow Routes


69.06  Parking Prohibited
 
69.15  Permit Parking


69.07  Persons With Disabilities Parking
 
69.16  Fire Lanes


69.08  No Parking Zones
 
69.17  Temporary No Parking


69.09  All Night Parking Prohibited
 
 




 



69.01    PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.



No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement
and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of
the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of
angle parking and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



69.02    PARK ADJACENT TO CURB – ONE-WAY STREET.



No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way
street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the
direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the
vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except
as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



69.03    ANGLE PARKING.



Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



   1.   Broad Street, on both sides, from Third Avenue to Sixth Avenue.



   2.   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, from Park Street to West Street.



   3.   Main Street, on both sides, from Sixth Avenue to Commercial
Street.



   4.   Fourth Avenue, on both sides, from West Street to Broad Street.



   5.   Fourth Avenue, on the south side, from Broad Street to State
Street.



(Ord. 1360 – Nov. 11 Supp.)



69.04    ANGLE PARKING – MANNER.



Upon those streets or portions of streets which have been signed or marked
for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an
angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as
indicated by such signs and markings.  No part of any vehicle, or the load
thereon, when parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into
the roadway more than a distance of sixteen (16) feet when measured at right
angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



69.05    PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.



No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for any of the following
principal purposes:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])



   1.   Sale.  Displaying such vehicle for sale;



   2.   Repairing.  For lubricating, repairing or for commercial
washing of such vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an
emergency;



   3.   Advertising.  Displaying advertising;



   4.   Merchandise Sales.  Selling merchandise from such vehicle
except in a duly established market place or when so authorized or licensed
under this Code of Ordinances.



69.06    PARKING PROHIBITED.



No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:



   1.   Crosswalk.  On a crosswalk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [5])



   2.   Center Parkway.  On the center parkway or dividing area of any
divided street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])



   3.   Mailboxes.  Within twenty (20) feet on either side of a
mailbox which is so placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of
mail from vehicles on the roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])



   4.   Sidewalks.  On or across a sidewalk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [1])



   5.   Driveway.  In front of a public or private driveway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [2])



   6.   Intersection.  Within, or within ten (10) feet of an
intersection of any street or alley.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [3])



   7.   Fire Hydrant.  Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [4])



   8.   Stop Sign or Signal.  Within ten (10) feet upon the approach
to any flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located
at the side of a roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [6])



   9.   Railroad Crossing.  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail
of a railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not
exhibiting a red light.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [8])



   10.   Fire Station.  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway
entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the
entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance
when properly sign posted.  Parking prohibited in the designated “Fire
Vehicle Only” parking area located east of the Fire Station from Hwy. 146
to 173 feet west unless authorized by the Fire Chief.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [9])



(Ord. 1339 – Aug. 10 Supp.)



   11.   Excavations.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [10])



   12.   Double Parking.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped
or parked at the edge or curb of a street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [11])



   13.   Hazardous Locations.  When, because of restricted visibility
or when standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving
traffic, or when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause
curbs to be painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing
signs.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [13])



   14.   Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings.  A space of
fifty (50) feet is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any
theatre, auditorium, hotel having more than twenty-five (25) sleeping rooms,
hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or other building
where large assemblages of people are being held, within which space, when
clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or
stopped except in taking on or discharging passengers or freight, and then
only for such length of time as is necessary for such purpose.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)



   15.   Alleys.  No person shall park a vehicle in any alley in the
Central Business District at any time, except for the purpose of loading and
unloading, and no person shall park a vehicle at any time in any other alley
in the City.



   16.   Ramps.  In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on
public or private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or
ramp.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])



   17.   Area Between Curb and Street Right-of-Way Line.  In the area
between the back of the curb and street right-of-way line except on a paved
driveway approach or a paved parking area.



   18.   In More Than One Space.  In any designated parking space so
that any part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes
beyond the markings designating such space on public streets and public
parking lots.



69.07    PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.



The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of persons
with disabilities parking spaces:



   1.   Establishment.  Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall
be established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of
Iowa and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18.  No unauthorized person shall
establish any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first
obtaining Council approval.



   2.   Improper Use.  The following uses of a persons with
disabilities parking space,  located on either public or private property,
constitute improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit, which
is a violation of this Code of Ordinances:



      A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons
with disabilities parking permit;



      B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or
being transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa;



      C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under
Section 321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.



   3.   Wheelchair Parking Cones.  No person shall use or interfere
with a wheelchair  parking cone in violation of the following:



      A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking
permit must comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A(1) of the Code of
Iowa when utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.



      B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking
cone which is properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A(1) of
the Code of Iowa.



   4.   Parking Spaces.  The following are hereby designated as
persons with disabilities  parking spaces:



      A.   Main Street.



         (1)   The first space north of Fourth Avenue on the west
side of Main Street.



         (2)   The first space north of Fifth Avenue on the east
side of Main Street.



         (3)   The first space south of Sixth Avenue on the east
side.



         (4)   The first space on the east side on the north side
of the mid- block crossing between Fourth Avenue and Fifth Avenue.



      B.   Broad Street.



         (1)   The first space south of Commercial Street on the
west side Broad Street.



         (2)   The first space north of Commercial Street on the
west side Broad Street.



         (3)   The first space south of Fourth Avenue on the west
side Broad Street.



         (4)   The first space south of Fourth Avenue on the east
side Broad Street.



         (5)   The first space south of Fifth Avenue on the east
side Broad Street.



         (6)   On the west side of Broad Street, beginning one
hundred seventeen (117) feet south of the south right-of-way line of
Commercial Street, thence extending twenty-seven (27) feet south.



         (7)   At the intersection of Fourth Avenue and Broad
Street, on the east side, the seventh and eighth places north of Fourth
Avenue.



         (8)   At the intersection of Fourth Avenue and Broad
Street, on the west side, the first stall north of the mid-block crossing
north of Fourth Avenue.



      C.   Park Street.



         (1)   On the west side of Park Street, 117 feet south of
the southern intersecting point of 7th Avenue.



         (2)   On the west side of Park Street, 43 feet north of
the northern intersecting point of 7th Avenue.



         (3)   On the west side of Park Street, 45 feet south of
the southern intersecting point of 8th Avenue, thence extending 58 feet south



      D.   Commercial Street.  The fifth space east of Main Street
on the south side of Commercial Street.



      E.   Fourth Avenue.



         (1)   On the south side of Fourth Avenue, between Main
Street and Broad Street, the first space west of the alley.



         (2)   On the north side of Fourth Avenue, between Main
Street and Broad Street, the first space east of the alley.



      F.   Fifth Avenue.



         (1)   The first space west of Main Street on the south
side of Fifth Avenue.



         (2)   On the south side of Fifth Avenue, between Main
Street and Broad Street, the first space west of the alley.



         (3)   The first space west of Park Street on the south
side of Fifth Avenue.



         (4)   At the intersection of Main Street and Fifth
Avenue, on the south side, the first space east of Main Street.



         (5)   At the intersection of Broad Street and Fifth
Avenue, on the north side, the first space east of Broad Street.



         (6)   At the intersection of Broad Street and Fifth
Avenue on the south side, the first space west of Broad Street.



      G.   City Parking Lots.



         (1)   In the parking lot located on the south side of
Fourth Avenue between West Street and Main Street, on the east side of the
lot, the first space south of Fourth Avenue.



         (2)   In the parking lot located on the west side of
City Hall, on the east side of the lot, the first space south of the main
sidewalk off Fourth Avenue.



      H.   Other Areas.  Fourth and fifth parking spaces located
from the east side of property located at 122 Fourth Avenue.



      I.   On the north side of Eighth Avenue, beginning four
hundred forty (440) feet east of the north right-of-way line of Park Street,
thence extending one hundred eighteen (118) feet east.



(Ord. 1473 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



69.08    NO PARKING ZONES.



No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following
specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace
officer or traffic control signal.(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])



   1.   Beck Court, on both sides of the cul-de-sac, from Third Avenue
to the point of termination.



   2.   First Avenue, on the north side, from Park Street to a point 83
feet west.



   3.   First Avenue, on the north side, from Park Street to a point 92
feet east.



   4.   Third Avenue, on the north side from Reed Street to the alley.



   5.   Eighth Avenue, on both sides, from Bliss Street to East Street
except for the Persons with Disability parking beginning four hundred forty
(440) feet east of the north right-of-way line of Park Street, thence
extending one hundred eighteen (118) feet east.



   6.   Tenth Avenue, on both sides, from Park Street to a point 75
feet west.



   7.   Eleventh Avenue, on both sides, from Sunset Drive to a point 75
feet west.



   8.   East Street, on both sides, from Eighth Avenue to Tenth Avenue.



   9.   East Street, between Sixth Avenue and Eighth Avenue on the east
side except for Sunday.



   10.   Industrial Avenue, on both sides, from Highway 146 to the east
end of Industrial Avenue.



   11.   Reed Street, on the west side, from Third Avenue to a point 50
feet north.



   12.   Reed Street, on the west side, from Fourth Avenue to a point
190 feet south.



   13.   Reed Street, on the east side, from Third Avenue north to a
point 85 feet south of Fourth Avenue.



   14.   Park Street, on the east side, from Sixth Avenue to Tenth
Avenue.



   15.   Park Street on the west side from Eighth Avenue to Tenth
Avenue.



   16.   Park Street, on both sides, from Tenth Avenue to a point 75
feet north.



   17.   Sunset Street, on both sides, from Eleventh Avenue to a point
40 feet south.



   18.   Sunset Street, on the east side, from Eleventh Avenue to a
point 40 feet north.



   19.   Sunset Street, on the west side, from Eighth Avenue to
Thirteenth Avenue.



   20.   Sunset Street, on the east side, from a point 49 feet south of
the entrance to the school parking lot to a point 51 feet north of said
entrance.



   21.   Sunset Street, on the east side, from a point 62 feet south of
the exit from the school parking lot to a point 57 feet north of said exit.



   22.   Grinnell Mutual Family Aquatic Center.  In the aquatic center
parking lot located east of the bathhouse and all other parking that may be
part of the aquatic center from 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. June 1 to September
1.  There shall be no parking outside these dates except as authorized in
writing by the Chief of Police or his designee.



   23.   Eighth Avenue, on both sides, from East Street to Elm Street
except on Sunday parking is allowed on the south side of Eighth Avenue.



   24.   Eighth Avenue, on the south side, from East Street to a point
40 feet east.



   25.   Reed Street, on the east side, from Eighth Avenue to a point
100 feet south.



   26.   Reed Street, on the west side, from Eighth Avenue to a point
110 feet south.



   27.   Prairie Street, on the east side, from Eighth Avenue to a
point 246 feet south.



   28.   Prairie Street, on the west side, from Eighth Avenue to a
point 42 feet south.



   29.   Ninth Avenue, on the south side, from east curb line of Hobart
Avenue to a point 175 feet east.



   30.   Tenth Avenue, on the south side, from East Street to Park
Street.



   31.   Prince Street, on the west side, from the back of the south
curb of Eighth Avenue to a point 219 feet south of Eighth Avenue.



   32.   Tenth Avenue, on the north side, from East Street to Park
Street.



   33.   Seventh Avenue, on the south side, from Broad Street to Park
Street.



   34.   Ninth Avenue, on the south side, from Broad Street to Park
Street.



   35.   Blakely Circle, west side in its entirety.



   36.   Fourth Avenue, on the north side from Park Street to a point
186 feet west.



   37.   Fourth Avenue, on both sides, from Spring Street to Pearl
Street.



   38.   Fourth Avenue, on the south side, from West Street to Spring
Street.



   39.   Waterford Road, on both sides, from Lang Creek Avenue to 410th
Avenue.



   40.   Lang Creek Avenue, on both sides, east of West Street South
(S.H. 146).



   41.   Lang Creek Avenue, on the north side, from West Street South
(S.H. 146) to Brownell Parkway.



   42.   Zimmerman Drive, west side in its entirety.



(Ord. 1474 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



69.09    ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED.



   1.   No person, except physicians or other persons on emergency
calls, shall park a vehicle on any of the following named streets or
locations between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day.



      A.   Fourth Avenue, on both sides, from West Street to Broad
Street.



      B.   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, from West Street to Broad
Street.



      C.   Broad Street, on both sides, from the railroad to Sixth
Avenue.



      D.   Main Street, on both sides, from the railroad to Sixth
Avenue.



      E.   Main Street, on both sides, from the railroad to Sixth
Avenue.



      F.   Park Street, on both sides, from Fourth Avenue to Fifth
Avenue.



      G.   Park Street on the west side from Sixth Avenue to Eighth
Avenue.



      H.   On the east side and north side of the municipal parking
lot located at the 700 block of Fourth Avenue.



      I.   On the north side of the municipal parking lot located at
the 1000 block of West Street.



      J.   In the spaces located on either side of the west driveway
of the municipal parking lot located at the 800 block of Commercial Avenue.



      K.   In the entire Community Center parking lot, including
south and west sides.



      L.   On the north side of Seventh Avenue from Broad Street to
Park Street.



      M.   On the north side of Ninth Avenue from Broad Street to
Park Street.



      N.   Fourth Avenue, on the north side, from West Street to
Spring Street.



   2.   The following avenues are designated as no parking, between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5 a.m., on the south side on Monday, Wednesday, Friday
and Sunday and no parking on the north side on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday:



      A.   Fourth Avenue from Broad Street to State Street.



      B.   Fifth Avenue from Broad Street to Park Street.



(Ord. 1475 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



69.10    OVERSIZED VEHICLE PARKING.



No person shall park a motor truck, semi- trailer, motor home or other motor
vehicle with trailer attached which exceeds ninety-six (96) inches in width
or thirty-six (36) feet in length on any street for a period longer than
twelve (12) hours except when such vehicles are actually engaged in the
delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo or making necessary minor
repairs.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])



69.11    PARKING LIMITED. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])



   1.   Fifteen Minute Parking.  It is unlawful to park any vehicle
for a continuous period of more than fifteen minutes upon the following
designated streets:



      A.   Fifth Avenue, on both sides, in the two (2) spaces east
of Broad Street.



      B.   Broad Street, on the east side, in the seven (7) spaces
south of Fifth Avenue.



      C.   In the parking located on the west side of the City Hall,
on the east side of the parking lot, beginning with the first space south of
the handicap parking including a total of six parking spaces.



   2.   One Hour Parking.  It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a
continuous period of more than one hour upon the following designated parking
lot:



      A.   In the parking lot located on the west side of City Hall
on the west side of the parking lot the first two parking spaces south of the
Spaulding Loft West driveway.



   3.   Twenty-four Hour Parking.  On all streets and municipal
parking lots, which are not signed otherwise, it is unlawful to park any
vehicle for a continuous period of more than twenty-four hours.  Provided,
however, the provisions of this subsection do not apply to the following
locations.



      A.   The west and south sides of the municipal parking lot at
the 700 block of Fourth Avenue.



      B.   The south side of the municipal parking lot at the 1000
block of West Street.



      C.   The spaces located on either side of the east driveway of
the municipal parking lot at the 800 block of Commercial Street.



(Ord. 1435 - Dec. 17 Supp.)



69.12    ALTERNATE SIDE PARKING.



The following street locations and days are designated for alternate parking
with the time change at 9:00 a.m.



   1.   Avenues.  The following avenues are designated as no parking
on the south side on Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Sunday and no parking on
the north side on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday:



      A.   Second Avenue from West Street to Spring Street.



      B.   Second Avenue from Main Street to Park Street.



      C.   Third Avenue from State Street to Penrose Street.



      D.   Fourth Avenue from Penrose Street to State Street.



      E.   Fifth Avenue from Spring Street to West Street.



      F.   Seventh Avenue from West Street to Broad Street.



      G.   Eighth Avenue from Elm Street to Penrose Street.



      H.   Ninth Avenue from West Street to Broad Street.



      I.   Ninth Avenue from East Street to Summer Street.



      J.   Ninth Avenue from Summer Street to Ann Street.



      K.   Washington Avenue from West Street to Arbor Lake.



      L.   Washington Place - all.



      M.   Davis Avenue from East Street to Penrose Street.



      N.   Harrison Avenue from West Street to Pearl Street.



      O.   Marvin Avenue from West Street to Pearl Street.



(Ord. 1461 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



69.13    SNOW EMERGENCY.



No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any public
street, alley, or City-owned off-street parking area during any snow
emergency proclaimed by the Mayor, unless the snow has been removed or plowed
from such street, alley or parking area and the snow has ceased to fall.  A
snow emergency parking ban shall continue from its proclamation throughout
the duration of the snow or ice storm and the 48-hour period after cessation
of such storm except as above provided upon streets which have been fully
opened.  Such a ban shall be of uniform application and the Public Services
Director is directed to publicize the requirements widely, using all
available news media, in early November each year.  When predictions or
occurrences indicate the need, the Mayor shall proclaim a snow emergency and
the Public Services Director shall inform the news media to publicize the
proclamation and the parking rules under the emergency.  The emergency may
be extended or shortened when conditions warrant.  The provisions of this
section shall not apply to the streets listed in subsections 1 – 6 of
Section 69.09 of this chapter.



(Code of Iowa, 321.236[1])



69.14    SNOW ROUTES.



The Council may designate certain streets in the City as snow routes.  When
conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a designated snow
route, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to impede or block traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[12])



69.15    PERMIT PARKING.



The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of permit
parking spaces:



   1.   Downtown Resident Parking - 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.



      A.   No person, except those residents possessing a Downtown
Resident Parking Permit, shall park a vehicle in such a designated parking
space, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.



      B.   The permit system allows verified downtown residents to
purchase a permit for a parking space within a City parking lot.



      C.   A residence located within the downtown business district
will be eligible for two parking permits.  A permit will be issued to a
designated vehicle, with the permit being affixed to the rear window of the
designated vehicle.



      D.   The spaces shall be designated by such signs or other
markers indicating that the space is reserved for the exclusive use of
downtown resident permit holders.  Said signs will be placed at the expense
of the permit holder.



      E.   Any vehicle parked in violation of this section may be
ticketed by the Police Department or other City official authorized to issue
parking citations.



(Ord. 1399 - Oct. 14 Supp.)



69.16    FIRE LANES.



No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a fire lane as provided
herein.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236)



   1.   Fire Lanes Established.  The Fire Chief may designate fire
lanes on any private road or driveway where deemed necessary to assure access
to property or premises by authorized emergency vehicles.



   2.   Signs and Markings.  Wherever a fire lane has been designated,
the Fire Chief shall inform the property owner where to place signs and
markings identifying such fire lanes and the parking prohibition established
by this section.  These signs and markings shall be installed and maintained
by the property owner.



   3.   Exception.  The provisions of this section do not apply to
authorized emergency vehicles.



(Ord. 1357 – Nov. 11 Supp.)



69.17    TEMPORARY NO PARKING.



The Public Services Director and the Police Chief or their designee, upon
application and good cause being shown therefor, may authorize temporary no
parking upon those streets which are under the authority of the City and for
such time period as deemed appropriate by them.  Any such temporary no
parking shall be designated by a posted sign.  No person shall stop, park,
or stand a vehicle in violation of any such posted parking regulations unless
in compliance with the directions of a peace officer.



(Ord. 1459 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES



 

70.01  Arrest or Citation
 
70.04  Parking Violations:  Vehicle Unattended


70.02  Scheduled Violations
 
70.05  Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking


70.03  Parking Violations:  Alternate
 
70.06  Impounding Vehicles



 



70.01    ARREST OR CITATION.



Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:



   1.   Immediate Arrest.  Immediately arrest such person and take
such person before a local magistrate, or



   2.   Issue Citation.  Without arresting the person, prepare in
quintuplicate a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the
Iowa Commissioner of Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint
utilizing a State-approved computerized device.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 & 321.485)



70.02    SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.



For violations of the Traffic Code which are designated by Section 805.8A of
the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of
those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 & 805.8A)



70.03    PARKING VIOLATIONS:  ALTERNATE.



Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of
Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the
Police Department.  The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of
ten dollars ($10.00) for all violations except improper use of a persons with
disabilities parking permit.  If such fine is not paid within thirty (30)
days, it shall be increased by five dollars ($5.00).  The simple notice of a
fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit is one
hundred dollars ($100.00).



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1a] & 321L.4[2])



(Ord. 1324 – Nov. 09 Supp.)



70.04    PARKING VIOLATIONS:  VEHICLE UNATTENDED.



When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code,
and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein
provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.



70.05    PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.



In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed
such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such
violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that:



   1.   Described Vehicle.  The particular vehicle described in the
information was parked in violation of the Traffic Code, and



   2.   Registered Owner.  The defendant named in the information was
the registered owner at the time in question.



70.06    IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.



A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a
vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:



   1.   Disabled Vehicle.  When a vehicle is so disabled as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of
the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent
as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])



   2.   Illegally Parked Vehicle.  When any vehicle is left unattended
and is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])



   3.   Snow Removal.  When any vehicle is left parked in violation of
a ban on parking during snow removal operations.



   4.   Parked Over Limited Time Period.  When any vehicle is left
parked for a continuous period in violation of any limited parking time.  If
the owner can be located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove
the vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])



   5.   Outstanding Violations.  When any vehicle has three (3) or
more outstanding, unpaid parking violations for which payment is late thirty
(30) days or more.



   6.   Costs.  In addition to the standard penalties provided, the
owner or driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of
towing and storage.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])



CHAPTER 71
MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE



 

71.01  Purpose
 
71.04  Operating Noise Limits


71.02  Definitions
 
71.05  Standing Motor Vehicles


71.03  Exemptions
 



 



71.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to establish noise regulating standards for
motor vehicles in the City.



71.02    DEFINITIONS.



Unless otherwise expressly stated or the contents clearly indicate a
different intention, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:



   1.   “dBA” means the composite abbreviation for A-weighted sound
level, the decibel.



   2.   “Gross combination weight rating” or “GCWR” means the
value specified by the manufacturer as the maximum loaded weight of a
combined vehicle.



   3.   “Gross vehicle weight rating” or “GVWR” means the value
specified by the manufacturer as a loaded weight of a single vehicle.



   4.   “Sound level” means the A-weighted sound pressure level
measured with a fast response using an instrument complying with
specifications for sound level meters of the American National Standards
Institute, Inc., (ANSIS 1.4-1971 or the latest approved revision thereof) or
its successor bodies, except that only A-weighting and fast dynamic response
need to be provided.



   5.   “Sound level meter” means an apparatus or instrument
including a microphone, amplifier, attenuator, output meter and frequency
weighing networks for the measurement of sound levels.



71.03    EXEMPTIONS.



This chapter does not apply to:



   1.   Emergency vehicles, designated as such by the State, and
ambulances on emergency call.



   2.   Construction or agricultural equipment or street maintenance
equipment that is on the job site or traveling on streets and highways.



71.04    OPERATING NOISE LIMITS.



No person shall make any loud and unnecessary noise upon the streets, alleys
or other public places within the City by racing or otherwise unnecessarily
accelerating the motor of any motor vehicle, by the loud and unnecessary
sounding of any motor vehicle horn or other warning device, by the operation
of a motor vehicle not equipped with a muffler in good working order or by
any other means whatsoever to the disturbance of the public peace and quiet
whereby other persons may be annoyed.  It is unlawful for any person to
operate or cause to be operated a motor vehicle or motorcycle on a public
right-of-way at any time in such a manner that the sound level emitted by the
motor vehicle or motorcycle exceeds the level set forth in Table 1, for the
speed limit zone, regardless of the actual speed of the motor vehicle or
motorcycle or any other manner prohibited by this section.



 



 


TABLE 1
MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE SOUND LIMIT
Measured at 15 Meters (50 feet)†




Vehicle Class

 

Speed Limit 35 MPH or Less

 

Speed Limit Over 35 MPH



Motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce of GVWR or GCWR of
10,000 pounds or more 
 

86 dBA

 

90 dBA



All other motor vehicles of GVWR or GCWR of 10,000 pounds or more 
 

86 dBA

 

90 dBA



Any motorcycle 
 

82 dBA

 

86 dBA



Any other motor vehicle or any combination of vehicles towed by any motor
vehicle 
 

76 dBA

 

82 dBA



†   In the event the distance is less than 50 feet, such listed noise
limit will be corrected to reflect the equivalent noise limits for the actual
distance.



 



71.05    STANDING MOTOR VEHICLES.



No person shall operate the engine providing motive power, or an auxiliary
engine of a motor vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross weight rating of ten
thousand (10,000) pounds or more for a consecutive period longer than twenty
(20) minutes while such vehicle is standing and located within one hundred
fifty (150) feet of property zoned and used for residential purposes except
where a vehicle is standing within a completely enclosed structure.  This
section shall not apply to delivery or pickup vehicles that require the
operation of the engine to unload or load their vending loads.



CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES



 

75.01  Purpose
 
75.05  Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles


75.02  Definitions
 
75.06  Negligence


75.03  General Regulations
 
75.07  Accident Reports


75.04  Operation of Snowmobiles
 



 



75.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.



75.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized
vehicle, with not less than three and not more than six non-highway tires,
that is limited in engine displacement to less than one thousand (1,000)
cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to less than one thousand two
hundred (1,200) pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled
by the operator and handlebars for steering control.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)



(Ord. 1369 – Dec. 12 Supp.)



   2.   “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle
that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and
handlebars for steering control and that is intended by the manufacturer for
use on natural terrain.  Off-road motorcycle includes a motorcycle that was
originally issued a certificate of title and registered for highway use under
Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa, but which contains design features that
enable operation over natural terrain.  An operator of an off-road
motorcycle is also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the
operation of all-terrain vehicles.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)



   3.   "Off-road utility vehicle" means a motorized vehicle, with not
less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized
tracks, that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be
straddled by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for
control.  "Off-road utility vehicle" includes the following vehicles:




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)




      A.   "Off-road utility vehicle - type 1" includes vehicles
with a total dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or
less.



      B.   "Off-road utility vehicle - type 2" includes vehicles,
other than type 1 vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less
and a width of 65 inches or less.



      C.   "Off-road utility vehicle - type 3" includes vehicles
with a total dry weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65
inches, or both.



   An operator of an off-road utility vehicle is also subject to the
provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.



(Ord. 1402 - Oct. 14 Supp.)



   4.    “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle weighing less than
one thousand (1,000) pounds which uses sled-type runners or skis, endless
belt-type tread with a width of forty-eight (48) inches or less, or any
combination of runners, skis or tread, and is designed for travel on snow or
ice.  “Snowmobile” does not include an all- terrain vehicle which has
been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks or treads.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)



75.03    GENERAL REGULATIONS.



No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle or off-road utility
vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a
snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of
the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource
Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their
registration, equipment and manner of operation.



(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G & Ch. 321I)



75.04    OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.



The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as
to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:



   1.   Streets.  Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets
which have not been plowed during the snow season and on such other streets
as may be designated by resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])



   2.   Exceptions.  Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets
only under the following circumstances:



      A.   Emergencies.  Snowmobiles may be operated on any street
in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow
upon the roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])



      B.   Direct Crossing.  Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing
of a prohibited street provided all of the following occur:



         (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately
ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;



         (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop
before crossing the street;



         (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all
on-coming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; and



         (4)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made
only at an intersection of such street with another street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])



   3.   Railroad Right-of-way.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated on
an operating railroad right-of-way.  A snowmobile may be driven directly
across a railroad right- of-way only at an established crossing and
notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the
improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming
traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])



   4.   Trails.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain
vehicle trails except where so designated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4g])



   5.   Parks and Other City Land.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated
in any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the
express permission of the City.  A snowmobile shall not be operated on any
City land without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.



   6.   Sidewalk or Parking.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon
the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb
line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the
“parking” except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street
upon which operation is authorized by this chapter.



75.05    OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.



The operators of ATVs shall comply with the following restrictions as to
where ATVs may be operated within the City:



   1.   Streets.  ATVs may be operated on streets only in accordance
with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa or on such streets as may be
designated by resolution of the Council for the sport of driving ATVs.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 & 3])



   2.   Trails.  ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails
except where designated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])



   3.   Railroad Right-of-way.  ATVs shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way.  An ATV may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])



   4.   Parks and Other City Land.  ATVs shall not be operated in any
park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City. 



   5.   Sidewalk or Parking.  ATVs shall not be operated upon the
public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line
and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”



   6.   Exception for Snow Removal.



      A.   An all-terrain vehicle (ATV) registered with the City
Clerk may be operated on the streets for the purpose of traveling from one
place to another for the sole purpose of snow removal operations and must be
equipped with equipment that is used for snow removal operations.



      B.   No all-terrain vehicle under this provision shall be
driven across Iowa Highway 146 or US Highway 6.



      C.   Operation on the streets shall be only during the period
from November 1st to March 31st.



      D.   Every all-terrain vehicle operated under the provisions
of this subsection shall be equipped with at least one amber flashing,
rotating or oscillating beacon light, one head lamp and one tail lamp, which
shall be lighted during the operation on a public street at any time.



      E.   Every all-terrain vehicle shall also be equipped with
brakes which conform to standards prescribed by the director of
transportation.



      F.   An all-terrain vehicle operated under this provision
shall carry only the operator (no passengers) and the operator must wear a
DOT approved helmet while operating on the public right-of-way (includes
streets and sidewalks).



      G.   An all-terrain vehicle shall not be operated on or across
a City street or public highway by a person who does not have in the
person’s possession a valid driver’s license issued to the person by the
State of Iowa.



      H.   An all-terrain vehicle shall not be operated at a rate of
speed greater than reasonable or proper under all existing conditions.  In
no event shall an all-terrain vehicle be operated upon a public street at a
rate of speed in excess of the posted speed limit.



      I.   The owner of the all-terrain vehicle shall have liability
insurance on said vehicle of $500,000 per claim and acknowledgement from the
insurer that they are aware the ATV is being operated on public streets. 
The same shall be provided to the City Clerk during registration.



      J.   A City Certificate of Registration must be carried on the
ATV being operated on streets under this subsection.  Registration fees will
be set by resolution of the Council.



      K.   The Mayor, Police Chief or Fire Chief may authorize the
operation of ATVs by designated personnel on any City street for the purpose
of mitigating an emergency.



      L.   No all-terrain vehicle shall be driven on any street
solely for entertainment or pleasure.



      M.   Any and all violations of the terms of this subsection
shall result in immediate suspension of the permit for a minimum of one year



(Ord. 1302 – Sep. 08 Supp.)



   7.   Direct Crossing.  An all-terrain vehicle or off-road utility
vehicle may make a direct crossing of a highway provided all of the following
occur:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[5])



      A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety
degrees to the direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing.



      B.   The all-terrain vehicle or off-road utility vehicle is
brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main traveled way
of the highway.



      C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming
traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard.



      D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only
at an intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.



      E.   The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or highway
designated as an all-terrain vehicle trail by a state agency, county, or city
to a street, roadway, or highway designated as an all-terrain vehicle trail
by a state agency, county, or city.



(Ord. 1439 - Dec. 17 Supp.)



75.06    NEGLIGENCE.



The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any injury or
damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile.  The
owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage
only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at the time the
injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the owner’s consent to
operate the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 & 321I.19)



75.07    ACCIDENT REPORTS.



Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury
or death to anyone or property damage amounting to one thousand dollars
($1000.00) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator
shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident
report, in accordance with State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 & 321I.11)



CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS



 



76.01  Scope of Regulations
 
76.08  Carrying Articles


76.02  Traffic Code Applies
 
76.09  Riding on Sidewalks


76.03  Double Riding Restricted
 
76.10  Towing


76.04  Single File on Roadways
 
76.11  Careful Riding


76.05  Riding on Bikeways
 
76.12  Parking


76.06  Vehicles on Bicycle Lanes and Bicycle Parking Areas
 
76.13  Equipment Requirements


76.07  Emerging from Alley or Driveway
 
76.14  Impoundment


 
76.15  License




 



76.01    SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.



These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street
or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject
to those exceptions stated herein.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.02    TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES.



Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of
a vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by the traffic code of the City applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application.  Whenever such person dismounts from a bicycle the person shall
be subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians.  If any bicycle is
found stopped, standing or parked in any manner violative of this chapter and
the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner shall be held
prima facie responsible for said violation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)



76.03    DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED.



A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent
and regular seat attached thereto.  No bicycle shall be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234[3 and 4])



76.04    SINGLE FILE ON ROADWAYS.



Persons riding bicycles on the roadway shall ride single file.  Every person
riding a bicycle on the roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of
the roadway as practicable except for turning movements and where bike lanes
are designated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.05    RIDING ON BIKEWAYS.



No person shall ride or operate a bicycle within a bicycle lane or path in
any direction except that permitted by vehicular traffic traveling on the
same side of the roadway; provided, bicycles may proceed either way along a
lane or path where arrows or signs appear designating two-way bicycle traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.06    VEHICLES IN BICYCLE LANES AND BICYCLE PARKING AREAS.



Except as otherwise provided, no persons shall drive a motor vehicle in a
designated bicycle path, lane or parking area, or park any motor vehicles in
such a path, lane or parking area.  No person shall cross a bicycle lane
except after giving the right-of-way to all bicycles within the lane. 
Bicycle paths may be temporarily blocked by motor vehicles with authorization
from the Council.



76.07    EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.



The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall,
upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.08    CARRYING ARTICLES.



No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the rider from keeping both hands upon the handle bars.



76.09    RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



The following shall apply to riding bicycles on sidewalks:



   1.   Central Business District.  No person shall ride a bicycle
upon a sidewalk, walkway or any ramp in the Central Business District unless
signs authorized by the Police Chief specifically designate a sidewalk or
walkway for bicycle use.  The City Manager is authorized to erect signs on
any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



   2.   Other Locations.  When signs are erected on any sidewalk or
roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person
shall disobey the signs.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



   3.   Yield Right-of-way.  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle
upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.10    TOWING.



It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow any
other vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is manufactured
for such use.



76.11    CAREFUL RIDING.



No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any sidewalk or roadway except
in a prudent and careful manner.



76.12    PARKING.



Regardless of any other provision in this chapter, no person shall park a
bicycle upon a street or alley in such manner as to obstruct pedestrian or
motor vehicle travel.  Any bicycle parked on public property shall not be
supported against a fire hydrant or attached to a fire hydrant.  Any bicycle
parked on public property in a commercial district shall not be supported
against a door or glass window or door.



76.13    EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible for providing and using
equipment as provided herein:



   1.   Lamps Required.  Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall
be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible
from a distance of at least three hundred (300) feet to the front and with a
lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 300 feet
to the rear except that a red reflector on the rear, of a type which shall be
visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to 300 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may
be used in lieu of a rear light.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)



   2.   Brakes Required.  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake
which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level,
clean pavement.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.14    IMPOUNDMENT.



   1.   The Police Department or any officer, agent or employee of the
City designated to enforce the parking ordinances of the City, upon finding a
bicycle unattended at a place where the bicycle constitutes an obstruction to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or which constitutes an imminent threat to
the health, safety or welfare of the public in violation of an existing
parking ordinance, may remove or cause the removal of the bicycle to a place
designated by the Police Chief for the storage of impounded bicycles.



   2.   Upon impoundment of the bicycle, the City shall notify the last
known registered owner of the impounded bicycle by certified mail.  The City
may cause to be filed an information and citation pursuant to State law upon
the registered owner or operator of the bicycle at the time of impoundment. 
The registered owner or operator may reclaim the bicycle by accepting service
of said information and signing a promise to appear and by payment of any
accrued fees and charges.  The fees and charges shall be set by resolution.



   3.   Should impoundment require the destruction of a chain, padlock
or other security device, municipal employees designated to enforce the
parking ordinances of the City and peace officers are hereby authorized to
destroy such security devices.



   4.   In the event that the City is unable to ascertain the owner or
if the owner does not claim the bicycle within three (3) months from the date
of impoundment, the City shall cause such bicycle to be sold at a public
auction or destroyed.  Notice of the disposition shall be published pursuant
to State law.  Proceeds from sales and impoundment fees shall be used to
defray the costs of bicycle registration and bicycle facilities.



76.15    LICENSE.



The Police Chief is authorized to issue bicycle licenses.  A bicycle license
is valid until a change in ownership occurs for the licensed bicycle.



CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES



 

80.01  Definitions
 
80.06  Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles


80.02  Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles
 
80.07  Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles


80.03  Notice by Mail
 
80.08  Proceeds from Sales


80.04  Notification in Newspaper
 
80.09  Duties of Demolisher


80.05  Fees for Impoundment
 



 



80.01    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1])



   1.   “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:



      A.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public
property for more than twenty-four (24) hours and lacks current registration
plates or two (2) or more wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle
totally inoperable.



      B.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property
for more than twenty-four (24) hours.



      C.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on
private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the
property for more than twenty-four (24) hours.



      D.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a
police authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten (10) days. 
However, a police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the
ten-day period by commencing the notification process.



      E.   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police
authority to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.



      F.   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section
321J.4B of the Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not
paid the impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency
responsible for carrying out the impoundment order.



   2.   “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of
the Code of Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed
scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.



   3.   “Police authority” means the Iowa state patrol or any law
enforcement agency of a county or city.



80.02    AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.



A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request
of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic,
shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take
into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property.  The police
authority may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a
private entity, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing,
preserving, storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles.  A property owner
or other person in control of private property may employ a private entity
which is a garage keeper (any operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair,
or maintenance of motor vehicles) to dispose of an abandoned vehicle, and the
private entity may take into custody the abandoned vehicle without a police
authority’s initiative.  If a police authority employs a private entity to
dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall provide the private
entity with the names and addresses of the registered owners, all lienholders
of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or the personal
property found in the vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])



(Ord. 1326 – Nov. 09 Supp.)



80.03    NOTICE BY MAIL.



The police authority or private entity that takes into custody an abandoned
vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by certified mail, the last
known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any
other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in the
vehicle, addressed to the parties’ last known addresses of record, that the
abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody.  Notice shall be deemed given
when mailed.  The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle
identification number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in
the vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is
being held, and inform the persons receiving the notice of their right to
reclaim the vehicle and personal property within ten (10) days after the
effective date of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and
storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon
payment of the costs of the notice.  The notice shall also state that the
failure of the owner, lienholders or claimants to exercise their right to
reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall be
deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants of all right, title,
claim and interest in the vehicle or personal property and that failure to
reclaim the vehicle or personal property is deemed consent to the sale of the
vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher and to
disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction.  If the abandoned
vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity without a police
authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the private entity may
claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90 of the Code of
Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the vehicle.  If the abandoned
vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority or by a private entity
hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that any person claiming
rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who disputes the
planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police authority or
private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this
section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to
contest those matters.  If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a
hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property
within the ten-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or claimants
shall no longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the
vehicle or the personal property.  A court in any case in law or equity
shall not recognize any right, title, claim, or interest of the owner,
lienholders or claimants after the expiration of the ten-day reclaiming
period.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])



(Ord. 1326 – Nov. 09 Supp.)



80.04    NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER.



If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and
addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders, notice by one
publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice
under Section 80.03.  The published notice may contain multiple listings of
abandoned vehicles and personal property but shall be published within the
same time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for
mailed notice in Section 80.03.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])



80.05    FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.



The owner, lienholder or claimant shall pay all towing and storage fees as
established by the storage facility, whereupon the vehicle shall be released.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])



80.06    DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.



If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the police
authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether or not
the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose
of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])



80.07    DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.



The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found
any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle
whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of such
motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without
notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two (2) or
more wheels or other structural part which renders the vehicle totally
inoperable.  The police authority shall give the applicant a certificate of
authority.  The applicant shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a
junking certificate and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu
of the certificate of title.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])



80.08    PROCEEDS FROM SALES.



Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the
expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing and notification
required, in accordance with State law.  Any balance shall be held for the
owner of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and
then shall be deposited in the State Road Use Tax Fund.  Where the sale of
any vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the police
authority shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])



80.09    DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.



Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor vehicle
for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or otherwise demolish such motor
vehicle.  A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or demolish a
vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for
the vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])



CHAPTER 81
RAILROAD REGULATIONS



 

81.01  Definitions
 
81.03  Obstructing Streets


81.02  Warning Signals
 
81.04  Crossing Maintenance



 



81.01    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation
or other association which owns, operates, drives or controls a railroad
train.



   2.   “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)



81.02    WARNING SIGNALS.



Operators shall sound a horn at least 1,000 feet before a street crossing is
reached and after sounding the horn, shall ring the bell continuously until
the crossing is passed.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.13)



81.03    OBSTRUCTING STREETS.



Operators shall not operate any train in such a manner as to prevent
vehicular use of any highway, street or alley for a period of time in excess
of ten (10) minutes except:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)



   1.   Comply with Signals.  When necessary to comply with signals
affecting the safety of the movement of trains.



   2.   Avoid Striking.  When necessary to avoid striking any object
or person on the track.



   3.   Disabled.  When the train is disabled.



   4.   Safety Regulations.  When necessary to comply with
governmental safety regulations including, but not limited to, speed
ordinances and speed regulations.



   5.   In Motion.  When the train is in motion except while engaged
in switching operations.



   6.   No Traffic.  When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use
the crossing. 



An employee is not guilty of a violation of this section if the employee’s
action was necessary to comply with the direct order or instructions of a
railroad corporation or its supervisors.  Guilt is then with the railroad
corporation.



81.04    CROSSING MAINTENANCE.



Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient and safe crossings
over any street traversed by their rails.



(Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943])



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)



CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM



 



90.01  Definitions
 
90.12  Responsibility for Water Service Pipe


90.02  Superintendent’s Duties
 
90.13  Failure to Maintain


90.03  Mandatory Connections
 
90.14  Curb Valve


90.04  Abandoned Connections
 
90.15  Interior Valve


90.05  Permit
 
90.16  Inspection and Approval


90.06  Fee for Permit and Connection Charge
 
90.17  Completion by the City


90.07  Compliance with Plumbing Code
 
90.18  Shutting off Water Supply


90.08  Plumber Required
 
90.19  Operation of Curb Valve


90.09  Excavations
 
90.20  Fire Hydrants


90.10  Tapping Mains
 
90.21  Water Emergencies


90.11  Water Service Pipe
 
90.22  Use of Easements




 



90.01    DEFINITIONS.



The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code of
Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:



   1.   “Combined service account” means a customer service account
for the provision of two or more utility services.



   2.   “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water
service from the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such
parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter
imposed shall be joint and several.



   3.   “Superintendent” means the Water Resources Director of the
City or any duly authorized assistant, agent or representative.



   4.   “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public
or community use.



   5.   “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main,
including the tap, to the building served.



   6.   “Water system” or “water works” means all public
facilities for securing, collecting, storing, pumping, treating and
distributing water.



90.02    SUPERINTENDENT’S DUTIES.



The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of water service pipes
and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining
to water services in the City in accordance with this chapter.  This chapter
shall apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to
new ones.  The Superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with
the provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation
of the water system, subject to the approval of the Council.  In the event
of an emergency the Superintendent may make temporary rules for the
protection of the system until due consideration by the Council may be had.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



90.03    MANDATORY CONNECTIONS.



The owners of any houses, buildings or structures used for human occupancy,
employment or use, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley
or right-of-way in which there is located a public water main are hereby
required to connect such facilities to the City’s public water system in
accordance with the provisions of these Water Service chapters within sixty
(60) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said
public water main is located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the
property line of such owner.



90.04    ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.



When an existing water service is abandoned or a service is renewed with a
new tap on the main, all abandoned connections with the mains shall be turned
off at the corporation stop located on the water main and made absolutely
watertight.



90.05    PERMIT.



Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a written
permit must be obtained from the City.  The application for the permit shall
include a legal description of the property, the name of the property owner,
the name and address of the person who will do the work, and the general uses
of the water.  If the proposed work meets all the requirements of this
chapter and if all fees required under this chapter have been paid, the
permit shall be issued.  Work under any permit must be completed within
sixty (60) days after the permit is issued, except that when such time period
is inequitable or unfair due to conditions beyond the control of the person
making the application, an extension of time within which to complete the
work may be granted.  The permit may be revoked at any time for any
violation of these chapters.



90.06    FEE FOR PERMIT AND CONNECTION CHARGE.



Before any permit is issued the person who makes the application shall pay a
fee, as established by resolution of the Council, to the Clerk to cover the
cost of issuing the permit and supervising, regulating, and inspecting the
work.  In addition there may be a connection charge, as established by
resolution of the Council, paid before issuance of a permit to reimburse the
City for costs borne by the City in making water service available to the
property served.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



90.07    COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE.



The installation of any water service pipe and any connection with the water
system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether
regulatory, procedural or enforcement provisions of the State Plumbing Code
and/or the City of Grinnell Specifications.



90.08    PLUMBER REQUIRED.



All installations of water service pipes and connections to the water system
shall be made by a plumber approved by the City.  The Superintendent shall
have the power to suspend the approval of any plumber for violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter.  A suspension, unless revoked, shall
continue until the next regular meeting of the City Council.  The
Superintendent shall notify the plumber immediately by personal written
notice of the suspension, the reasons for the suspension and the time and
place of the Council meeting at which the plumber will be granted a
hearing.  At this Council meeting the Superintendent shall make a written
report to the Council stating the reasons for the suspension, and the
Council, after fair hearing, shall affirm or revoke the suspension or take
any further action that is necessary and proper.  The plumber shall provide
a surety bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) secured by a
responsible surety bonding company authorized to operate within the State,
conditioned to indemnify and save the City harmless against all losses or
damages that may arise from or be occasioned by the making of connections to
the water system or excavations therefor or by carelessness, negligence or
unskillfulness in making the same.  Such bond shall remain in force and must
be executed for a period of one year except that on such expiration it shall
remain in force as to all penalties, claims and demands that may have accrued
thereunder prior to such expiration.  In lieu of a surety bond, a cash
deposit of $10,000.00 may be filed with the City.



90.09    EXCAVATIONS.



All trench work, excavation and backfilling required in making a connection
shall be performed in accordance with applicable excavation provisions as
provided for installation of building sewers and/or the provisions of Chapter
135.



90.10    TAPPING MAINS.



All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the direct supervision of
the Superintendent and in accord with the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   Independent Services.  No more than one house, building or
premises shall be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is
obtained from the Superintendent and unless provision is made so that each
house, building or premises may be shut off independently of the other.



   2.   Sizes and Location of Taps.  All mains six (6) inches or less
in diameter shall receive no larger than a ¾-inch tap.  All mains of over
six inches in diameter shall receive no larger than a one-inch tap. 
Connections larger than a one-inch tap may be permitted with written approval
from the Superintendent.  All taps in the mains shall be made in the top
half of the pipe, at least eighteen (18) inches apart.  No main shall be
tapped nearer than two (2) feet of the joint in the main.



   3.   Corporation Stop.  A brass corporation stop, of the pattern
and weight approved by the Superintendent, shall be inserted in every tap in
the main.  The corporation stop in the main shall be of the same size as the
service pipe.



   4.   Location Record.  An accurate and dimensional sketch showing
the exact location of the tap shall be filed with the Superintendent in such
form as the Superintendent shall require.



   5.   Contractors Bond.  The City will only tap mains or make
connections to mains for contractors who provide a bond in the same amount as
required by Section 90.08.



90.11    WATER SERVICE PIPE.



Water service pipes and all appurtenances shall be in accordance with the
IDNR approved City of Grinnell Specifications.



90.12    RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE.



All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the water service pipe from and including the corporation to
the building served shall be borne by the owner.  The owner shall indemnify
the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation or maintenance of said water service pipe.



90.13    FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.



When any portion of the water service pipe which is the responsibility of the
property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the owner fails to
correct such nuisance the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to the
property.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])



90.14    CURB VALVE.



There shall be installed within the public right-of-way a main shut-off valve
on the water service pipe in accordance with IDNR approved City of Grinnell
Specifications.  The shut-off valve shall be constructed to be visible and
even with the pavement or ground.



90.15    INTERIOR VALVE.



There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe inside the
building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible
and so located that the water can be shut off conveniently.  Where one
service pipe supplies more than one customer within the building, there shall
be separate lockable valves for each such customer so that service may be
shut off for one without interfering with service to the others.



90.16    INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.



All water service pipes and their connections to the water system must be
inspected and approved in writing by the Superintendent before they are
covered, and the Superintendent shall keep a record of such approvals.  If
the Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner
must proceed immediately to correct the work.  Every person who uses or
intends to use the municipal water system shall permit the Superintendent to
enter the premises to inspect or make necessary alterations or repairs at all
reasonable hours and on proof of authority.



90.17    COMPLETION BY THE CITY.



Should any excavation be left open or only partly refilled for twenty-four
(24) hours after the water service pipe is installed and connected with the
water system, or should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the
right to finish or correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs
to the property owner or the plumber.  If the plumber is assessed, the
plumber must pay the costs before receiving another permit, and the plumber's
bond or cash deposit shall be security for the assessment. If the property
owner is assessed, such assessment may be collected with and in the same
manner as general property taxes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])



90.18    SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY. 



   1.   The Superintendent may shut off the supply of water to any
customer because of any violation of the regulations contained in these Water
Service System chapters that is not being contested in good faith.  The
supply shall not be turned on again until all violations have been corrected
and the Superintendent has ordered the water to be turned on.



   2.   The City reserves the right to shut off water from the mains,
for a reasonable time, for repairs, extensions or other proper purposes, or
for unavoidable cause.



90.19    OPERATION OF CURB VALVE.



It is unlawful for any person except the Superintendent or a plumber to turn
water on at the curb valve and said plumber shall take no action contrary to
the orders of the Superintendent.



   1.   In repairing plumbing and making extensions or additions, the
plumber shall in all cases leave the water turned off or on, as the plumber
may have found it before commencing the work.



   2.   When a job of plumbing is completed, if the water has not been
turned on by City employees, the plumber may turn on the water for the
purpose of testing the work, and shall then immediately shut it off.



90.20    FIRE HYDRANTS.



No person, unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent, shall open
or attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose whatsoever. 
The provisions of this section do not apply to the members of the Fire
Department in the performance of their duties.



90.21    WATER EMERGENCIES.



Water use may be curtailed or suspended during a water emergency declared by
the Mayor or the City Manager.



90.22    USE OF EASEMENTS.



The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the water system lying
within said easement.  All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS



 

91.01  Purpose
 
91.07  Meter Repairs


91.02  Water Use Metered
 
91.08  Special Meter Reading Fees


91.03  Fire Sprinkler Systems – Exception
 
91.09  Right of Entry


91.04  Location of Meters
 
91.10  Meter Installation Fee


91.05  Meter Setting
 
91.11  Yard Meters


91.06  Meter Costs
 



 



91.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and
facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers.



91.02    WATER USE METERED.



All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters furnished by
the City and installed by the City. 



91.03    FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS – EXCEPTION.



Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection
without meters under the direct supervision of the Superintendent.  No open
connection can be incorporated in the system, and there shall be no valves
except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which must be
sealed open.  Each building served by a sprinkler system or fire line may be
charged a yearly fee as established by resolution of the Council.



91.04    LOCATION OF METERS. 



   1.   All meters shall be so located that they are easily accessible
to meter readers and repairmen and protected from freezing. 



   2.   All new dwellings and commercial or industrial buildings to be
served by City water shall have an outside water meter register installed in
a location designated by the Superintendent.  The City will install the
outside reading device on said dwelling or commercial or industrial building
at a cost to be determined by resolution of the Council.  If a dwelling or
commercial or industrial building does not have an outside reading device
installed, an additional charge as established by resolution of the Council,
shall be billed to the owner to cover the cost of entering the building to
obtain a reading.  Said charge shall be added to and collected with the bill
for utility service.



91.05    METER SETTING.



The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and fittings for proper
setting of the meter including a valve on the discharge side of the meter. 
Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Superintendent and shall be
of a design and construction approved by the Superintendent.



91.06    METER COSTS.



The full cost of any meter larger than a 5/8 inch meter shall be paid to the
City by the property owner or customer prior to the installation of any such
meter by the City.  The City will be the sole owner of all water meters.



91.07    METER REPAIRS.



Whenever a water meter owned by the City is found to be out of order the
Superintendent shall have it repaired.  If it is found that damage to the
meter has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or
property owner, then the property owner shall be liable for the cost of
repairs and/or replacement.



91.08    SPECIAL METER READING FEES. 



   1.   A fee, as established by resolution of the Council, shall be
paid for any meter reading made by the water department which is not the
regular monthly reading.



   2.   If water department personnel are not able to get a water usage
reading from the water meter or reading device for a premises, the City may
assess a charge, as established by resolution of the Council, for a repeat
trip by the water department personnel to obtain the usage reading.



   3.   The special meter reading fees shall be billed and collected
with the regular monthly billing for water usage for that premises.



(Ord. 1470 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



91.09    RIGHT OF ENTRY.



The Superintendent shall be permitted to enter the premises of any customer
at any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter.



91.10    METER INSTALLATION FEE.



There shall be a fee charged to the property owner for each new installation
of a water meter, in accordance with the schedule of such fees approved by
resolution of the Council.



91.11    YARD METERS.



A customer who uses water for watering a lawn or garden, filling a swimming
pool, for existing single-pass air conditioning, or for other such uses where
the water so used is not discharged into the sanitary sewer system, may apply
for and have a yard meter installed.



   1.   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, a yard meter
means a second water meter or sub-meter installed downstream of the first or
master water meter.  The yard meter shall be so placed as to meter only
water used for outside purposes and which is not discharged into the sanitary
sewer system.  The yard meter shall have a remote reading device.



   2.   Permanent Yard Meter.  The full cost of a permanent yard meter
and any associated plumbing charges shall be the responsibility of the
customer.  The permanent yard meter shall be furnished and owned by the
City.  Maintenance and replacement of the permanent yard meter shall be
governed by the same requirements applying to other water meters owned by the
City.  The monthly sewer user charge will be billed only on the difference
between the two water meter readings.



(Ord. 1470 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES



 

92.01  Service Charges
 
92.06  Lien for Nonpayment


92.02  Rates For Service
 
92.07  Lien Notice


92.03  Rates Outside the City
 
92.08  Customer Deposits


92.04  Billing for Water Service
 
92.09  Temporary Vacancy


92.05  Service Discontinued
 



 



92.01    SERVICE CHARGES.



Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the City based upon use
of water as determined by meters provided for in Chapter 91.  Each location,
building, premises or connection shall be considered a separate and distinct
customer whether owned or controlled by the same person or not.  For the
purpose of facilitating the collection of fees for water service, the City is
divided into two (2) districts as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



   1.   District No. 1 consists of all water customers with meters
located in the area east of the alley located between Main Street and Broad
Street and the extension of said alley north to the north City limits, also
the extension of said alley south to the centerline of Garfield Avenue,
thence east along the centerline of Garfield Avenue to the centerline of the
Union Pacific Railroad, thence south along the centerline of said railroad to
the south City limits.



   2.   District No. 2 consists of all water customers with meters
located in the area west of District No. 1.



92.02    RATES FOR SERVICE.



Water service shall be furnished at the following monthly rates within the
City:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



   1.   Metered Water.  Metered water is furnished at the following
monthly rates:



 



 

Effective Dates




Water Usage in Cubic Feet

 

April 3, 2017
To
June 30, 2017

 

July 1, 2017
To
June 30, 2018

 

July 1, 2018
To
June 30, 2019

 

July 1, 2019
To
June 30, 2020

 

July 1, 2020
To
June 30, 2021




0 to 150
(Minimum Bill)

 

$8.72

 

$9.16

 

$9.61

 

$10.09

 

$10.60




151
to
800

 

$5.26 per 100 Cubic Feet

 

$5.52 per 100 Cubic Feet

 

$5.80 per 100 Cubic Feet

 

$6.08 per 100 Cubic Feet

 

$6.38 per 100 Cubic Feet




801
to
3,300

 

$4.23 per 100 Cubic Feet

 

$4.44 per 100 Cubic Feet

 

$4.66 per 100 Cubic Feet

 

$4.89 per 100 Cubic Feet

 

$5.14 per 100 Cubic Feet




All Over 3,300

 

$3.10 per 100 Cubic Feet

 

$3.25 per 100 Cubic Feet

 

$3.42 per 100 Cubic Feet

 

$3.59 per 100 Cubic Feet

 

$3.77 per 100 Cubic Feet




 



All meters will be converted to gallons and the following rate table will be
used:



 



 

Effective Dates




Water Usage in Gallons

 

April 3, 2017
To
June 30, 2017

 

July 1, 2017
To
June 30, 2018

 

July 1, 2018
To
June 30, 2019

 

July 1, 2019
To
June 30, 2020

 

July 1, 2020
To
June 30, 2021




0 to 1,125
(Minimum Bill)

 

$8.72

 

$9.16

 

$9.61

 

$10.09

 

$10.60




1,126
to
6,000

 

$5.26 per 750 Gallons

 

$5.52 per 750 Gallons

 

$5.80 per 750 Gallons

 

$6.08 per 750 Gallons

 

$6.38 per 750 Gallons




6,001
to
24,750

 

$4.23 per 750 Gallons

 

$4.44 per 750 Gallons

 

$4.66 per 750 Gallons

 

$4.89 per 750 Gallons

 

$5.14 per 750 Gallons




All Over 24,750

 

$3.10 per 750 Gallons

 

$3.25 per 750 Gallons

 

$3.42 per 750 Gallons

 

$3.59 per 750 Gallons

 

$3.77 per 750 Gallons




 



   2.   Bulk Water.  Bulk water sold from the public meter is sold at
the rate of twenty-five cents ($.25) per forty (40) gallons.



(Ord. 1437 - Dec. 17 Supp.)



92.03    RATES OUTSIDE THE CITY.



Water service shall be provided to any customer located outside the corporate
limits of the City which the City has agreed to serve at rates one hundred
fifty percent (150%) of the rates provided in Section 92.02.  No such
customer, however, will be served unless the customer shall have signed a
service contract agreeing to be bound by the ordinances, rules and
regulations applying to water service established by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 & 384.84)



92.04    BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE.



Water service shall be billed as part of a combined service account, payable
in accordance with the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



   1.   Bills Issued.  The Clerk shall prepare and issue bills for
combined service accounts on the first day of each month.



   2.   Bills Payable.  Bills for combined service accounts shall be
due and payable at the office of the Clerk by the fifteenth (15th) day of the
month of issuance.



   3.   Late Payment Penalty.  Bills not paid when due shall be
considered delinquent.  A late payment penalty of ten percent (10%) of the
amount due, except for the sewer user charge, shall be added to each
delinquent bill.



   4.   If the bill is not paid by the due date, the City shall send a
reminder notice stating that the bill must be paid within six working days.



   5.   If the bill is not paid within the six working days, the City
shall send a second reminder notice stating that the bill must be paid within
four working days or the water service will be shut off.  A $15.00
administrative fee is added to the customer's account when the second
reminder notice is sent.



   6.   If the bill remains unpaid after four working days, water
service shall be discontinued.



   7.   All water customers without a radio read water meter shall be
charged $15.00 a month service fee.



(Ord. 1437 - Dec. 17 Supp.)



92.05    SERVICE DISCONTINUED.



Water service to delinquent customers shall be discontinued or disconnected
in accordance with the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



   1.   Notice.  Prior to the discontinuance or disconnection of water
service, the Clerk shall notify each delinquent customer in whose name the
delinquent charges were incurred, by ordinary mail, of the nature of the
delinquency and afford the customer the opportunity for a hearing.



   2.   Notice to Landlords.  If the customer is a tenant, and if the
owner or landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for
notice, the notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or
landlord.  If the customer is a tenant and requests a change of name for
service under the account, such request shall be sent to the owner or
landlord of the property if the owner or landlord has made a written request
for notice of any change of name for service under the account to the rental
property.



   3.   Hearing.  If a hearing is requested by noon of the day
preceding the shut off, the Clerk shall conduct an informal hearing and shall
make a determination as to whether the discontinuance or disconnection is
justified.  The customer has the right to appeal the Clerk's decision to the
Council, and if the Council finds that discontinuance or disconnection is
justified, then such discontinuance or disconnection shall be made, unless
payment has been received.



   4.   Fees.  A fee of forty-five dollars ($45.00) shall be charged
during normal working hours or sixty-five dollars ($65.00) after normal
working (after 4:00 p.m. and on weekends) for discontinuing/disconnecting and
restoring water service to a delinquent customer.  No fee shall be charged
for the usual or customary trips in the regular changes in occupancies of
property.



(Ord. 1441 - Dec. 17 Supp.)



92.06    LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.



The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises. 
Water service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien
upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County
Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



92.07    LIEN NOTICE.



A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to the
County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is
given to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. 
If the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property or
premises has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be
given to the owner or landlord.  The notice shall be sent to the appropriate
persons by ordinary mail not less than thirty (30) days prior to
certification of the lien to the County Treasurer.



(Ord. 1329 – Nov. 09 Supp.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



92.08    CUSTOMER DEPOSITS.



There shall be required from every customer not the owner of the premises
served a one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) deposit intended to guarantee the
payment of bills for service.  This deposit will not collect interest and
will be refunded upon payment of the final bill issued for the customer.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



92.09    TEMPORARY VACANCY.



A property owner may request water service be temporarily discontinued and
shut off at the curb valve when the property is expected to be vacant for an
extended period of time.  There shall be a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee
collected for shutting the water off at the curb valve, removing the water
meter and for restoring service.  During a period when service is
temporarily discontinued as provided herein there shall be no minimum service
charge. 



CHAPTER 93
WATER WELL PROTECTION



 

93.01  Definitions
 
93.04  Petroleum Storage


93.02  Shallow Well Protection
 
93.05  Applicability


93.03  Deep Well Protection
 
93.06  Existing Structures or Facilities



 



93.01    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Deep well” means a well located and constructed in such a
manner that there is a continuous layer of low permeability soil or rock at
least five (5) feet thick the top of which is located at least twenty-five
(25) feet below the normal ground surface and above the aquifer from which
the water is drawn.



   2.   “Shallow well” means a well located and constructed in such
a manner that there is not a continuous layer of low permeability soil or
rock at least five (5) feet thick the top of which is located at least
twenty-five (25) feet below the normal ground surface and above the aquifer
from which the water is drawn.



93.02    SHALLOW WELL PROTECTION.



No structure or facility of the following enumerated and listed types shall
be located within the distances hereinafter set forth after each structure or
facility from a shallow public well within the City.



   1.   Well house floor drains – 5 feet; 



   2.   Water treatment plant wastes – 50 feet;



   3.   Sanitary and industrial discharges – 400 feet;



   4.   Floor drains from pump house to surface:



      A.   None within 5 feet;



      B.   5 to 10 feet – water main materials encased in at least
8 inches of concrete permitted;



      C.   10 to 25 feet – must be water main material;



      D.   25 to 75 feet – must be watertight sewer pipe;



   5.   Floor drains from pump house to sewer or drain:



      A.   None permitted within 10 feet;



      B.   10 to 75 feet, must be water main material;



      C.   75 to 200 feet, must be watertight sewer pipe;



   6.   Water treatment plant waste handling system or a sanitary or
storm sewer or drain:



      A.   None permitted within 25 feet;



      B.   25 to 75 feet, must be water main material;



      C.   75 to 200 feet, must be watertight sewer pipe;



   7.   Force mains:



      A.   None permitted within 75 feet;



      B.   75 to 400 feet, must be water main materials;



   8.   Land application of solid waste – 200 feet;



   9.   Irrigation of wastewater – 200 feet;



   10.   Concrete vaults and septic tanks – 200 feet;



   11.   Mechanical wastewater treatment plants – 400 feet;



   12.   Cesspools and earth pit privies – 400 feet;



   13.   Soil absorption fields – 400 feet;



   14.   Lagoons – 1000 feet;



   15.   Chemicals:



      A.   Application to ground surface – 200 feet;



      B.   Above ground storage – 200 feet;



      C.   On or underground storage – 400 feet;



   16.   Animal pasturage – 50 feet;



   17.   Animal enclosure – 200 feet;



   18.   Animal wastes:



      A.   Land application of solids – 200 feet;



      B.   Land application of liquid or slurry – 200 feet;



      C.   Storage tank – 200 feet;



      D.   Solids stockpile – 400 feet;



      E.   Storage basin or lagoon – 1000 feet;



   19.   Earthen silage storage trench or pit – 200 feet;



   20.   Basements, pits, sumps – 10 feet;



   21.   Flowing streams or other surface water bodies – 50 feet;



   22.   Cisterns – 50 feet;



   23.   Cemeteries – 200 feet;



   24.   Private wells – 400 feet;



   25.   Solid waste disposal sites – 1000 feet.



93.03    DEEP WELL PROTECTION.



No structure or facility of the following enumerated and listed types shall
be located within the distances hereinafter set forth from a deep public well
within the City.



   1.   Well house floor drains – 5 feet;



   2.   Water treatment plant wastes – 50 feet;



   3.   Sanitary and industrial discharges – 400 feet;



   4.   Floor drains from pump house to surface:



      A.   None within 5 feet;



      B.   5 to 10 feet – water main materials encased in at least
8 inches of concrete permitted;



      C.   10 to 25 feet – must be water main material;



      D.   25 to 75 feet – must be watertight sewer pipe;



   5.   Floor drains from pump house to sewer or drain:



      A.   None permitted within 10 feet;



      B.   10 to 75 feet, must be water main material;



      C.   75 to 200 feet, must be watertight sewer pipe;



   6.   Water treatment plant waste handling system or a sanitary or
storm sewer or drain:



      A.   None permitted within 25 feet;



      B.   25 to 75 feet, must be water main material;



      C.   75 to 200 feet, must be watertight sewer pipe;



   7.   Force mains:



      A.   None permitted within 75 feet;



      B.   75 to 400 feet, must be water main materials;



   8.   Land application of solid waste – 100 feet;



   9.   Irrigation of wastewater – 100 feet;



   10.   Concrete vaults and septic tanks – 100 feet;



   11.   Mechanical wastewater treatment plants – 200 feet;



   12.   Cesspools and earth pit privies – 200 feet;



   13.   Soil absorption fields – 200 feet;



   14.   Lagoons – 400 feet;



   15.   Chemicals:



      A.   Application to ground surface – 100 feet;



      B.   Above ground storage – 100 feet;



      C.   On or underground storage – 200 feet;



   16.   Animal pasturage – 50 feet;



   17.   Animal enclosure – 100 feet;



   18.   Animal wastes:



      A.   Land application of solids – 100 feet;



      B.   Land application of liquid or slurry – 100 feet;



      C.   Storage tank – 100 feet;



      D.   Solids stockpile – 200 feet;



      E.   Storage basin or lagoon – 400 feet;



   19.   Earthen silage storage trench or pit – 100 feet;



   20.   Basements, pits, sumps – 10 feet;



   21.   Flowing streams or other surface water bodies – 50 feet;



   22.   Cisterns – 50 feet;



   23.   Cemeteries – 200 feet;



   24.   Private wells – 200 feet;



   25.   Solid waste disposal sites – 1000 feet.



93.04    PETROLEUM STORAGE.



The location and erection of petroleum storage facilities is prohibited
within 600 feet of any source of a public water supply.  The provisions of
this section do not apply, however, to storage tanks not exceeding 300
gallons in capacity located above ground.



93.05    APPLICABILITY.



The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public water wells existing
within the City except former public water wells which have been abandoned
and from which the pumping equipment has been removed.



93.06    EXISTING STRUCTURES OR FACILITIES.



The use of structures or facilities existing at the time of enactment of the
ordinance codified in this chapter may be continued even though such use may
not conform to the regulations of this chapter.  However, such structure or
facility may not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or substituted
subsequent to adoption of such ordinance. †



 


Notes

† 
† Ordinance No. 1174 imposing the regulations contained herein was adopted
on November 6, 2000.



CHAPTER 94
WATER BENEFITED DISTRICT  CONNECTION CHARGES



 

94.01  General Provisions
 
94.05  East Street and Pinder Avenue Benefited District


94.02  Definitions
 
94.06  Hobart Street and 14th Avenue Benefited District


94.03  Connection Charge Required
 
94.07  Iowa Highway 146 Benefited District


94.04  Industrial Park Plat 4 and Plat 5
 
94.08  Penrose Street and 16th Avenue Benefited District



 



94.01    GENERAL PROVISIONS.



The purpose of this chapter is to establish water connection charges for
certain properties within the City to recover the costs of designing and
constructing major water service facilities from property owners who connect
to such facilities subsequent to their construction.  In the event the
Council determines the necessity of constructing a major water service
facility and determines that the utilization of a connection charge is the
most equitable manner in which to recover the City’s costs associated
therewith, the Council shall first hold a public hearing on the proposed
adoption of an ordinance to establish a benefited district and a connection
charge.



94.02    DEFINITIONS.



The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:



   1.   “Benefited district” means that area of the City to which
water service can feasibly be provided by a major water service facility of a
given design and capacity.



   2.   “Direct access frontage fee” means the cost per lineal foot
to be paid by the property owner having frontage on the water service
facility.  This fee is considered to be the portion of the cost of the water
service facility which serves as the local water service lateral serving the
property.  It does not include the cost of the water service pipe from the
water main to the property being served.



   3.   “Frontage” means the length of property directly adjoining
the water service facility, or the right-of-way or easement area where the
water service facility has been constructed.



   4.   “Trunk main fee” means the cost to be charged per acre to
all property which is able to access the water service facility as a trunk
main.  It does not include the cost of the water service pipe to be extended
into the property being served by the trunk main or the cost of a local
lateral main to extend from the trunk main to the property being served.



94.03    CONNECTION CHARGE REQUIRED.



After the effective date of the ordinance establishing a benefited district
and a connection charge, no owner of property within the district, whose
property is eligible for connection to the water service facility, shall make
such connection until the required connection charge has been paid.  The
water connection charge required by this chapter is in addition to, and not
in lieu of, any other fees required under other provisions of this Code of
Ordinances.  In the event a property owner makes a connection to the water
service facility without having paid the required connection charge, the City
shall disconnect the water service pipe until the required charge has been
paid.



94.04    INDUSTRIAL PARK PLAT 4 AND PLAT 5.



   1.   Legal Description.  There is hereby established a benefited
water district to be known as the Industrial Park Plat 4 and Plat 5 Benefited
District, said district lying within the following boundaries:



      Lots 4 and 5 of the Grinnell Industrial Park Plat 4 in the
Northwest Quarter of Section 28, Township 80 North, Range 16 West of the 5th
P.M., Poweshiek County, Iowa



      and



      That part of the Southwest Quarter of Section 28, Township 80
North, Range 16 West of the 5th P.M., Poweshiek County, Iowa, lying west of
the Chicago and Northwestern Transportation Company right-of-way, except the
west 360 feet of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter and except
that part occupied by the Iowa Highway 146 right- of-way and except Parcel A
in the Southwest Quarter of said Section, Township and Range.



The total area of the property benefited by the construction of the water
lines is 78.52 acres.  The actual total cost of the construction project for
the water lines to Industrial Park Plat 4 was $29,465.04, and the cost for
the lines to Industrial Park Plat 5 was $44,011.40.



   2.   Fees.  Fees to be paid are consistent with a direct access fee
of $11.51 per lineal foot and a trunk main fee of $475.85 per acre (without
storm water detention area).



   3.   Exemptions.  There are no properties within the benefited area
which are exempt from the project-specific, tap-on fee by virtue of their
having been previously assessed for the service provided.



   4.   Industrial Park Plat 6.  Whereas Greater Grinnell Development,
Inc. has now recorded a plat known as Industrial Park Plat 6 and whereas the
connection charges for connection to the City Water System affect the cost of
development of said Industrial Park Plat 6, it is the purpose of this
subsection to reduce the water connection charges established by this section
for the lots lying within the Industrial Park Plat 6.  Such connection
charges are established for each lot located within said Industrial Park Plat
6 in accordance with the following table:



 




Lot No.

 

Connection Charge




1

 

$  3,215.00




2

 

$  3,351.00




3

 

$  1,901.00




4

 

$  1,977.00




5

 

$  1,463.00




6

 

$  2,879.00




Total

 

$14,786.00





 



94.05    EAST STREET AND PINDER AVENUE BENEFITED DISTRICT.



   1.   Legal Description.  There is hereby established a benefited
water district to be known as the East Street and Pinder Avenue Benefited
District, said district lying within the following boundaries:



      That portion of the SW¼ of Section 21, east of the east
right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad, except Lot E, Lot G and the
north 30 feet of Lot H; the west half of the SE¼ of Section 21, the NW¼ of
the NE¼ of Section 28; and that portion of the NE¼ of the NW¼ of Section
28 lying east of the east right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad,
all located in T80N, R16W of the 5th P.M., Poweshiek County, Iowa



The total area of the property benefited by the construction of the water
main is 177.02 acres.  The actual total cost of the construction project for
the water main was $128,459.58.



   2.   Schedule of Fees to be Paid by the Benefited Property upon
Connection to the Water Main.  Fees to be paid consist of a direct access
fee and a trunk main fee.



      A.   A direct access fee shall be charged to all property
which is located adjacent to the East Street right-of-way and which extends
450 feet both east and west from the East Street right-of-way and which is
located no farther than 58 feet north of the point of connection described in
Section 3 of Ordinance No. 1210, or which is located no farther south than
the north Pinder Avenue right-of-way line.  In addition, all property which
is located adjacent to the Pinder Avenue right-of-way and which extends 450
feet south from the Pinder Avenue right-of-way and which is located no
farther east than 510 feet east of the East Street centerline and no farther
west than the east right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad; and all
property which is located adjacent to the Pinder Avenue right-of-way and
which extends 450 feet north from the Pinder Avenue right-of-way and which is
located no farther east than 510 feet west of the East Street centerline and
no farther west than the east right-of-way line of the Union Pacific
Railroad.  The direct access fee is based on a lineal foot cost.  The total
length over which a direct access fee is to be charged is 3,573 feet;
2,605.31 feet along the east side of East Street beginning at the centerline
of Ogan Avenue south to the north right-of-way line of Pinder Avenue;
1,668.31 feet along the west side of East Street beginning 937 feet south of
the Ogan Avenue centerline, continuing south to the north right-of-way line
of Pinder Avenue; 1,478.17 feet along the south side of Pinder Avenue,
beginning at a point 510 feet east of the East Street centerline and west to
the east right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad; 458.17 feet along
the north side of Pinder Avenue beginning at a point 510 west of the
centerline of East Street, continuing west to the east right-of-way line of
the Union Pacific Railroad.  The total cost to be charged as direct access
fee is identified by this section to be 60% of the total cost of
construction, which equates $77,075.75.  ($128,459.58 x 60% = $77,075.75). 
The direct access fee is $12.41 per lineal foot ($77,075.75 ÷ 6,209.96 LF =
$12.41/lin. ft.)



      B.   A trunk main fee shall be charged to all benefited
properties identified in subsection 1 of this section.  The total truck main
fee is by this section identified to be 40% of the total cost of construction
or $51,383.83 ($128,459.58 x 40% = $51,383.83).  The trunk main fee for the
benefited property is $290.27 per acre ($51,383.83 ÷ 177.02 = $290.27 per
acre).



   3.   Exemptions.  There are no properties within the benefited area
which are exempt from the fees established in this section.



94.06    HOBART STREET AND 14TH AVENUE BENEFITED DISTRICT.



   1.   Legal Description.  There is hereby established a benefited
water district to be known as the Hobart Street and 14th Avenue Benefited
District, said district lying within the following boundaries:



      Lots 1 through 6 in Block 1, Lots 1 through 4 and the north 40
feet of Lot 5 in Block 4 of the College Place Addition; the north 891 feet of
the west 660 feet of the SE¼ of the NE¼; the SW¼ of the NE¼ of the NE¼;
and the east 715 feet of the SE¼ of the NW¼ of the NE¼, all located in
Section 9, Township 80 North, Range 16 West of the 5th P.M., Poweshiek
County, Iowa



The total area of the property benefited by the construction of the water
main is 47.15 acres.  The actual total cost of the construction project for
the water main was $56,094.91.



   2.   Schedule of Fees to be Paid by the Benefited Property upon
Connection to the Water Main.  Fees to be paid consist of a direct access
fee and a trunk main fee.



      A.   A direct access fee shall be charged to all property
which is located adjacent to Hobart Street which extends 194 feet both east
and west from the Hobart Street right-of-way and which is located no farther
than 10 feet south of the point of connection described in Section 3 of
Ordinance No. 1215, or which is located no farther north than the north
right-of-way line of 14th Avenue.  In addition, all property which is
located adjacent to the 14th Avenue right-of-way line and which extends 90
feet north from the north 14th Avenue right-of-way line and which is located
no farther east than the east right-of- way line of Hobart Street and no
farther west than the northward extension of the west line of College Place
Addition.  The direct access fee is based on lineal foot cost.  The total
length over which a direct access fee is to be charged is 2,245.43 feet; 892
feet along the east side of Hobart Street beginning at the south right-of-way
line of 12th Avenue north to the north right-of-way line of 14th Avenue; 640
feet along the west side of Hobart Street beginning at a point 20 feet north
of the south lot line of Lot 5 to the north lot line of Lot 1 in Block 4 and
the south lot line of Lot 6 to the north lot line of Lot 1 in Block 1, all in
College Place Addition; 713.43 feet along the north side of 14th Avenue,
beginning at the east right-of-way line of Hobart Street, continuing west to
the west line of College Place Addition.  The total cost to be charged as
direct access fee is identified by this section to be 60% of the total cost
of construction, which equates $33,656.95 ($56,094.91 x 60% = $33,656.95). 
The direct access fee is $14.99 per lineal foot ($33,656.95 ÷ 2,245.43 LF =
$14.99/lin. ft.)



      B.   A trunk main fee shall be charged to all benefited
properties identified in subsection 1 of this section.  The total trunk main
fee is identified to be 40% of the total cost of construction or $22,437.96
($56,094.91 x 40% = $22,437.96).  The trunk main fee for the benefited
property is $475.88 per acre ($22,437.96 ÷ 47.15 = $475.88 per acre).



   3.   Exemptions.  There are no properties within the benefited area
which are exempt from the fees established in this section.



94.07    IOWA HIGHWAY 146 BENEFITED DISTRICT.



   1.   Legal Description.  There is hereby established a benefited
water district to be known as the Iowa Highway 146 Benefited District, said
district lying within the following boundaries:



      The south 986 feet of the west 360 feet of the SW¼ SW¼, Section
28, Township 80N, Range 16W; Parcel “A” in the SW¼ SW¼, Section 28,
Township 80N, Range 16W; that portion of the NW¼, Section 33, Township 80N,
Range 16W which lies west of the Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way; Parcel
“D” of Lot 1 of the NE¼ NE¼, Section 32, Township 80N, Range 16W; SW¼
NE¼, Section 32, Township 80N, Range 16W; SE¼ NE¼ Section 32, Township
80N, Range 16W; Lot 1 in the NE¼ NE¼, Section 32, Township 80N, Range 16W,
except that portion of the north 314.74 feet of Lot 1 lying west of Parcel
“D”; and Parcel “B” in Lot 2 in the NE¼ NE¼, Section 32, Township
80N, Range 16W.



The total area of the property benefited by the construction of the water
main is 163.92 acres.  The actual total cost of the construction project for
the water main was $299,304.00.



   2.   Schedule of Fees to be Paid by the Benefited Property upon
Connection to the Water Main.  Fees to be paid consist of a direct access
fee and a trunk main fee.



      A.   A direct access fee shall be charged to all property
which is located adjacent to the Iowa Highway 146 right-of-way and which
extends 360 feet east from the Iowa Highway 146 right-of-way which is located
at the point of connection described in Section 3 of Ordinance No. 1253, or
which is located no further south than the north Stagecoach Road right-of-way
line.  In addition, a direct access fee shall be charged to all property
which is located adjacent to the Iowa Highway 146 right-of-way and which
extends 415 feet west and 450 east from the Iowa Highway 146 right-of-way and
which is located from the south Stagecoach Road right-of-way south to the
north Interstate 80 right-of-way.  The direct access fee is based on a
lineal foot cost.  The total length over which a direct access fee is
charged is 4,072.04 feet; 2,490.38 feet along the east side of Iowa Highway
146 beginning at the point of connection to the north Stagecoach Road
right-of-way and from the south Stagecoach Road right-of-way south to the
north Interstate 80 right-of-way; in addition, 1,581.66 feet along the west
side of Iowa Highway 146 beginning at a point on the south Stagecoach Road
right-of-way, south to the north Interstate 80 right-of- way.  The total
cost to be charged as direct access fee is identified by this section to be
60% of the total cost of construction, which equates to $179,582.40
($179,582.40 ÷ 4,072.04 LF = $44.10/Lin. ft.). 



      B.   The total cost to be charged as trunk main fee is
identified by this section to be 40% of the total cost of construction, which
equates to $119,721.60.  Trunk main fees shall be charged to all benefited
properties identified in subsection 1 of this section.  The trunk main fee
for the benefited property is $730.37 per acre ($119,721.60 ÷ 163.92 acres =
$730.37/acre).



   3.   Exemptions.  There are no properties within the benefited area
which are exempt from the fees established in this section.



94.08    PENROSE STREET AND 16TH AVENUE BENEFITED DISTRICT.



   1.   Legal Description.  There is hereby established a benefited
water district to be known as the Penrose Street and 16th Avenue Benefited
District, said district lying within the following boundaries:



      Parcel C of  Lot 3 of the SW ¼ of the NW ¼ of Section 10,
Township 80 north, Range 16 west of the 5th p.m.; the NW ¼ of the NW ¼ of
Section 10, Township 80 north, Range 16 west of the 5th  p.m.; the west 250
feet of the east 660 feet of the north 13 acres of the S ½ of the SE ¼ of
the NE ¼ of Section 9, Township 80 north, Range 16 west of the 5th p.m.; the
E ½ of the N ½ of the SE ¼ of the NE 1/4 , including Lot 1 of Section 9,
Township 80 north, Range 16 west of the 5th p.m.; the E ½ of the S ½ of the
NE ¼ of the NE ¼ of Section 9, Township 80 north, Range 16 west of the 5th
p.m.; and the south 150 feet of the SW ¼ of the SW ¼ of Section 3, Township
80 north, Range 16 west of the 5th p.m., all located in Poweshiek County,
Iowa.



The total area of the property benefited by the construction of the water
main is 72.11 acres.  The actual total cost of the construction project for
the water main was $123,013.50.



   2.   Schedule of Fees to be Paid by the Benefited Property upon
Connection to the Water Main.  Fees to be paid consist of a direct access
fee and a trunk main fee.



      A.   A direct access fee shall be charged to all property,
which is located adjacent to Penrose Street, extending 660 feet west from the
west Penrose Street right-of-way line, beginning at a point located 1,158
feet north of the north right-of-way line of 10th Avenue and extending 1,320
feet to the north; and extending 150 feet east from the east Penrose Street
right-of-way line, beginning at a point located 1,540 feet north of the 10th
Avenue right-of-way line and extending 488 feet north.  In addition all
property which is located adjacent to the 370th Avenue north of the north
right-of-way line beginning at the east Penrose Street right-of-way line and
extending 1,320 feet east along said 370th Avenue north right-of-way line. 
The direct access fee is based on a lineal foot cost.  The total length over
which a direct access fee is to be charged is 3,128 feet; the west side of
Penrose Street - 1,320 feet; the east side of Penrose Street – 488 feet;
the north side of 370th Avenue – 1,320 feet.  The total cost to be charged
as direct access fee is identified by this section to be 60% of the total
cost of construction, which equates to $73,808.10 ($123,013.50 X 60% =
$73,808.10).  The direct access fee is $23.60 per lineal foot ($73,808.10 ÷
3,128 = $23.60 / Lin. Ft.)



      B.   A trunk main fee shall be charged to all benefited
properties identified in subsection 1 of this section.  The total trunk main
fee is by this section identified to be 40% of the total cost of construction
or $49,205.40 ($123,013.50 x 40% = $49,205.40).  The trunk main fee for the
benefited property is $682.37 per acre.  ($49,205.40 ÷ 72.11 = $682.37 per
acre). 



   3.   Exemptions.  There are no properties within the benefited area
which are exempt from the fees established in this section.



(Ord. 1321 – Sep. 09 Supp.)



CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM



 

95.01  Purpose
 
95.06  Service Outside the City


95.02  Definitions
 
95.07  Right of Entry


95.03  Superintendent
 
95.08  Use of Easements


95.04  Prohibited Acts
 
95.09  Special Penalties


95.05  Sewer Connection Required
 



 



95.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Sanitary
Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and
disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.



95.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20º)
C, expressed in milligrams per liter or parts per million.



   2.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil,
waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys
it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.



   3.   “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping
from the building wall to and including its connection with the main sewer or
the primary treatment portion of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system conveying the drainage of one building site.



   4.   “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface
run-off and sewage.



   5.   “Customer” means any person responsible for the production
of domestic, commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly
discharged into the public sewer system.



   6.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and
commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the
handling, storage and sale of produce.



   7.   “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary
sewage. 



   8.   “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council
to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and their
connections to the public sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be
discharged therefrom. 



   9.   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 



   10.   “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means
all equipment and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection,
storage, treatment, and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling
units or other facilities serving the equivalent of fifteen persons (1500
gpd) or less.



   11.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight
of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 



   12.   “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of
abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.



   13.   “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the
sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels),
office buildings, factories or institutions, and free from storm, surface
water, and industrial waste.



   14.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries sewage and to
which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 



   15.   “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes
from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial
establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may
be present. 



   16.   “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices
and structures used for treating sewage. 



   17.   “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities
for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 



   18.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 



   19.   “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates
or fees levied against and payable by customers, as consideration for the
servicing of said customers by said sewer system.



   20.   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial
waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow
exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than
five (5) times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal
operation. 



   21.   “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer which
carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.



   22.   “Superintendent” means the Water Resources Director of the
City or any authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 



   23.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the
surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and
which are removable by laboratory filtering. 



   24.   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water
occurs, either continuously or intermittently.



95.03    SUPERINTENDENT.



The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and duties:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   Operation and Maintenance.  Operate and maintain the City
sewage system.



   2.   Inspection and Tests.  Conduct necessary inspections and tests
to assure compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters. 



   3.   Records.  Maintain a complete and accurate record of all
sewers, sewage connections and manholes constructed showing the location and
grades thereof.



95.04    PROHIBITED ACTS.



No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:



   1.   Damage Sewer System.  Maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewer system.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



   2.   Surface Run-off or Groundwater.  Connect or maintain a roof
downspout, sump pump, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



(Ord. 1386 - Dec. 13 Supp.)



   3.   Manholes.  Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system,
except by authority of the Superintendent. 



   4.   Objectionable Wastes.  Place or deposit in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the City, or in any area under
the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or
other objectionable waste.



   5.   Septic Tanks.  Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage except as provided in these chapters. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])



   6.   Untreated Discharge.  Discharge to any natural outlet within
the City, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of these
chapters. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])



   7.   New Interior or Exterior drains.  It shall be prohibited to
connect any new interior or exterior foundation drains. 



(Ord. 1386 - Dec. 13 Supp.)



95.05    SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.



The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located,
or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer, are hereby required
to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and
a building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper public
sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of
these Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to be completed within sixty
(60) days after date of official notice from the City to do so provided that
said public sewer is located within two hundred (200) feet (61 meters) of the
property line of such owner and is of such design as to receive and convey by
gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to it.  Billing for sanitary sewer
service will begin the date of official notice to connect to the public sewer.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [3f])



(IAC, 567-69.1[3])



95.06    SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.



The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so situated
that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for
permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions
stipulated by resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])



95.07    RIGHT OF ENTRY.



The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary
Sewer chapters.  The Superintendent or representatives shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical,
oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways
or facilities for waste treatment.



95.08    USE OF EASEMENTS.



The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement.  All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



95.09    SPECIAL PENALTIES.



The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters: 



   1.   Notice of Violation.  Any person found to be violating any
provision of these chapters except subsections 1, 3 and 4 of Section 95.04,
shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof.  The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations. 



   2.   Continuing Violations.  Any person who shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall be
in violation of this Code of Ordinances.  Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



   3.   Liability Imposed.  Any person violating any of the provisions
of these chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or
damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation. 



CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



 

96.01  Permit
 
96.06  Backwater Valves


96.02  Permit Fee and Connection Charge
 
96.07  Inspection Required


96.03  Plumber Required
 
96.08  Property Owner’s Responsibility


96.04  Connection Requirements
 
96.09  Abatement of Violations


96.05  Sewer Tap
 



 



96.01    PERMIT.



No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the City.  The application for the
permit shall set forth the location and description of the property to be
connected with the sewer system and the purpose for which the sewer is to be
used, and shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent.  The permit shall require the owner to
complete construction and connection of the building sewer to the public
sewer within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit, except that
when a property owner makes sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond
the owner’s control or peculiar hardship, such time period is inequitable
or unfair, an extension of time within which to comply with the provisions
herein may be granted.  Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at any
time for a violation of these chapters.



96.02    PERMIT FEE AND CONNECTION CHARGE.



The person who makes the application shall pay a fee, as established by
resolution of the Council, to the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the
permit and supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work.  In addition,
there may be a connection charge, as established by resolution of the
Council, paid to reimburse the City for costs borne by the City in making
sewer service available to the property served.



96.03    PLUMBER REQUIRED.



All installations of building sewers and connections to the public sewer
shall be made by a plumber approved by the City.  The Superintendent shall
have the power to suspend the approval of any plumber for violation of any of
the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters; a suspension, unless
revoked, shall continue until the next regular meeting of the Council.  The
Superintendent shall notify the plumber immediately by personal written
notice of the suspension, the reasons for the suspension, and the time and
place of the Council meeting at which the plumber will be granted a
hearing.  At this Council meeting the Superintendent shall make a written
report to the Council stating the reasons for the suspension, and the
Council, after fair hearing, shall affirm or revoke the suspension or take
any further action that is necessary and proper.  The plumber shall provide
a surety bond in the minimum sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) secured
by a responsible surety bonding company authorized to operate within the
State, conditioned to indemnify and save the City harmless against all losses
or damages that may arise from or be occasioned by the making of connections
with the public sewers or excavations therefor or by carelessness, negligence
or unskillfulness in making the same.  Such bond shall remain in force and
must be executed for a period of one year except that on such expiration it
shall remain in force as to all penalties, claims and demands that may have
accrued thereunder prior to such expiration.  In lieu of a surety bond, a
cash deposit of $10,000.00 may be filed with the City.



96.04    CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.



The installation of the building sewer and its connection to the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code and/or the City
of Grinnell Specifications.



96.05    SEWER TAP.



Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the
“Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location.  If no
properly located “Y” branch is available, a saddle “Y” shall be
installed at the location specified by the Superintendent.  The public sewer
shall be tapped with a tapping machine and a saddle, approved by the
Superintendent, shall be attached with a gasket and stainless steel clamps to
the sewer.  At no time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter
a manhole unless special written permission is received from the
Superintendent and in accordance with the Superintendent’s direction if
such connection is approved.



96.06    BACKWATER VALVES.



A backwater valve shall be installed on all new sanitary sewer services in
residential, commercial and industrial sewer installations.  The valve shall
be installed immediately inside or outside the footings.  The valve is
designed to be installed horizontally in the building drainage system and
shall be installed with the access opening at the top to permit access to the
valve for periodic inspections.



96.07    INSPECTION REQUIRED.



No building sewer shall be covered, concealed or put into use until it has
been tested, inspected and accepted as prescribed in the Plumbing Code.



96.08    PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.



All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.  The owner
shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



96.09    ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.



Building sewers, whether located upon the private property of any owner or in
the public right-of-way, which are constructed or maintained in violation of
any of the requirements of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance and the
same shall be abated by the City in the manner provided for the abatement of
nuisances.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])



CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS



 

97.01  Storm Water
 
97.04  Restricted Discharges – Powers


97.02  Prohibited Discharges
 
97.05  Special Facilities


97.03  Restricted Discharges
 
97.06  Control Manholes



 



97.01    STORM WATER.



No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface
water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary
sewer.  Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent and/or IDNR. 
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on
approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural
outlet.



97.02    PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



   1.   Flammable or Explosive Material.  Any gasoline, benzene,
naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 



   2.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials.  Any waters or wastes containing
toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a
public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2)
milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 



   3.   Corrosive Wastes.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than
5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 



   4.   Solid or Viscous Substances.  Solid or viscous substances in
quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works
such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 



97.03    RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.



No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion
of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance.  In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes,
the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities
of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.  The
substances restricted are:



   1.   High Temperature.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature
higher than one hundred fifty degrees (150º) F (65º C).



   2.   Fat, Oil, Grease.  Any water or waste containing fats, wax,
grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per
liter or 600 milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble matter. 



   3.   Viscous Substances.  Water or wastes containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32º F and 150º
F (0º to 65º C).



   4.   Garbage.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded,
that is, to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the
flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle
greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimension.



   5.   Acids.  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron
pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or
not. 



   6.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes.  Any waters or wastes
containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic
substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such
degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such
materials. 



   7.   Odor or Taste.  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or
other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding
limits which may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state,
federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.



   8.   Radioactive Wastes.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
Superintendent in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations. 



   9.   Excess Alkalinity.  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess
of 9.5. 



   10.   Unusual Wastes.  Materials which exert or cause: 



      A.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such
as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or
of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).



      B.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).



      C.   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works.



      D.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting “slugs” as defined herein. 



   11.   Noxious or Malodorous Gases.  Any noxious or malodorous gas
or other substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is
capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing
entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair. 



   12.   Damaging Substances.  Any waters, wastes, materials or
substances which react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release
noxious gases, develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids
in objectionable concentration or create any other condition deleterious to
structures and treatment processes. 



   13.   Untreatable Wastes.  Waters or wastes containing substances
which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment
processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



97.04    RESTRICTED DISCHARGES – POWERS.



If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to
the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section 97.03 and which in the judgment of the
Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard
to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:



   1.   Rejection.  Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from
the public sewage system;



   2.   Pretreatment.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition
for discharge to the public sewers; 



   3.   Controls Imposed.  Require control over the quantities and
rates of discharge; and/or 



   4.   Special Charges.  Require payment to cover the added cost of
handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges under the provisions of Chapter 99.



97.05    SPECIAL FACILITIES.



If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and/or IDNR and
subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.



97.06    CONTROL MANHOLES.



When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes.  Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent.  The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the
owner’s expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.



CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS



 

98.01  When Prohibited
 
98.05  Discharge Restrictions


98.02  When Required
 
98.06  Maintenance of System


98.03  Compliance with Regulations
 
98.07  Systems Abandoned


98.04  Permit Required
 
98.08  Disposal of Septage



 



98.01    WHEN PROHIBITED.



Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])



98.02    WHEN REQUIRED.



When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section
95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are employed
shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system complying with the provisions of this chapter.



(IAC, 567-69.1[3])



98.03    COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.



The type, capacity, location and layout of a private on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and
requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and
with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the
County Board of Health.



(IAC, 567-69.1[3 & 4])



98.04    PERMIT REQUIRED.



No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of Health.



98.05    DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.



It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch,
stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the
surface of the ground.



(IAC, 567-69.1[3]) 



98.06    MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.



The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall
operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no
expense to the City.



98.07    SYSTEMS ABANDONED.



At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an
on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section
95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with these Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])



98.08    DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.



No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at any
location except an approved disposal site.



CHAPTER 99
SEWER USER CHARGE



 

99.01  Purpose
 
99.07  Rates Outside the City


99.02  Definitions
 
99.08  Responsibility for Increased Costs


99.03  Use of Funds
 
99.09  Special Agreements Permitted


99.04  Charges Based on Usage
 
99.10  Payment of Bills


99.05  Rates for Service
 
99.11  Lien for Nonpayment


99.06  Special Rates
 



 



99.01    PURPOSE.



It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection
of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the City to collect
charges from all users who contribute wastewater to the City’s treatment
works.  The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used for the purpose
of operating, maintaining and retiring the debt for such public wastewater
treatment works.



99.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter, the following additional terms are defined:



   1.   “NH3 or NH3-N” (denoting ammonia) means that portion of
nitrogen in the form of proteins or intermediate decomposition products which
is determined by standard laboratory procedure for analysis of ammonia
nitrogen, expressed in milligrams per litter (mg/l).



   2.   “Normal domestic wastewater” means wastewater that has a
BOD concentration of not more than 250 mg/l average and 400 mg/l maximum, a
suspended solids concentration of not more than 300 mg/l average and 450 mg/l
maximum and an ammonia concentration of not more than 40 mg/l average and 60
mg/l maximum.



   3.   “Operation and maintenance” means those functions that
result in expenditures during the useful life of the treatment works for
materials, labor, utilities and other items which are necessary for managing
and for which such works were designed and constructed.  The term
“operation and maintenance” includes replacement.



   4.   “Replacement” means expenditures for obtaining and
installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during
the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed. 



   5.   “Residential user” means any contributor to the treatment
works whose lot, parcel or real estate, or building is used for domestic
dwelling purposes only.



   6.   “Treatment works” means any devices and systems used for
the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal
sewage, domestic sewage or liquid industrial wastes.  These include
intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping,
power and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvement,
remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide
a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well
facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the land that will
be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal
of residues resulting from such treatment (including land for composting
sludge, temporary storage of such compost, and land used for the storage of
treated wastewater in land treatment systems before land application); or any
other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating,
separating or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste.



   7.   “Useful life” means the estimated period during which the
treatment works will be operated.



   8.   “User charge” means that portion of the total wastewater
service charge which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the
cost of operation, maintenance and replacement of a designated part of the
wastewater treatment works. 



   9.   “Water meter” means a water volume measuring and recording
device.



99.03    USE OF FUNDS.



The user charge system shall generate adequate annual revenues to pay costs
of annual operation and maintenance including replacement and costs
associated with debt retirement of bonded capital associated with financing
the treatment works which the City may designate to be paid by the user
charge system.  Capital expenditures and expenditures for the improvements
to the sewer system may also be made from “Equipment Depreciation-Sewer”
and “Sewer Revenue Sinking” funds.  Any monies which have been
transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the sewer fund
shall be returned to their respective accounts as may be directed by the
Council.



99.04    CHARGES BASED ON USAGE.



Each user shall pay for the services provided by the City based on said
user's use of the treatment works as determined by water meter readings or
other appropriate methods acceptable to the Council.  All monthly user
charges shall be based on actual water usage, except where a more practical
method of wastewater measurement is available.  If a customer has a
consumptive use of water, or in some other manner uses water which is not
discharged into the wastewater collection system, the user charge for that
customer may be based on readings of a wastewater meter or separate water
meter installed and maintained at the customer's expense, and in a manner
acceptable to the City.



(Ord. 1471 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



99.05    RATES FOR SERVICE.



The monthly user charge shall be as follows:



   Minimum Charge:   $4.16



In addition to the minimum monthly service charge there is a monthly usage
charge based upon the cubic feet of water used as follows:



   0 - 1,700       $5.70 per 100 cubic feet



   All over 1,700      $4.11 per 100 cubic feet



All meters will be converted to gallons and the following monthly usage
charge based upon gallons of water will be used as follows:



   Minimum Charge:   $4.16



   All over 12,750 gal.   $4.11 per 750 gallons



   All over 24,750 gal.   $3.01 per 750 gallons



In addition to the minimum monthly charges, based on the following rates,
effective July 1, 2016, there shall be an increase of two percent (2%)
percent each year beginning with July 1, 2017 until and including July 1,
2020.



(Ord. 1424 - Sep. 16 Supp.)



99.06    SPECIAL RATES.



For those customers who contribute wastewater, the strength of which is
greater than normal domestic wastewater, a surcharge in addition to the
normal user charge may be collected.  The surcharge for operation and
maintenance including replacement is:



   $0.136 per pound B.O.D.



   $0.253 per pound SS



   $0.781 per pound NH3



99.07    RATES OUTSIDE THE CITY.



The user charge for customers located outside the corporate limits of the
City shall be at rates one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the above rates.



99.08    RESPONSIBILITY FOR INCREASED COSTS.



Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the
cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the City’s treatment works
or any user which discharges any substance which singly or by interaction
with other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation,
maintenance or replacement of the treatment works shall pay for such
increased costs.  The charge to each such user shall be as determined by the
appropriate financial personnel and approved by the Council.



99.09    SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED.



No statement in these chapters shall be construed as preventing a special
agreement, arrangement or contract between the Council, and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted subject to special conditions, rate and cost as established by the
Council.



99.10    PAYMENT OF BILLS.



All sewer user charges are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section 92.04 of this Code of Ordinances.  Sewer service may be discontinued
or disconnected in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 92.05
if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section 92.07 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the
event of a delinquent account.



(Ord. 1441 - Dec. 17 Supp.)



99.11    LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.



The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for sewer service charges to the premises. 
Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien
upon the premises served and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for
collection in the same manner as property taxes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84 [1])



CHAPTER 100
LIQUID WASTE HAULERS



 

100.01  Definitions
 
100.05  Identification of Source


100.02  Bond Required
 
100.06  Liquid Waste


100.03  Hours of Operation
 
100.07  Rates


100.04  Disposal Station
 
100.08  Other Regulations



 



100.01    DEFINITIONS.



The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:



   1.   “Disposal station” means the Grinnell Water Pollution
Control Plant.



   2.   “Liquid waste” means the contents of any privy vault,
cesspool, sump, septic tank, or chemical toilet intended to be disposed of at
the Grinnell Water Pollution Control Plant.



   3.   “Superintendent” means the wastewater treatment plant
supervisor or whoever is delegated with responsibility of the management and
operation of that portion of the City sewage treatment works, subject to such
rules and regulations as the Council may from time to time by resolution
prescribe.



   4.   “Waste hauler” means any person engaged in or engaging in
the collection, removal, or transportation of liquid waste for the purpose of
disposing of the same at the Grinnell Water Pollution Control Plant.



100.02    BOND REQUIRED.



Prior to the acceptance of any liquid waste from a waste hauler at the water
pollution control plant, said waste hauler shall deliver to the Clerk a
surety bond in favor of the City.  Said bond shall be in the penal sum of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) issued by a surety approved by the Clerk.



100.03    HOURS OF OPERATION.



Liquid wastes will be accepted at the disposal station between the hours of
7:30 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and between 1:00 p.m. and 3:30 p.m., Mondays through
Fridays.  Weekend and holiday hauling will not be accepted.  Emergency
hauling outside of the preceding times will be accepted only upon approval of
the Superintendent.  A surcharge for after-hours hauling will be assessed to
compensate for overtime hours worked by City personnel.



100.04    DISPOSAL STATION.



   1.   Waste haulers shall only dispose of liquid waste which is
permitted to be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
Disposal shall be done only at the disposal station, and only during the
hours of operation set forth in this chapter.



   2.   Waste haulers shall maintain the designated dumpsite at the
disposal station in a clean, orderly condition so as to avoid noxious odors
and unsanitary conditions.  The hauler must satisfactorily clean up any
spillage which occurs during discharge of hauled wastes.



   3.   A sample shall be taken by the hauler from each load discharged
at the disposal station and given to the City employees on duty at the
disposal station.



100.05    IDENTIFICATION OF SOURCE.



Waste haulers must provide documentation of the nature and origin of wastes
delivered to the disposal station at the time of delivery.  Such information
shall be provided on a manifest form provided by the Superintendent and shall
be presented to a City employee at the disposal station prior to the
discharge of the waste load.  A manifest form must be completed before each
load is discharged.  The manifest shall include:



   1.   The name, address and phone number of the waste generator;



   2.   The type of waste collected;



   3.   The volume of the load.



The Superintendent shall have the right to verify the source, chemical nature
and volume of the material prior to disposal; including the right to sample
and make chemical analysis thereof.  Fees for the actual cost of performing
such testing by the City or as billed by an outside private testing
laboratory shall be invoiced to the waste hauler who shall pay the same.



100.06    LIQUID WASTE.



Only domestic liquid waste will be accepted.  The Superintendent can refuse
to accept hauled wastes that can be land applied without additional
treatment.  Non- acceptable liquid wastes are as follows:



   1.   Hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR Part 261 of the Federal
Register, as amended;



   2.   Wastes which originate from a waste source outside of Poweshiek
County, Iowa.



   3.   Wastes from sand traps, such as those located in car, truck and
trailer washes, which primarily contain sand and dirt.



   4.   Wastes from oil and grease traps, such as those located in
restaurants, cafeterias and vehicle maintenance facilities.



   5.   Animal, commercial and industrial wastes.



100.07    RATES.



Fees for disposing of liquid waste at the disposal station are as follows:



   1.   Loads originating from within the corporate limits of Grinnell
– $8.50 per 100 gallons or portion thereof.



   2.   Loads originating from outside the corporate limits of Grinnell
– 150% of the rates charged for loads originating from within the corporate
limits of Grinnell.



   3.   After-hours liquid waste hauling for City personnel time –
$27.00 per hour; one hour minimum.



100.08    OTHER REGULATIONS.



The regulations set forth in this chapter are in addition to, and not in
substitution of, any other applicable Federal, State, or local statutes,
rules and regulations regarding the subject matter of waste collection,
transportation and disposal.



CHAPTER 101
SEWER BENEFITED DISTRICT  CONNECTION CHARGES



 

101.01  General Provisions
 
101.07  Summer Street and 14th Avenue Benefited District


101.02  Definitions
 
101.08  Hobart Street and 14th Avenue Benefited District


101.03  Connection Charge Required
 
101.09  East Street Lift Station Benefited District


101.04  Industrial Park Trunk Sewer Benefited District
 
101.10  South West Street Benefited District


101.05  East Street Benefited District
 
101.11  Broad Street Benefited District


101.06  Penrose Street Lift Station Benefited District
 
101.12  Penrose Street and Hobart Street Benefited District



 



101.01    GENERAL PROVISIONS.



The purpose of this chapter is to establish sanitary sewer connection charges
for certain properties within the City to recover the costs of designing and
constructing major sanitary sewer facilities from property owners who connect
to such facilities subsequent to their construction.  In the event the
Council determines the necessity of constructing a major sanitary sewer
facility and determines that the utilization of a connection charge is the
most equitable manner in which to recover the City’s costs associated
therewith, the Council shall first hold a public hearing on the proposed
adoption of an ordinance to establish a benefited district and a connection
charge.



101.02    DEFINITIONS.



The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:



   1.   “Benefited district” means that area of the City to which
sanitary sewer service can feasibly be provided by a major sanitary sewer
facility of a given design and capacity.



   2.   “Direct access frontage fee” means the cost per lineal foot
to be paid by the property owner having frontage on the sanitary sewer. 
This fee is considered to be the portion of the cost of the sanitary sewer
which serves as the local sanitary sewer lateral serving the property.  It
does not include the cost of the building sewer from the sanitary sewer to
the property being served.



   3.   “Frontage” means the length of property directly adjoining
the sanitary sewer, or the right-of-way or easement area where the sanitary
sewer has been constructed.



   4.   “Trunk line service fee” means the cost to be charged per
acre to all property which is able to access the sanitary sewer as a trunk
line sewer.  It does not include the cost of the building sewer to be
extended into the property being served by the trunk line or the cost of a
local lateral sewer to extend from the trunk line sanitary sewer to the
property being served.



101.03    CONNECTION CHARGE REQUIRED.



After the effective date of the ordinance establishing a benefited district
and a connection charge, no owner of property within the district, whose
property is eligible for connection to the sanitary sewer facility, shall
make such connection until the required connection charge has been paid. 
The sewer connection charge required by this chapter is in addition to (and
not in lieu of) any other fees required under other provisions of this Code
of Ordinances.  In the event a property owner makes a connection to the
sanitary sewer facility without having paid the required connection charge,
the City shall disconnect the building sewer until the required charge has
been paid.



101.04    INDUSTRIAL PARK TRUNK SEWER BENEFITED DISTRICT.



   1.   There is hereby established a benefited sanitary sewer district
to be known as the Industrial Park Trunk Sewer Benefited District.  Said
district lying within the following boundaries:



      The part of Section 28, T80N, R16W lying west of the west
right-of- way line of the Chicago Northwestern Railroad, except Lot A and Lot
B of the Grinnell Industrial Park Plat 2;



      Also, the part of Section 33, T80N, R16W lying west of the west
right- of-way of the Chicago Northwestern Railroad;



      Also, the north 600 feet of section 4, T79N, R16W lying west of
the west right-of-way of the Chicago Northwestern Railroad;



      Also, the east 950 feet of the North 600 feet of Section 5, T79N,
R16W;



      Also, the east 950 feet of the SE¼ of Section 32, T80N, R16W,
the east 950 feet of the SE¼ NE¼ Section 32, T80N, R16W, and the NE¼ NE¼
of Section 32, T80N, R16W, and the east 560 feet of the NW¼ NE¼ of Section
32, T80N, R16W;



      Also, the east 950 feet of Section 29, T80N, R16W.



   2.   The connection charge for connecting property in said benefited
district to the City sewer is twenty-nine dollars ($29.00) per lineal foot of
frontage as a direct access fee and four hundred four dollars ($404.00) per
acre as a trunk line service fee.



   3.   Businesses or entities within the Industrial Park Trunk Sewer
Benefited District, in existence or under construction upon the effective
date of Ordinance No. 1084, and located within the corporate limits of the
City, are eligible for connection to the sanitary sewer.  Owners of such
parcels located within said benefited district may connect such property to
the Industrial Park Trunk Sewer upon approval of their application for
connection, payment of the connection charge for the parcel, and construction
of appropriate connection structures, as determined necessary by the City
Engineer.  All other property located within the Industrial Park Trunk Sewer
Benefited District shall be eligible for connection to the trunk sewer upon
approval by the Council of an application for connection by the owner thereof
and payment of the connection charge for such property, provided that all
sanitary sewer improvements necessary to serve said property have been
constructed and approved by the City.



   4.   Industrial Park Plat 6.  Whereas Greater Grinnell Development,
Inc. has now recorded a plat known as Industrial Park Plat 6 and whereas the
connection charges for connection to the City Sewer System affect the cost of
development of said Industrial Park Plat 6, it is the purpose of this
subsection to reduce the sewer connection charges established by this section
for the lots lying within the Industrial Park Plat 6.  Such connection
charges are established for each lot located within said Industrial Park Plat
6 in accordance with the following table:



 




Lot No.

 

Connection Charge




1

 

$  6,369.00




2

 

$    992.00




3

 

$  3,938.00




4

 

$  2,081.00




5

 

$  5,505.00




6

 

$15,710.00




Total

 

$34,595.00





 



101.05    EAST STREET BENEFITED DISTRICT.



   1.   Legal Description.  There is hereby established a benefited
sewer district to be known as the East Street Benefited District, said
district lying within the following boundaries:



      The south 10 acres of the NW¼ of the NE¼ of Section 21; the
SW¼ of the NE¼ of Section 21; the north 10 acres of the NW¼ of the SE¼ of
Section 21; except the East Street right-of-way located in the previously
described portion of Section 21; all lying in T80N R16W of the 5th P.M.



The total area of the property benefited by the construction of the sanitary
sewer is 57.3 acres.  The actual total cost of the construction project for
the sanitary sewer was $77,480.00.



   2.   Schedule of Fees to be Paid by the Benefited Property upon
Connection to the Sanitary Sewer.  Fees to be paid consist of a direct
access fee and a trunk main fee.



      A.   A direct access fee shall be charged to all property
which is located adjacent to the East Street right-of-way and which extends
120.7 feet east from the East Street right-of-way and which is located no
farther than 100 feet south of the southern most sanitary sewer manhole
described in Section 3 of Ordinance No. 1172 or which is located no more than
100 feet north of the northern most portion of the sanitary sewer described
in Section 3 of said Ordinance 1172.  The direct access fee is based on a
lineal foot cost.  The total length over which a direct access fee is to be
charged is 1375 feet of the sanitary sewer plus the additional 100 feet south
of the manhole at East Street and Ogan Avenue and 100 feet north of the north
sanitary sewer manhole on East Street for a total of 1575 feet of frontage. 
The total cost to be charged as direct access fee is identified by this
section to be 60% of the total cost of construction, which equates $46,488.00
($77,480.00 x 60% = $46,488.00).  The direct access fee is $29.52 per lineal
foot ($46,488.00 ÷ 1575 LF = $29.52/lin. ft.). 



      B.   A trunk main fee shall be charged to all benefited
properties identified in subsection 1 of this section.  The total trunk main
fee is identified to be 40% of the total cost of construction or $30,992.00
($77,480.00 x 40% = $30,992.00).  The trunk main fee for the benefited
property is $540.87 per acre ($30,992.00 ÷ 57.3 acres = $540.87 per acre).



   3.   Exemptions.  There are no properties within the benefited area
which are exempt from the fees established in this section.



101.06    PENROSE STREET LIFT STATION BENEFITED DISTRICT.



   1.   Legal Description.  There is hereby established a benefited
sewer district to be known as the Penrose Street Lift Station Benefited
District, said district lying within the following boundaries:



      The south 90 feet of east 713.43 feet of NW¼ of the NE¼ of
Section 9; all of Blocks 1, 2, 3; Block 4 except Lot 6 and the south 20 feet
of Lot 5; Lots 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 in Block 5; Lots 1, 2 and the north 44
feet of Lot 3 in Block 6; and the 13th Avenue right-of-way all in College
Place Addition; Lot D of the SW¼ of the NE¼ of Section 9, except the south
320 feet; the SE¼ of the NE¼ of Section 9, except parcel A and Lot 1 in
Block 7 in College Place Addition; all located in the NE¼ of Section 9,
Township 80, Range 16 West of the 5th P.M.; Poweshiek County, Iowa



The total area of the property benefited by the construction of the lift
station is 54.09 acres.  The actual total cost of the construction project
for the lift station was $67,578.00.



   2.   Schedule of Fees to be Paid by the Benefited Property upon
Connection to the Sanitary Sewer System.  Fees to be paid consist of a lift
station tap-on fee.  The lift station tap-on fee shall be charged to all
benefited property identified in subsection 1 of this section.  The total
lift station tap-on fee is identified to be 100% of the total cost of
construction, or $67,578.00.  The lift station tap-on fee for the benefited
property is $1,249.36 per acre ($67,578.00 ÷ 54.09 acres = $1,249.36 per
acre).



   3.   Exemptions.  There are no properties within the benefited area
which are exempt from the fees established in this section.



101.07    SUMMER STREET AND 14TH AVENUE BENEFITED DISTRICT.



   1.   Legal Description.  There is hereby established a benefited
sewer district to be known as the Summer Street and 14th Avenue Benefited
District, said district lying within the following boundaries:



      Lots 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 in Block 1, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6
in Block 2, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 in Block 3, Lots 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
in Block 4, Lots 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 in Block 5; the north 180 feet of Block
6, the west half of the 13th Avenue right-of-way lying between Blocks 1 and
4, the 13th Avenue right-of-way lying between Blocks 2 and 3 of College Place
Addition; the south 90 feet of the west 445 feet of the east 713.43 feet of
the NW¼ of the NE¼ of Section 9; all of Lot D in the SW¼ of the NE¼
Section 9 except for the south 320 feet; all located in the NE¼ of Section
Township 80, Range 16 West of the 5th P.M.; Poweshiek County, Iowa



The total area of the property benefited by the construction of the sanitary
sewer is 14.97 acres.  The actual total cost of the construction project for
the sanitary sewer was $103,312.90.



   2.   Schedule of Fees to be Paid by the Benefited Property upon
Connection to the Sanitary Sewer System.  Fees to be paid consist of a
direct access fee and a trunk main fee.



      A.   A direct access fee shall be charged to all property
which is located adjacent to Summer Street, which extends 194 feet east of
the east right-of- way line of Summer Street and which begins at 1,222 feet
south of the north right-of-way line of 14th Avenue, and 165 feet west of the
west right-of-way line of Summer Street and which begins 1,072 feet south of
the north right-of- way line of 14th Avenue.  In addition all property which
is located adjacent to the 14th Avenue right-of-way line and which extends 90
feet north from the north 14th Avenue right-of-way line and which is located
no farther west than the west line of College Place Addition extended and no
farther east than 445 feet east of the west line of College Place Addition. 
The total cost to be charged as direct access fee is identified to be 60% of
the total cost of construction, which equates to $61,987.74 ($103,312.90 x
60% = $61,987.74).  The direct access fee is $24.53 per lineal foot
($61,987.74 ÷ 2,527 LF = $24.53/lin. ft.). 



      B.   A trunk main fee shall be charged to all benefited
properties identified in subsection 1 of this section.  The total trunk main
fee is identified to be 40% of the total cost of construction or $41,325.16
($103,312.90 x 40% = $41,325.16).  The trunk main fee for the benefited
property is $2,760.53 per acre ($41,325.16 ÷ 14.97 = $2,760.53 per acre).



   3.   Exemptions.  There are no properties within the benefited area
which are exempt from the fees established in this section.



101.08    HOBART STREET AND 14TH AVENUE BENEFITED DISTRICT.



   1.   Legal Description.  There is hereby established a benefited
sewer district to be known as the Hobart Street and 14th Avenue Benefited
District, said district lying within the following boundaries:



      That portion of the SE¼ of the NE¼ of Section 9, except parcel
A in the SE¼ of the NE¼, and Lot 1 in Block 7 in College Place Addition;
the south 90 feet of the east 268.5 feet of the NW¼ of the NE¼ of Section
9; Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 in Block 1, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and the north 40 feet
of 5 in Block 4 and east ½ of the 13th Avenue right-of-way lying between
Blocks 1 and 4 of College Place Addition; all located in the NE¼ of Section
9, Township 80, Range 16, West of the 5th P.M.; Poweshiek County, Iowa.



The total area of the property benefited by the construction of the sanitary
sewer is 39.10 acres.  The actual total cost of the construction project for
the sanitary sewer was $44,188.21.



   2.   Schedule of Fees to be Paid by the Benefited Property upon
Connection to the Sanitary Sewer System.  Fees to be paid consist of a
direct access fee and a trunk main fee.



      A.   A direct access fee shall be charged to all property
which is located adjacent to Hobart Street, which extends 194 feet both east
and west from the Hobart Street right-of-way line, which begins at a point
located 1,102.5 feet south of the north right-of-way line of 14th Avenue; in
addition, all property which is located adjacent to the 14th Avenue
right-of-way line and which extends 90 feet north from the north 14th Avenue
right-of-way and which is located no farther east than the east right-of-way
line of Hobart Street and no farther west than 268 feet west of the east
right-of-way line of Hobart Street.  The direct access fee is based on a
lineal foot cost.  The total length over which a direct access fee is to be
charged is 2,077.0 feet; the north side of 14th Avenue beginning at the east
right-of-way line of Hobart Street west 268.5 feet; the east side of Hobart
Street beginning at the north right-of-way line of 14th Avenue south 1,102.5
feet; and the west side of Hobart Street beginning at the north 14th Avenue
right-of-way line south 706 feet.  The total cost to be charged as direct
access fee is identified to be 60% of the total cost of construction, which
equates to $26,512.93 ($44,188.21 x 60% = $26,512.93).  The direct access
fee is $12.77 per lineal foot ($26,512.93 ÷ 2,077 = $12.77/lin. ft.).



      B.   A trunk main fee shall be charged to all benefited
properties identified in subsection 1 of this section.  The total trunk main
fee is identified to be 40% of the total cost of construction or $17,675.28
($44,188.21 x 40% = $17,675.28).  The trunk main fee for the benefited
property is $452.05 per acre ($17,675.28 ÷ 39.10 = $452.05 per acre).



   3.   Exemptions.  There are no properties within the benefited area
which are exempt from the fees established in this section.



101.09    EAST STREET LIFT STATION BENEFITED DISTRICT.



   1.   Legal Description.  There is hereby established a benefited
sewer district to be known as the East Street Lift Station Benefited
District, said district lying within the following boundaries:



      The west side of Iowa Highway 146 - NE¼ SE¼, Section 20,
Township 80N, Range 16W; SE¼ SE¼, Section 20, Township 80N, Range 16W; NE¼
NE¼, Section 29, Township 80N, Range 16W; SE¼ NE¼, Section 29, Township
80N, Range 16W; NE¼ SE¼, Section 29, Township 80N, Range 16W, excluding
City-owned airport property; SE¼ SE¼, Section 29, Township 80N, Range 16W,
excluding City- owned airport property; NE¼ NE¼, Section 32, Township 80N,
Range 16W; SW¼ NE¼, Section 32, Township 80N, Range 16W; and the SE¼ NE¼,
Section 32, Township 80N, Range 16W;



      The east side of Iowa Highway 146 which lies west of the Union
Pacific Railroad - NW¼ SW¼, Section 21, Township 80N, Range 16W; SW¼ SW¼,
Section 21, Township 80N, Range 16W; NW¼ NW¼, Section 28, Township 80N,
Range 16W; SW¼ NW¼, Section 28, Township 80N, Range 16W; NW¼ SW¼, Section
28, Township 80N, Range 16W; SW¼ SW¼, Section 28, Township 80N, Range 16W;
NW¼ NW¼, Section 33, Township 80N, Range 16W; and the SW¼ NW¼, Section
33, Township 80N, Range 16W;



      The west side of East Street which lies east of the Union Pacific
Railroad - SE¼ SW¼, Section 21, Township 80N, Range 16W; NE¼ SW¼, Section
21, Township 80N, Range 16W; SE¼ NW¼, Section 21, Township 80N, Range 16W;
and that portion of the NE¼ NW¼, Section 21, Township 80N, Range 16W which
lies south of a line 990 feet more or less south and parallel to the
centerline of Garfield Avenue.



      The east side of East Street – SW¼ NE¼, Section 21, Township
80N, Range 16W; and that portion of the NW¼ NE¼, Section 21, Township 80N,
Range 16W which lies south of a line 990 feet more or less south and parallel
to the centerline of Garfield Avenue.



The total area of the property benefited by the construction of the lift
station is 729.35 acres.  The actual total cost of the construction project
for the lift station was $196,900.00.



   2.   Schedule of Fees to be Paid by the Benefited Property upon
Connection to the Sanitary Sewer System.  Fees to be paid consist of a lift
station tap-on fee.  The lift station tap-on fee shall be charged to all
benefited property identified in subsection 1 of this section.  The total
lift station tap-on fee is identified to be 100% of the total cost of
construction, or $196,900.00.  The lift station tap-on fee for the benefited
property is $269.97 per acre ($196,900.00 ÷ 729.35 acres = $269.97 per acre).



   3.   Exemptions.  Properties which were connected to the sanitary
sewer collection system prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 1254 are
exempt from the fee established in this section.



101.10    SOUTH WEST STREET BENEFITED DISTRICT.



   1.   Legal Description.  There is hereby established a benefited
sewer district to be known as the South West Street Benefited District, said
district lying within the following boundaries:



      Starting at the NE corner of the SE¼ Section 29, Township 80N,
Range 16W, thence west along the north line of said section to the west
right-of-way line of Iowa Highway 146 to the point of beginning, thence west
800 feet along said line to a point, thence south 1,328 feet parallel to the
west right-of-way line of Iowa Highway 146 to a point, thence east 800 feet
to a point on the west right-of-way line of Iowa Highway 146, thence north
along the west right-of-way line of Iowa Highway 146 to the point of
beginning.



The total area of the property benefited by the construction of the sanitary
sewer is 24.39 acres.  The actual total cost of the construction project for
the sanitary sewer was $110,692.94.



   2.   Schedule of Fees to be Paid by the Benefited Property upon
Connection to the Sanitary Sewer Main.  Fees to be paid consist of a direct
access fee and a trunk main fee.



      A.   A direct access fee shall be charged to all property
located adjacent to the west side of Iowa Highway 146 which extends 400 feet
west of the west right-of-way line of Iowa Highway 146, beginning 1,312 feet
north of the centerline of Stagecoach Road and ending 1,328 feet from the
point of beginning.  The total cost to be charged as direct access fee is
identified to be 60% of the total cost of construction, which equates to
$66,415.76 ($110,692.94 x 60% = $66,415.76).  The direct access fee is
$50.01 per lineal foot ($66,415.76 ÷ 1,328 l. f. = $50.01/l. f.).



      B.   The trunk main fee shall be charged to all benefited
properties identified in subsection 1 of this section.  The total trunk main
fee is identified to be 40% of the total cost of construction or $44,277.18
($110,692.94 x 40% = $44,277.18).  The trunk main fee is $1,815.38 per acre
($44,277.18 ÷ 24.39 acres = $1,815.38/acre).



   3.   Exemptions.  There are no properties within the benefited area
which are exempt from the fees established in this section.



101.11    BROAD STREET BENEFITED DISTRICT.



   1.   Legal Description.  There is hereby established a benefited
sewer district to be known as the Broad Street Benefited District, said
district lying within the following boundaries:



      The east 383 feet of the north 464.6 feet of Lot A of Section 21;
the east 174.96 feet of the south 170.25 feet of Lot A of Section 21; Parcel
A of Lot B of Section 21; Lot B (except parcel A) and Lot C of Section 21;
all located in the NW ¼ of the NW ¼ of Section 21, Township 80, Range 16,
west of the 5th p.m.; Poweshiek County, Iowa.



      Note:  see benefited properties that are exempt, subsection 3.



The total area of the property benefited by the construction of the sanitary
sewer main is 7.91 acres.  The actual total cost of the construction project
for the sanitary sewer main was $48,442.00.



   2.   Schedule of Fees to be Paid by the Benefited Property upon
Connection to the Sanitary Sewer Main.  Fees to be paid consist of a direct
access fee and a trunk main fee.



      A.   A direct access fee shall be charged to all property,
which is located adjacent to Broad Street, which extends 406 feet east of the
east Broad Street right-of-way line and 383 feet west of the west Broad
Street right-of-way line, with the exception of the exempt properties noted
in subsection 3.  The direct access fee is based on a lineal foot cost. 
The total length over which a direct access fee is to be charged is 968.84
feet; the east side of Broad Street beginning at the south Garfield Avenue
right-of-way line south 632.75 feet; the west side of Broad Street beginning
at the south right-of-way line of Garfield Avenue south 634.25 feet.  The
total cost to be charged as direct access fee is identified by this section
to be 60% of the total cost of construction, which equates to $29,065.20
($48,442.00 X 60% = $29,065.20).  The direct access fee is $30.00 per lineal
foot ($29,065.20 ÷ 968.84 = $30.00 / Lin. Ft.)



      B.   A trunk main fee shall be charged to all benefited
properties identified in subsection 1 of this section.  The total trunk main
fee is by this section identified to be 40% of the total cost of construction
or $19,376.80 ($48,442.00 x 40% = $19,376.80).  The trunk main fee for the
benefited property is $2,449.66 per acre.  ($19,376.80 ÷ 7.91 = $2,449.66
per acre). 



   3.   Exemptions.  Benefited properties which are exempt from this
project specific tap-on-fee.



      A.   The south 148.16 feet of Parcel A, Lot B, Section 21.



      B.   The south 150 feet of the east 383 feet of the north
464.6 feet of Lot A, Section 21.



(Ord. 1312 – Sep. 09 Supp.)



101.12    PENROSE STREET AND HOBART STREET BENEFITED DISTRICT.



   1.   Legal Description.  There is hereby established a benefited
sewer district to be known as the Penrose Street and Hobart Street Benefited
District, said district lying within the following boundaries:



      Parcel C of  Lot 3 of the SW ¼ of the NW ¼ of Section 10,
Township 80 north, Range 16 west of the 5th p.m.; the NW ¼ of the NW ¼ of
Section 10, Township 80 north, Range 16 west of the 5th  p.m.; the east 716
feet of the west 910 feet of the north 13 acres of the S ½ of the SE ¼ of
the NE ¼ of Section 9, Township 80 north, Range 16 west of the 5th p.m.; the
E ½ of the N ½ of the SE ¼ of the NE ¼, including Lot 1 of Section 9,
Township 80 north, Range 16 west of the 5th p.m.; the E ½ of the S ½ of the
NE ¼ of the NE ¼ of Section 9, Township 80 north, Range 16 west of the 5th
p.m., all located in Poweshiek County, Iowa.



The total area of the property benefited by the construction of the sanitary
sewer main is 46.27 acres.  The actual total cost of the construction
project for the sanitary sewer main was $276,465.00.



   2.   Schedule of Fees to be Paid by the Benefited Property upon
Connection to the Sanitary Sewer Main.  Fees to be paid consist of a direct
access fee and a trunk main fee.



      A.   A direct access fee shall be charged to all property,
which is located adjacent to sanitary sewer between Hobart Street and Penrose
Street, extending 80 feet north of the north property line of the north 13
acres of the S ½ of the SE ¼ of the NE ¼ of Section 9, Township 80 north,
Range 16 west of the 5th P.M., beginning at a point 194 feet east of the east
Hobart Street right-of-way and extending east to the west Penrose Street
right-of-way line, and to the south 150 feet beginning at a point 194 feet
east of the east Hobart Street right-of-way and extending 716 feet east along
said property line; beginning at a point located 80 feet north of the north
property line of the north 13 acres of the S ½ of the SE ¼ of the NE ¼ of
Section 9, Township 80 N, Range 16 west of the 5th P.M., extending west 150
feet from the west Penrose Street right-of-way line and north along said
right-of-way 910 feet; beginning at the point of the north property line of
Parcel C of Lot 3 of the SW ¼ of the NW ¼ of Section 10, Township 80 north,
Range 16 west of the 5th P.M. and the east Penrose Street right-of-way line,
extending east 150 feet from the east Penrose street right-of-way line and
south along said right-of- way 243 feet.  The direct access fee is based on
a lineal foot cost.  The total length over which a direct access fee is to
be charged is 2,995 feet; the west side of Penrose Street - 910 feet; the
east side of Penrose Street – 243 feet; the north side of the main between
Hobart and Penrose Streets – 1,126 feet and the south side -716 feet . 
The total cost to be charged as direct access fee is identified by this
section to be 60% of the total cost of construction, which equates to
$165,879.00 ($276,465.00 X 60% = $165,879.00).  The direct access fee is
$55.38 per lineal foot ($165,879.00 ÷ 2,995 = $55.38 / Lin. Ft.)



      B.   A trunk main fee shall be charged to all benefited
properties identified in subsection 1 of this section.  The total trunk main
fee is by this section identified to be 40% of the total cost of construction
or $110,586.00 ($276,465.00 x 40% = $110,586.00).  The trunk main fee for
the benefited property is $2,390.01 per acre.  ($110,586.00 ÷ 46.27 =
$2,390.01 per acre).



   3.   Exemptions.  There are no properties within the benefited area
which are exempt from the fees established in this section.



(Ord. 1320 – Sep. 09 Supp.)



CHAPTER 102
STORM WATER UTILITY



 

102.01  Purpose and Findings
 
102.06  Determination and Modification of Storm Water Service Charges or Fees


102.02  Establishment of a Storm Water Utility
 
102.07  Exemptions and Credits Applicable to Storm Water Service Charges


102.03  Definitions
 
102.08  Service Charge Billing, Delinquencies and Collections


102.04  Scope of Responsibility for the Drainage System
 
102.09  Appeals


102.05  Requirements for On-Site Storm Water Systems, Enforcement and
Inspections
 
102.10  Storm Water Service Charges/Fees



 



102.01    PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   1.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a policy and
procedure for managing and controlling the quantity and quality of storm
water runoff, wherever it may be found, within the City limits.  The
management shall include the establishment of a storm water utility to
provide revenues for whatever aspects of this requirement are deemed
appropriate by the Council. 



   2.   The storm water needs in the City include, but are not limited
to, protecting the public safety, health and welfare of its citizens.  Storm
water management programs and facilities result in both service and benefit
to all properties, property owners, citizens and residents of Grinnell in a
variety of ways.  The service and benefit rendered or resulting from
provision of storm water management systems and facilities may differ
depending on many factors and considerations, including, but not limited to,
location, demands and impacts imposed on the storm water systems and programs
and risk of exposure. 



   3.   The City presently owns and operates numerous storm water
management systems and facilities which have been developed over many
years.  The future usefulness of the existing storm water systems owned and
operated by the City, and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the
ability of the City to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use
and enhance storm water systems and facilities in Grinnell in concert with
the management of other water resources in the City.  In order to do so, the
City must have adequate and stable funding for its storm water management
program operating and capital investment needs.



   4.   The Council finds, concludes and determines that a utility
provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering and
funding storm water management services in Grinnell.



   5.   An equitable approach to funding storm water management
services and facilities can be provided by adopting a schedule of service
charges upon properties that is related to the burden of storm water quality
and quantity requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the
City.  Such schedule of service charges can be complemented by other funding
methods which address specific needs.  This schedule will be adopted by
resolution.  Impervious area is the most important factor influencing storm
water service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the City,
and therefore is an appropriate parameter for calculating storm water service
charges.



   6.   The City may be required under Federal and State mandates to
provide increased quantity or quality controls to mitigate the impacts of
pollutants that may be discharged from the storm water collection system. 
Therefore, it is appropriate to impose a storm water user charge upon all
users of property that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the storm
sewer system, whether private or public in nature.



102.02    ESTABLISHMENT OF A STORM WATER UTILITY.



   1.   There is hereby established a Storm Water Management Utility
within the City which shall be responsible for creating revenue for storm
water management throughout the City’s corporate limits, and which shall
provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and
enhancement of storm water systems and facilities.  Such utility shall be
under the operational direction of the Water Resources Director and the
financial direction of the City Clerk.  The corporate limits of the City, as
increased from time to time, shall constitute the boundaries of the Storm
Water Utility District.



   2.   The City shall establish a Storm Water Enterprise Fund in the
City budget and accounting system, separate and apart from its General Fund,
for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the
purposes and responsibilities of the utility, including but not limited to,
rentals, rates, charges, fees and licenses as may be established by the
Council.  All revenues and receipts of the Storm Water Utility shall be
deposited promptly upon receipt into the Storm Water Enterprise Fund, to be
held and invested in trust for the purposes dedicated, and expended
exclusively for purposes of the utility, including (but not limited to)
operational actions, capital project construction, or payment of bonds
funding capital projects.  No other funds of the City shall be deposited in
the Storm Water Enterprise Fund or commingled with dedicated storm water
revenues, except that other revenues, receipts and resources not accounted
for in the Storm Water Enterprise Fund, including grants, loans, and bond
proceeds may be combined with and applied to storm water management capital
projects as deemed appropriate by the Council upon recommendation of the
Water Resources Director and City Manager.



102.03    DEFINITIONS.



The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:



   1.   “Customers of the Storm Water Utility” include all persons,
properties and entities serviced by and/or benefiting from the utility’s
acquisition, management, maintenance, extension and improvement of the public
storm water management systems and facilities and regulation of public and
private storm water systems, facilities and activities related thereto, and
persons, properties and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited
as a result of the storm water management program.  See also “user” and
“occupant.”



   2.   “Detached dwelling unit” means developed land containing
one structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains
one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for
occupancy by one family.  Detached dwelling units may include houses,
manufactured homes and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or
parcels of land.  Developed land may be classified as a detached dwelling
unit despite the presence of incidental structures associated with
residential uses such as garages, carports or small storage buildings, or the
presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use
does not result in additional impervious areas, such as parking spaces,
playgrounds or structures or additions to the building which are used as
offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship, or
similar nonresidential uses.  “Detached dwelling unit” does not include
developed land containing structures used primarily for nonresidential
purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured
home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by others than the owners
of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple dwelling unit
residential properties.



   3.   “Developed land” means property altered from its natural
state by the construction or installation of more than five hundred (500)
square feet of impervious surface as defined in this chapter.



   4.   “Duplexes” and “triplexes” mean developed land
containing two (duplex) or three (triplex) attached residential dwelling
units located on one or more parcels of land.  At a minimum, each dwelling
unit shall be charged one ERU.



   5.   “Equivalent residential unit (ERU)” of impervious area
means the median average impervious coverage of detached dwelling unit
properties in the City as determined by the City, and shall be used as the
basis for determining storm water service charges to detached dwelling unit
properties or classes of detached dwelling unit properties and other
properties. Three thousand two hundred fifty (3,250) square feet of
impervious area is one equivalent unit.



   6.   “Hydrologic response” of a property is the manner and means
whereby storm water collects, remains and infiltrates and is conveyed from a
property.  It is dependent on several factors, including (but not limited
to) the presence of impervious area, the size, shape, topographic, vegetative
and geologic conditions of a property, antecedent moisture conditions and
groundwater conditions on a property.



   7.   “Impervious surfaces” means those areas which prevent or
impede the infiltration of storm water into the soil as it enters natural
conditions prior to development.  Common impervious areas include, but are
not limited to:  rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways,
parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and
other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces which prevent or impede
the natural infiltration of storm water runoff which existed prior to
development.



   8.   “Multiple dwelling unit residential properties” means
developed land whereon four or more attached residential dwelling units are
located and includes, but is not limited to, apartment houses, condominiums,
town homes, attached single-family homes, boarding houses, group homes,
hotels and motels, retirement centers, and other structures in which four or
more family groups commonly and normally reside or could reside.  In the
application of storm water service charge rates, multiple dwelling unit
properties shall be treated as other developed lands.  At a minimum, each
multiple dwelling unit shall be charged one ERU.



   9.   “Occupant” means the person residing or doing business on
the property.  In a family or household situation, the person responsible
for the obligation imposed shall be the adult head of the household.  In a
shared dwelling or office situation, the adult legally responsible for the
management or condition of the property shall be responsible.



   10.   “Other developed land” means (but is not limited to)
multiple dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home and mobile
home parks, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures,
industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas
covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties,
public and private schools, research stations, hospitals and convalescent
centers and agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces.



   11.   “Owner” means the legal owner of record as shown on the
tax rolls of Poweshiek County except where there is a recorded land sale
contract, the purchaser there under shall be deemed the owner.



   12.   “Service charge” means the periodic rate, fee or charge
applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of
the service provided by the City Storm Water Utility.  Service charges are
based on measurable parameters which influence the Storm Water Utility’s
cost of providing services and facilities, with the most important factor
being the amount of impervious area on each parcel of developed land.  The
use of impervious areas as a service charge rate parameter shall not preclude
the use of other parameters, or the grouping of properties having similar
characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a
consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one or
more classes of similarly situated properties whose impact on the Storm Water
Utility’s cost of providing storm water management services and facilities
is relatively consistent.  Storm water service charges may also include
special charges to the owners of particular properties for services or
facilities uniquely related to storm water management of that property,
including (but not limited to) charges for development plan review,
inspection of development projects and on-site storm water control systems,
and enhanced levels of storm water services above those normally provided by
the City.



   13.   “Storm water management systems” address the issues of
drainage management (flooding) and environmental quality (pollution, erosion
and sedimentation) of receiving rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds and
reservoirs through improvements, maintenance, regulation and funding of
plants, works, instrumentalities and properties used or useful in the
collection, retention, detention and treatment of storm water or surface
water drainage.



   14.   “Undeveloped land” means land in its unaltered natural
state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a
hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state. 
Undeveloped land shall have minimal concrete pavement, asphalt or compacted
gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would
prevent infiltration of storm water or cause storm water to collect,
concentrate or flow in a manner materially different from that which would
occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state.  For the purposes of
this chapter, undeveloped land includes property altered from its natural
state by the creation or installation of less than five hundred (500) square
feet of impervious surface.



   15.   “User” means any person who uses property which maintains
connection to, discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the City
for storm water management.  The occupant of any habitable property is
deemed the user.  If the property is not occupied, then the owner shall be
deemed the user.



102.04    SCOPE OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE DRAINAGE SYSTEM.



   1.   The City drainage system consists of all rivers, streams,
creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, channels, ditches,
swales, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls and
other structures, natural or man-made, within the political boundaries of the
City which control and/or convey storm water through which the City
intentionally diverts surface waters from its public streets and
properties.  The City owns or has legal access for purposes of operation,
maintenance and improvements to those segments of this system which (i) are
located within public streets, rights-of-way, and easements; (ii) are subject
to easements of rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use, or other
permanent provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance and/or
improvement of systems and facilities; or (iii) are located on public lands
to which the City has adequate access for operation, maintenance and/or
improvement of systems and facilities.  Operation and maintenance of storm
water systems and facilities which are located on private property or public
property not owned by the City and for which there has been no public
dedication of such systems and facilities for operation, maintenance and/or
improvement of the systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal
responsibility of the property owner.



   2.   It is the intent of this chapter to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare of all properties and persons in general, but not
to create any special duty or relationship with an individual person or to
any specified property within or outside the boundaries of the City.  The
City expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and
defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the City, its
officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach
of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created.  To the
extent any permit plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the
City as a condition precedent to any activity by or upon property not owned
by the City, pursuant to this chapter or any other regulatory ordinance,
regulation or rule of the City under Federal or State law, the issuance of
such permit, plan approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a
warranty, expressed or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action,
including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a
permit, seeking the imposition of money damages against the City, its
officers, employees or agents.



102.05    REQUIREMENTS FOR ON-SITE STORM WATER SYSTEMS, ENFORCEMENT AND
INSPECTIONS.



   1.   All property owners and developers of developed real property
within the City shall provide, manage, maintain and operate on-site storm
water systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain and discharge storm water
in a safe manner consistent with all City, State and Federal laws and
regulations.



   2.   Pursuant to 364.12(3) or successor section of the State Code,
any failure to meet this obligation may constitute a nuisance and may be
subject to an abatement action filed by the City.  In the event a nuisance
is found to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such
reasonable time as allowed by the City, the City may enter upon the property
and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the
actual cost thereof assessed against the owner in the same manner as a tax
levied against the property.  The City shall have the right, pursuant to the
authority of this chapter, for its designated officers and employees to enter
upon private and pubic property owned by entities other than the City, upon
reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct
surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance.



102.06    DETERMINATION AND MODIFICATION OF STORM WATER SERVICE CHARGES OR
FEES.



Storm water service charges or fees shall be determined and modified from
time to time by action of the Council.  In setting or modifying such rates
it shall be the objective of the Council to establish rates, fees and charges
that are fair and reasonable, reflect the value of storm water management
services and facilities to those properties who benefit therefrom, and which,
together with any other sources of revenue that may be made available to the
storm water utility, will be sufficient to meet the cost of budgeted
programs, services and facilities, including (but not limited to) the payment
of principal and interest on revenue bond obligations incurred for
construction and improvements to the storm water system, as applicable.



102.07    EXEMPTIONS AND CREDITS APPLICABLE TO STORM WATER SERVICE CHARGES.



   1.   Except as provided in this section, no public or private
property shall be exempt from storm water utility service charges.  No
exception, credit, offset or other reduction in storm water service charges
shall be granted based on the age, tax or economic status, race or religion
of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the storm water utility’s
cost of providing storm water services and facilities.  Streets, alley ways
and highways in the public and private domain are exempt from utility service
charges or connection fees.



   2.   A storm water utility service charge formula is available in
the office of the City Clerk.  The following areas are exempt from utility
service charges.



      A.   Undeveloped land, as defined in this chapter, shall be
exempt from storm water service charges.



      B.   Railroad rights-of-way shall be exempt from storm water
service charges.  However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings or other
developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from storm
water service charges.



      C.   All property owned and managed by the City of Grinnell. 
This does not include private drives, walks and other impervious surfaces
constructed across public rights-of-way and other City owned and managed
properties.



102.08    SERVICE CHARGE BILLING, DELINQUENCIES AND COLLECTIONS.



   1.   A storm water service charge bill may be sent through the
United States mail or by alternative means, notifying the customer of the
amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past
due.  Failure to receive a bill is not justification for nonpayment. 
Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of
each parcel of developed land, as shown from public land records of Poweshiek
County, shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fee.  If a customer is
under-billed or if no bill is sent for developed land, the City may back bill
for a period of up to one year, but shall not assess penalties for any
delinquency.  If a customer is over-billed, such customer may request
reimbursement for no more than one year of the over-billing, but no interest
costs may be claimed for over-billing.  In addition to the foregoing rates
there shall be paid by each storm water utility customer a service charge of
ten percent (10%) to be paid with and at the same time of paying the storm
water utility charges; provided, however, such service charge shall be
discounted for each period if the storm water utility charges are paid on or
before the fifteenth (15th) day of each month within which the storm water
utility fees become due and payable.



   2.   Suits for collection shall be commenced by the City in the Iowa
District Court for Poweshiek County.  No lien shall be imposed for
delinquent collections unless a judgment is first obtained from a court of
competent jurisdiction.  The City may employ any lawful means to collect
funds owed, and is not restricted to filing a lawsuit.



   3.   The storm water utility service charge may be billed on a
common statement and collected along with other City utility services,
usually on a bi-monthly basis.



   4.   Lien for Nonpayment.  The owner of the premises served is
severally liable for charges for the operation and maintenance of the storm
water drainage system.  Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall
constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the
Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property
taxes. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



   5.   Lien Notice.  A lien for delinquent storm water service
charges shall not be certified to the County Treasurer unless prior written
notice of intent to certify a lien is given to the owner of the premises. The
notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less
than thirty (30) days prior to certification of the lien to the County
Treasurer.



(Ord. 1354 – Nov. 11 Supp.)



102.09    APPEALS.



Any person who believes the provisions of this chapter have been applied to
such person in error may appeal in the following manner:



   1.   An appeal shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk.  In
the case of service charge appeals, the appellant shall complete a Storm
Water Utility Service Charge Appeal form available from the City Clerk and
Water Resources Director and provide all supporting documentation requested
by this appeal.



   2.   Using the information provided by the appellant and information
utilized by the City to calculate charges, the Water Resources Director shall
conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to
the appeal in writing within thirty (30) days.



   3.   In response to an appeal, the Water Resources Director may
recommend to the City Clerk an adjustment to the storm water service charge
applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent
of this chapter.



   4.   A decision of the Water Resources Director which is adverse to
an appellant may be further appealed to the City Council within thirty (30)
days of receipt of notice of the adverse decision.  Notice of the appeal
shall be served on the City Clerk by the appellant, stating the grounds for
appeal and shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the
impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence
the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events.  The City
Council shall issue a written decision on the appeal within forty-five (45)
days.  All decisions of the City Council shall be mailed to appellant at the
address the appellant lists on the notice of appeal.



   5.   There shall be no further administrative appeal beyond the City
Council.



102.10    STORM WATER SERVICE CHARGES/FEES.



   1.   Storm water service charges shall accrue beginning December 1,
2006, and shall be billed periodically thereafter to customers, except as
specific exemptions and credits may apply.



   2.   The following ERU Standards shall apply:



      A.   Storm water service charges are per equivalent
residential unit (ERU) or increment thereof.  The charge per ERU shall be
established by resolution of the Council.



      B.   The monthly minimum charge for developed property shall
be one ERU.



      C.   All developed lands not classified as detached dwelling
units shall be billed for one equivalent residential unit (ERU) for each
3,250 square feet of impervious surface or increment thereof.



CHAPTER 103
SUMP PUMP DISCONNECTION PROGRAM



 

103.01  Purpose
 
103.05  Approved Removal Procedure


103.02  Applicability
 
103.06  Non-Compliance Fee for Sump Pump Connection


103.03  Notification Procedure
 
103.07  Rebuttable Presumption


103.04  Removal of Sump Pump Connections Required
 
103.08  Inspection and Notice



 



103.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to eliminate sump pump connections to the
sanitary sewer system by the establishment of procedures of notification and
procedures of removal for sanitary sewer system customers to disconnect from
the sanitary sewer system within a specified period of time, and to establish
monthly surcharge payments for sanitary sewer system customers with previous
notification that fail to disconnect sump pump within a specified period of
time following the notification. This chapter does not apply to footing
drains, foundation drains and roof downspouts.



103.02    APPLICABILITY.



This chapter shall be applicable to all, located within the corporate
boundaries of the City of Grinnell, properties that are not currently
connected to a public storm sewer system, public footing drain collection
system or approved surface water collection system. The downtown area is
defined as the north to Highway 6, west to Highway 146, south to Interstate
Railroad and east to State Street and shall be not be included in the sump
pump disconnection program.



103.03    NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE. 



The Water Resources Director shall notify, by certified mail or other method
as approved by the City Council, sanitary sewer system customers that
directly or indirectly connect sump pumps, sump pits, or similar systems or
devices to the sanitary sewer system.  The notification shall mandate that
disconnection from the sanitary sewer system is required within the specified
period of time and installation of a sump pump pit, sump pump, discharge
line, and connection to a public storm sewer system or public footing drain
collection system, yard or street is required.



103.04    REMOVAL OF SUMP PUMP CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.



All indirect or direct connections of sump pump, sump pit, or similar system
or device intended to collect and convey groundwater along; adjacent to,
beside or under the footing, foundation or basement of any building shall be
disconnected from the sanitary sewer system within three hundred sixty-five
(365) days after the notification by the Water Resources Director.



103.05    APPROVED REMOVAL PROCEDURE.



The approved removal procedure for indirect or direct connected sump pumps,
sump pits, or similar systems or devices to the sanitary sewer system footing
drain connection to the sanitary sewer system under this chapter must fully
comply with the following:



   1.   Prior Inspection.  Prior to any work on the removal or
disconnection of sump, sump pit or similar system or device connection, the
existing connection must be inspected by designated City representative or
State of Iowa Licensed Plumber.  The sanitary sewer system customer shall be
responsible to schedule the inspection.



   2.   Approved System.  An approved system for the removal of sump
pump, sump pit or similar system or device connection must be used. The
approved system shall consist of a sump pump and sump pit with a discharge to
an approved storm sewer connection, an approved footing drain collection
connection, an approved yard location, or to the street.



   3.   Plugging of Existing Connection.  Any direct or indirect
connection between the sump pump and/or sump pit and the sanitary sewer
system of the building shall be permanently plugged.



   4.   Construction Inspection.  Upon installation of the sump pump
pit, sump pump, and plumbing connections; and prior to installation of the
concrete floor, the sanitary sewer customer shall be responsible to schedule
a City inspection or certificate or statement from a State of Iowa Licensed
Plumber of the completed work.



   5.   Floor Drain Connection Prohibited.  The new system shall be
installed in such a manner that direct or indirect flow from the footing
drain to a floor drain shall not be possible.



   6.   Post-Construction Inspection.  The installation of the sump
pump and associated facilities work shall be inspected by the City or
certificate from a State of Iowa Licensed Plumber. The sanitary sewer
customer shall be responsible to schedule the post-construction inspection.



103.06    NON-COMPLIANCE FEE FOR SUMP PUMP CONNECTION.



Any sanitary sewer customer with direct sump pump connection to the sanitary
sewer system, being properly notified as described under Section 103.03, and
remaining in place three hundred sixty-five (365) days after said
notification, shall be subject to a monthly surcharge for potential
un-metered flow contributed to the sanitary sewer system.  The payment will
be in addition to all other sanitary sewer user charges.  Monthly surcharge
fee table for non-compliance is as follows:



 

First Year
 
$20.00 per Month


Second Year
 
$40.00 per Month


Third Year
 
$60.00 per Month


Fourth Year
 
$80.00 per Month


Fifth Year
 
$100.00 per Month



 



103.07    REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION. 



There is a presumption that all sanitary sewer customers receiving
notification have a sump pump connection to the sanitary sewer system as
prohibited under this chapter. Effective three hundred sixty-five (365) days
after notification that properties that have not completed an approved
removal procedure or other equivalent removal procedure inspected and
documented by the City shall be presumed to have a sump pump connection for
purposes of this chapter. The payment shall continue until such time as the
City determines through inspection the sump pump, sump pit or similar device
connection no longer exists.



103.08    INSPECTION AND NOTICE.



The City may conduct periodic inspections of properties to confirm there are
no indirect connections of a sump pump to the sanitary sewer system. If
during an inspection the City determines there is an indirect connection as a
result of a modification of the system to allow for an indirect connection,
failure to maintain or replace a failed sump pump that would allow an
indirect connection to the sanitary sewer system, or such other cause as may
allow a direct or indirect connection, the City shall provide the property
owner a written notice. The property owner shall be provided thirty (30) days
to cure the defect and to arrange for a re-inspection by the City or a State
of Iowa Licensed Plumber. If at the end of thirty (30) days the indirect
connection has not been inspected and determined to have been removed, the
property shall be subject to the un-metered flow charge provisions under this
chapter.  The payment shall continue until such time as the City determines
through inspection the indirect footing drain connection no longer exists.



(Ch. 103 - Ord. 1387 - Dec. 13 Supp.)



CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL



 

105.01  City Collection; Private Collection Permit Required; Citizen Hauling
of Miscellaneous Items
 
105.03  Separation of Yard Waste Required


105.02  Definitions
 
105.04  Compost Piles



 



105.01    CITY COLLECTION; PRIVATE COLLECTION PERMIT REQUIRED; CITIZEN
HAULING OF MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS.



   1.   The collection of solid waste within the City is an essential
public service; and to better ensure compliance with the waste management
hierarchy established by Section 455B.301A of the Code of Iowa; and to
discharge the duties of the City regarding the establishment of a
comprehensive solid waste reduction plan as mandated in Sections 455B.302,
455B.306, 455B.307 of the Code of Iowa; and to regulate the unlawful
discarding of solid waste pursuant to Section 455B.307A of the Code of Iowa;
and to track the City's compliance with waste volume reduction goals as set
out in Sections 455D.3 and 455D.4 of the Code of Iowa - it is necessary for
the City to assume the overall responsibility for the collection of all solid
waste generated within its corporate boundaries and to limit collection of
said solid waste to the City, using City equipment and City employees, except
as provided for in subsection 2 of this section.



   2.   No person shall collect, transport, or dispose of garbage,
refuse or rubbish who does not possess a City permit issued by the City
Manager.  Permits will be issued only for roll-off container service if said
service is not provided for directly by the City and only after the applicant
furnishes evidence to the City Manager that safe, sanitary equipment will be
used to collect, store, and transport garbage, refuse or rubbish. 
Commercial businesses that require the use of roll-off container service for
solid waste collection may utilize the services of an entity that has been
properly permitted by the City for roll-off container service only, as
provided for in this section.



   3.   It is permissible for persons to haul their miscellaneous items
in private vehicles to a sanitary disposal project without obtaining a permit.



   4.   All city-owned trash carts and containers, which are provided
for use by rental in the Central Business District and/or other commercial or
residential districts, are to be used only with the permission of the
individual or business which is renting said cart or container.  No person
or business shall dispose of garbage, refuse, yard waste, or solid waste in
any trash cart or container unless authorized by the person renting or owning
the cart or container.  Any person who disposes of garbage, refuse, yard
waste, or solid waste in an unauthorized cart or container shall be in
violation of this Code of Ordinances.



105.02    DEFINITIONS.



As used in this chapter, the following words and terms have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:



   1.   "Brush" includes limbs removed from trees, fallen branches,
entire trees, hedges.



   2.   "Cart" means a rust-resistant, watertight residential solid
waste holder, with a handle and tight-fitting cover and a capacity of 35
gallons to 95 gallons.



   3.   "Central Business District" is the area from 5th Avenue to
Commercial Street, between Main and Broad Streets comprised of mixed-use
property.



   4.    "Commercial business" means any school, church, business,
non-profit organization or governmental entity located within the City.



   5.   "Commercial collection" means a collection program sponsored
and/or conducted by the City designed to collect solid waste and recyclables
from commercial, mixed-use or multi-family properties and, in certain
circumstances, residential structures.



   6.   "Commercial property" means any property containing only
commercial businesses.



   7.   "Commercial recyclables" means recyclable materials including
(but not limited to) metal, paper (including white office paper), magazines
and newspapers, mixed paper and corrugated cardboard and plastic. 
Additional recyclables may be designated by Council resolution.



   8.   "Container" means a rigid, rust-resistant, watertight device
for containing solid waste, fitted with a cover which shall be permanently
attached to the device and kept in a closed position except when depositing
or removing solid waste, and which is capable of being handled by mechanical
means, and not exceeding six (6) cubic yards in capacity.



   9.   "Degradable" is as defined in Section 455B.301 of the Code of
Iowa.



   10.   "Garbage" includes animal, fruit and vegetable matter and
other byproducts resulting from the preparation of food and drink.  All food
wastes are considered garbage.



   11.   "Mixed-use property" means a property containing one or more
residential dwelling units and one or more commercial businesses.



   12.   "Multi-family property" means a property consisting of one or
more multi-family structures and which is located within the corporate limits
of the City.



   13.   "Multi-family structure" means a building with more than five
(5) residential dwelling units, which is not included in the City's
residential collection program and which is located within the corporate
limits of the City.



   14.   "Multi-family unit" means any residential dwelling unit
located in a multi-family structure which is located within the corporate
limits of the City.



   15.    "Recyclable materials" means waste material that is capable
of being recycled, as defined herein.



   16.   "Recycling" means any process by which waste or materials
which otherwise become waste are collected, separated, or processed and
reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products.  This
does not include any form of energy recovery.



   17.    "Refuse" means the worthless or useless part of inorganic
matter which, if allowed to accumulate, would not be pleasing to the sight
and could be detrimental to the best interests of the community. 



   18.   "Residential collection" means a collection program sponsored
and/or conducted by the City designed for collection of solid waste from
residential structures.



   19.   "Residential dwelling unit" means one or more rooms in a
dwelling designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having
its own permanently installed cooking and sanitary facilities, and which may
or may not have its own water meter.



   20.   "Residential recyclables" means recyclable materials including
(but not limited to) metal, paper, plastic, cardboard, and used motor oil
that, at the sole discretion of the City,  can be dropped off at the City's
public service department to be recycled.



   21.   "Residential structure" means a building with no more than
five (5) residential dwelling units, and which is included in the City's
residential collection program, and which is located within the corporate
limits of the City.



   22.   "Rubbish" means useless waste or rejected organic matter which
is offensive to sight and smell, dangerous to public health, or detrimental
to the best interest of the community, and includes small dead animals such
as (but not limited to) cats, dogs or birds.



   23.   "Sanitary disposal project" is as defined in Iowa
Administrative Code 567 - 101.3.  "Sanitary disposal project" does not
include a pyrolysis or gasification facility as defined in Section 455B.301
of the Code of Iowa.



(Ord. 1478 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



   24.   "Solid waste" means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other
similar discarded solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to
such materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and
domestic activities.  Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by
Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa.  Solid waste does not include any of the
following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)



      A.   Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.



      B.   Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the
Code of Iowa, except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of
specific wastes have been adopted by the State Environmental Protection
Commission.



      C.   Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as
defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.



      D.   Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to
acceptable State or federal standards.



      E.   Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel
manufacturing process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled
manner and not as a discarded material.



      F.   Material that is legitimately recycled pursuant to
Section 455D.4A of the Code of Iowa.



      G.   Post-use polymers or recoverable feedstocks that are any
of the following:



         (1)   Processed at a pyrolysis or gasification facility.



         (2)   Held at a pyrolysis or gasification facility prior
to processing to ensure production is not interrupted.



(Ord. 1478 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



   25.   "Solid waste, collectable" means garbage, rubbish, and refuse,
as defined in this section.  Hypodermic needles, such as those used for
medical injection, will be collected under the following conditions: 
Needles must be separated from the other solid waste and placed in an
appropriately sealed container such as an empty coffee can, or plastic milk
jug, and clearly labeled as to the contents.  Solid waste which has other
characteristics which require special handling will be handled on a
case-by-case basis by the department supervisor.



   26.   "Solid waste, non-collectable" includes undrained garbage,
refuse, and rubbish of a liquid or semi-liquid nature, and unwrapped or
improperly placed solid waste.



   27.   "Tags" are stickers purchased for application to plastic trash
bags for disposal of trash in the Central Business District, for extra trash
in residential areas that won't fit in a cart, and bulky items and
appliances.  Other than in the Central Business District, all trash under 60
lbs. with tags, needs to be taken to the public services department for
disposal. "Yard waste" includes grass clippings, leaves and garden waste only.



105.03    SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED.



All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other
solid waste accumulated on the premises and shall be managed in accordance
with Section 455D.9 of the Code of Iowa.  Residents may bring yard waste and
brush to a site designated by the City Manager.  Charges for use of said
facility shall be set by Council resolution.



105.04    COMPOST PILES.



Compost piles are to be located in rear yards only, and shall either be
located at least six (6) feet from any lot lines, or screened from view of
neighboring lots.  Compost piles shall not produce obnoxious odors or
liquids frequently detectable on adjoining properties.  Neither shall they
be kept in a way that poses danger to public health.  Kitchen scraps (except
those specifically excluded herein) may be composted with yard wastes on an
owner's premises, if they are completely covered with leaves, grass clippings
or a layer of soil.  Meat, poultry, fish, bones and quantities of animal
fats shall not be disposed of in a compost pile.



(Ch. 105 - Ord. 1465 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE



 

106.01  Administration
 
106.06  Fees and Charges – Residential Collection


106.02  Solid Waste Preparation; Carts and Containers
 
106.07  Fees and Charges – Commercial Collection


106.03  Residential Collection
 
106.08  Payment of Bills


106.04  Commercial Collection
 
106.09  Lien for Nonpayment


106.05  Time of Collections
 
 



 



106.01    ADMINISTRATION.



The administration of this chapter shall be by the City Manager or such
employee as may be designated by the City Manager.



106.02  SOLID WASTE PREPARATION; CARTS AND CONTAINERS.



   1.   Weight.  Plastic bags and contents for mixed-use properties in
the Central Business District shall not exceed forty (40) pounds in weight.



   2.   Maintenance.  Carts or containers must be maintained in good
condition with no ragged or sharp edges or other defects which may impede or
injure solid waste collectors.  Defective carts or containers may be tagged
for repairs or total replacement by solid waste collectors.  If not repaired
or replaced in fifteen (15) days, defective carts and containers may be
collected as solid waste.  Defective carts or containers will not be dumped
until repairs or replacement has been made.  Arrangements may be made with
the department supervisor for the disposal of defective carts or
containers.  Such arrangements may carry an additional charge.



   3.   Number of Carts or Containers.  It is the duty of the owner of
commercial, mixed-use or multi-family property or a residential structure to
make arrangements for proper carts or containers to handle the garbage and
refuse on-site.  Carts and containers must be sufficient in number to hold
wastes accumulated between regular collections.



   4.   Preparation of Solid Waste. 



      A.   Garbage, refuse and rubbish must be drained of free
liquid and placed into the cart or container.



      B.   Used engine oil must be placed in a closed plastic jug
with a secure cap, and may be dropped off at the public services
department.  Used oil is not accepted from commercial properties.



      C.   If a cart or container falls apart when lifted, the
customer will be responsible for placing the solid waste in another cart or
container.



   5.   Damage to Carts and Containers.  The City will not be
responsible for damage to carts or containers.



106.03    RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION.



   1.   Collection Points.  Any collectable solid waste which is
placed within a public right-of-way is considered intended for collection by
the residential collection program and may be collected by City personnel
under the terms and conditions of this chapter.  All residential structures
must use carts (except as provided for in subsections 3 and 4 of this
section).  All carts and trash bags (Central Business District only) set out
for collection by the City shall be placed within zero feet to four feet of
the curb or edge of the traveled portion of the roadway, adjacent to the
property on which the waste was generated.  All lids on the carts shall be
completely closed.  Authorization for other collection points may be
arranged for handicapped or physically disabled persons as set out in Section
106.06(2) of this chapter.  The City Manager may also approve special
arrangements for the placement of carts, containers or bags for collection
where such arrangements are beneficial to both the customer and the City. 
City collection personnel have the right to refuse to collect solid waste on
any private property where dogs are loose, or other conditions exist which
could be harmful to the collector.  All residential solid waste will be
collected by the City at least once each week. 



   2.   Special Collections.  Whenever any person requests the removal
of solid waste by the City at a time other than the regularly scheduled
collection day, or when solid waste is considered non-collectable,
collectable by special arrangements, or is improperly placed for collection,
an additional charge may be made.  Special items such as (but not limited
to) appliances, brush, batteries, and tires shall only be collected by
special arrangement with the public service department. 



   3.   Collection Option for Certain Residential Structures.  Upon
approval by the City Manager, residential structures with two to five
residential dwelling units and a single water meter may elect to use
containers rather than carts.  In such cases, the City Manager must approve
the location of said containers in order to ensure ready access to the
containers by City collection personnel.



   4.   Mixed-use properties in the Central Business District will
dispose of their solid waste in plastic garbage bags with an appropriately
priced tag attached.



   5.   Residential Recyclables.  Any residential customer that wishes
to recycle acceptable items (plastic, paper, newspaper, metal, and used motor
oil, etc.), may do so by taking them to the public service department and
placing them in the appropriate containers labelled for recycling.  No glass
shall be placed in with these recyclables.



106.04    COMMERCIAL COLLECTION.



   1.   Commercial Property Service Option.  All commercial properties
shall be provided with solid waste collection service by the City based on
the size and frequency of service that is selected by the commercial property
owner or commercial business, and approved by the City Manager.  Said
collection service shall be selected so as to sufficiently provide for and
ensure that all solid waste generated by the commercial business or
commercial property can be properly and completely enclosed in carts or
containers between regularly scheduled collections by the City.  In no event
shall solid waste collection service be provided to a commercial business or
commercial property by the City less than one time per week.



   2.   Multi-Family Property Service Option.  All multi-family
properties shall be provided with solid waste collection service by the City
based on the size and frequency of service that is selected by the
multi-family property owners or tenants, and approved by the City Manager. 
Said collection service shall be selected so as to sufficiently provide for
and ensure that all solid waste generated by the multi-family property can be
properly and completely enclosed in carts or containers between regularly
scheduled collections by the City.  In no event shall solid waste collection
service be provided by the City less than one time per week.



   3.   Mixed-Use Property Service Option.  All mixed-use properties
shall be provided with solid waste collection service by the City based on
the size and frequency of service that is selected by the multi-use property
owners or tenants, and approved by the City Manager.  Said collection
service shall be selected so as to sufficiently provide for and ensure that
all solid waste generated by the mixed-use property can be properly and
completely enclosed in carts or containers between regularly scheduled
collections by the City.  In no event shall solid waste collection service
be provided by the City less than one time per week.  Customers in the
Central Business District will be required to use plastic trash bags with the
appropriately priced tag attached unless a container is provided.



   4.   Cart/Container Options.



      A.   Commercial Property.  Commercial businesses and
commercial properties, in general, are required to use containers provided by
the City.  Upon the approval of the City Manager, small commercial
businesses, as defined by resolution of the Council, may elect to use
carts.  Under certain circumstances, and with prior approval from the City
Manager, commercial businesses and/or commercial properties may elect to
share containers.



      B.   Multi-Family Property.  Multi-family properties are
required to use containers provided by the City.  Under certain
circumstances, and with prior approval from the City Manager, multi-family
properties may elect to share containers.



      C.   Mixed-Use Property.  Mixed-use properties, in general,
are required to use containers provided by the City.  However, upon the
approval of the City Manager, mixed-use properties containing only small
commercial businesses, as defined by resolution of the Council, and only
containing up to five (5) residential dwelling units, may elect to use carts,
except in the Central Business District where plastic trash bags will be used
with the appropriately priced tag Under certain circumstances, and with prior
approval from the City Manager, mixed-use properties may elect to share
containers. 



   5.   Collection Points.  Any solid waste or collectable solid waste
which is placed in a container or cart, or any commercial recyclables placed
in a device intended for their storage and subsequent collection by the City,
shall be considered intended for collection by the commercial collection
program and may be collected by City personnel under the terms and conditions
of this chapter.  City collection personnel have the right to refuse to
collect solid waste on any private property where dogs are loose, or other
conditions exist which could be harmful to the collector.



      A.   Commercial Property.  Containers shall be located at the
side or rear of a building in such a manner as to provide free and clear
access to City collection personnel.  Small commercial businesses, as
defined by resolution of the Council, may, with prior approval from the City
Manager, place carts or plastic trash bags (Central Business District only)
in front of a building, but only after 7:00 p.m. on the day prior to the
regularly scheduled collection day.  The exact placement in front of a
building for said carts or plastic trash bags for small commercial businesses
shall be approved by the City Manager and shall be placed in such a manner as
to provide free and clear access to City collection personnel.



      B.   Multi-Family Property.  Containers shall be located at
the side or rear of a building in such a manner as to provide free and clear
access to City collection personnel.



      C.   Mixed-Use Property.  Containers shall be located at the
side or rear of a building in such a manner as to provide free and clear
access to City collection personnel.  However, upon the approval of the City
Manager, mixed-use properties containing only small commercial businesses, as
defined by resolution of the Council, and only containing up to five (5)
residential dwelling units, and who use carts rather than containers may
place carts or plastic trash bags (Central Business District only) in front
of a building, but only after 7:00 p.m. on the day prior to the regularly
scheduled collection day.  The exact placement in front of a building shall
be approved by the City Manager and shall be placed in such a manner as to
provide free and clear access to City collection personnel. 



      D.   All containers shall be placed on a hard surfaced area
that is designed to support the weight of the container and its contents. 
The area that is used to roll the container to the collection vehicle shall
also be hard surfaced and free of any holes or cracks that would keep the
container from rolling freely.



      E.   All containment areas shall have a minimum clearance of
three feet around each container to allow collection personnel access to
empty containers without injury.  Containment areas with gates shall have a
means to latch or hold gates in the open position while collection personnel
are accessing containers.



      F.   It is the responsibility of all commercial customers to
remove snow and ice from and around containers or carts.



   6.   Special Collections.  Whenever any person requests the removal
of solid waste at a time other than the regularly scheduled collection day,
or when solid waste is considered non-collectable, collectable by special
arrangements, or is improperly placed for collection, an additional charge
may be made.     



   7.   Duty to Report.  Whenever a commercial property, multi-family
property or mixed-use property has more than one commercial business and/or
more than one residential dwelling unit, and has a single water meter, it is
the duty of the owner of said property to report to the City Manager the
number of units contained within the property and any changes in the number
of units on a quarterly basis.



   8.   Commercial Recyclables.  The City shall provide commercial
recycling collection service on a weekly basis to all commercial properties,
multi-family properties, and mixed-use properties.  The cost for said
service shall be included in the City's established rate structure for
commercial solid waste service.  All commercial properties, multi-family
properties, and mixed-use properties shall be required to establish effective
programs to collect for recycling by the City, at a minimum, two categories
of commercial recyclables.  Commercial recyclables shall be placed in
specially designated and clearly marked containers provided by the City for
that purpose.  All recycling containers, 2 yds and larger,  must be placed
out for collection at the specified location in the Central Business
District, unless an alternate location has been approved in advance by the
City Manager. 



106.05    TIME OF COLLECTIONS.



   1.   Residential Collection.  Residential collection begins at 7:00
a.m. each morning, Monday through Friday.  Collections take place on a
specified route each day.  Each resident owner or tenant of a residential
dwelling unit has been notified or will be notified as to the day of the week
on which said solid waste is to be collected.  No owner or tenant or other
person responsible for the residential structure shall place any solid waste
carts at the curb more than twenty-four (24) hours outside of the scheduled
collection day, or leave any cart at the curb more than twenty-four (24)
hours following the scheduled collection day.  If solid waste carts are
placed at the curb outside of the time specified in this section, the City
may, in addition to any civil penalties, collect such solid waste and charge
the owner, tenant or other person responsible for the residential structure
for a special collection at the rate established by resolution of the
Council.  If solid waste placed at the curb is scattered about by animals,
other activity or weather, the owner, tenant or other person responsible for
the residential structure which generated the solid waste shall be
responsible for the proper cleanup of the area.  If such cleanup is not
completed within twenty-four (24) hours of the regular collection day, the
City may file a civil penalty against the tenant, owner or other person
responsible for the residential structure and may charge the tenant, owner or
other person responsible for the residential structure for a special
collection at the rate set by resolution of the Council.



   2.   Commercial Collection.  Commercial collection shall begin at a
time to be determined in the sole discretion of the City, each day Monday
through Friday.  Collections take place on a specified route each day. 
Each commercial, mixed-use and multi-family property has been notified or
will be notified as to the day or days of the week on which solid waste is to
be collected.  No owner or tenant or other person responsible for a
commercial or mixed-use property which has been authorized by the City
Manager to place disposable carts in front of a building for collection shall
leave any cart in front of the building beyond midnight of the scheduled
collection day.  If disposable carts or solid waste are placed at the front
of the building outside of the time specified in this section, the City may,
in addition to any civil penalties, collect such carts or solid waste and
charge the owner, tenant or other person responsible for the commercial or
mixed-use property for a special collection at the rate set by resolution of
the Council.  If solid waste which is placed at the front of a building are
scattered about by animals, other activity or weather, the owner, tenant or
other person responsible for the commercial or mixed-use property which
generated the solid waste shall be responsible for the proper cleanup of the
area.  If such cleanup is not completed within twenty-four (24) hours of the
regular collection day, the City may file a civil penalty against the tenant,
owner or other person responsible for the commercial or mixed-use property
and may charge the tenant, owner or other person responsible for the
commercial or mixed-use property for a special collection at the rate set by
resolution of the Council.



106.06    FEES AND CHARGES – RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION.



There shall be rates and fees established and collected by the City for its
residential collection service as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



   1.   Base Fee.  For each residential structure, a base monthly fee
for each residential dwelling unit shall be established by resolution of the
Council for one solid waste collection each week.  This fee will be charged
directly to each residential dwelling unit within residential structures in
the City in cases where each residential dwelling unit has its own water
meter.  For residential structures containing a single water meter, the base
monthly fee shall be multiplied by the number of residential dwelling units
in the residential structure and the resultant total shall be added to the
water bill for the residential structure as a separate charge for residential
collection service.   



      A.   Any collectable solid waste which will fit into the cart
shall be placed into such cart.  The lid on the cart shall be completely
closed and nothing shall stick out of the cart. However, it is recognized
that there will be collectable solid waste which will not fit into a cart. A
solid waste sticker may be purchased and attached to the item and it can be
taken to the public service department for disposal.  It is anticipated that
solid waste stickers will be attached to solid waste such as end tables,
other furniture and similar items that fit the definition of collectable
solid waste, but are too bulky to fit into the carts and weight up to sixty
(60) pounds.  The office of the Clerk or the public service department must
be notified within twenty-four (24) hours prior to the regular collection day
that the item will be placed at the curb for collection on the regular
collection day. .   



      B.   The charge for a solid waste sticker shall be established
by resolution of the Council, plus tax as may be applicable.  Solid waste
stickers may be purchased at the office of the Clerk or at other locations
throughout the community. 



      C.   In addition to the solid waste stickers, special stickers
will be available for purchase at the office of the Clerk or at other
locations throughout the community.  The special stickers will be sold
individually.  The charge for a special sticker shall be established by
resolution of the Council, plus tax as may be applicable.  The special
stickers are intended to be attached to each individual collectable solid
waste item which weighs more than sixty (60) pounds.  In addition to
attaching the special sticker to the item to be collected, the office of the
Clerk or the public service department must be notified within twenty-four
(24) hours prior to the regular collection day that the item will be placed
at the curb for collection on the regular collection day.  By way of
illustration (and not of limitation), items requiring a special sticker may
be microwave ovens, dehumidifiers, washing machines, dryers, water heaters,
dish washers, large pieces of furniture, or similar materials. 



      D.   In the event that there are large quantities of
collectable solid waste to be picked up at a single location, arrangements
may be made for a special collection.  Special collections may be arranged
by contacting the office of the Clerk or the public services department. 
The rates for special collections shall be established by resolution of the
Council. 



      E.   Collectable solid waste which is not placed into carts,
does not have a solid waste sticker or special sticker attached or for which
special collection arrangements have not been made, will be treated as solid
waste set out in violation of this chapter and will be subject to special
collection charges and civil penalties.



   2.   Additional Fees for People with Disabilities.  Handicapped or
physically disabled individuals, with an appropriate signed application on
file at the Clerk's office, may have solid waste carts taken to the curb
under a fee schedule to be determined by resolution of the Council.



   3.   Vacancies.  Fees, in full, shall be charged to residential
dwelling units which receive service during a calendar month, regardless of
the number of collections made during said month.  For those residential
dwelling units that are subject to a base monthly fee in accordance with
subsection 1 of this section, the base monthly fee may be credited back to
the owner of the residential dwelling unit if said owner provides
documentation to the Clerk's office showing that said residential dwelling
unit has been vacant for a minimum of three consecutive full calendar months
prior to the application for a credit refund.



106.07    FEES AND CHARGES – COMMERCIAL COLLECTION.



There shall be rates and fees established and collected by the City for its
commercial collection service as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



   1.   General.  The rates and fees for commercial collection service
shall be established by resolution of the Council in a manner that provides
for different rates and fees depending on the size and frequency of service
selected.  Generally, each commercial business, commercial property,
multi-family property, and mixed-use property shall pay the appropriate
monthly fee for commercial collection service based on the size and frequency
of service selected by said entity.  Each commercial business, commercial
property, multi-family property, and mixed-use property may request a change
in commercial collection service levels selected no more often than once
every month to coincide with the City's monthly billing process.  Any
requests for changes in service levels must be filed with the office of the
Clerk no later than 10 days prior to the beginning of the month the service
change will become effective.



   2.   Special Rates.



      A.   Mixed-Use and Multi-Family Properties.  For each
mixed-use or multi-family property that has been authorized by the City to
use carts, a base monthly fee for each unit within the mixed-use or
multi-family property shall be established by resolution of the Council, for
one collection of solid waste each week each week.  The purpose of this fee
is to help offset the cost of commercial collection service.  This fee will
be charged directly to each unit within mixed-use or multi-family properties
in the City in cases where each unit has its own water meter.  For mixed-use
or multi -family properties containing a single water meter, the base monthly
fee shall be multiplied by the number of units in the mixed-use or
multi-family property and the resultant total shall be added to the water
bill for the mixed-use or multi-family property as a separate charge for
commercial collection service.  In addition, each mixed-use or multi-family
property that has been authorized by the City to use carts shall be subject
to all additional requirements and fees regarding the use of carts, solid
waste stickers and special stickers, as set forth in Section 106.06(1) of
this chapter, except that in no circumstance shall reusable carts be placed
out for collection in front of a building in violation of Section 106.04(5)
this chapter.



      B.   Small Commercial Businesses.  For each small commercial
business, as defined by resolution of the Council, that has been authorized
by the City to use carts as provided for in Section 106.04(4) of this
chapter, a base monthly fee for each small commercial business shall be
established by resolution of the Council, for one collection of solid waste
each week.  The purpose of this fee is to help offset the cost of commercial
collection services.  This fee will be charged directly to each small
commercial business that uses carts, in cases where the small commercial
business has its own water meter.  For properties containing a single water
meter, the base monthly fee shall be multiplied by the number of small
commercial businesses in the property and the resultant total shall be added
to the water bill for the property as a separate charge for commercial
collection service.  In addition, each small commercial business that has
been authorized by the City to use carts shall be subject to all additional
requirements and fees regarding the use of carts, solid waste stickers and
special stickers, as set forth in Section 106.06(1) of this chapter, except
that in no circumstance shall reusable carts be placed out for collection in
front of a building in violation of Section 106.04(5) this chapter.



      C.   Shared Containers.  For commercial businesses,
commercial properties, multi-family properties, mixed-use properties, or any
combination thereof, that have been authorized by the City to share
containers as provided for in Section 106.04(4) of this chapter, the entities
electing to share containers ("participating entities") shall determine the
size and frequency of service and designate one participating entity to be
responsible for notifying the Clerk's office of the same, and for making
payment of all fees and charges owed to the City related to commercial
collection service selected by the participating entities ("responsible
party").  The Clerk's office must be notified of the name and billing
address of the responsible party at least 15 days prior to the commencement
of shared container service.  It shall be the duty of the responsible party
to notify the City of any requests for changes to the size and frequency of
service in accordance with subsection 1 of this section.  Furthermore, it
shall be the responsibility of the participating entities to determine the
apportionment of costs for the selected commercial collection service among
the participating entities. 



   3.   Vacancies.  Fees, in full, shall be charged to each commercial
property, multi-family property, and mixed-use property which receives
service during a calendar month, regardless of the number of vacant units in
said property during the month.  For those mixed-use properties that have a
single water meter and have been authorized by the City to use carts, the
base monthly fee per unit as established in paragraph 2(A) of this section
may be credited back to the owner of the mixed-use property for each vacant
unit based on the number of vacant units, provided that the owner of said
unit must provide documentation to the Clerk's office showing that said unit
has been vacant for a minimum of three consecutive full calendar months prior
to the application for a credit refund.   



106.08    PAYMENT OF BILLS.



All fees are due and payable under the same terms and conditions provided for
payment of a combined service account as contained in Section 92.04 of this
Code of Ordinances.  Solid waste collection service may be discontinued in
accordance with the provisions contained in Section 92.05 if the combined
service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions contained in Section
92.07 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.



106.09    LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.



The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof are jointly
and severally liable for fees for solid waste collection and disposal.  Fees
remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises
served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for
collection in the same manner as property taxes. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



(Ch. 106 - Ord. 1466 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE



 

110.01  Franchise Granted
 
110.06  Franchise Fees


110.02  Mains and Pipes; Indemnification
 
110.07  Management Fees


110.03  Excavations
 
110.08  Term of Franchise


110.04  Construction and Maintenance
 
110.09  Entire Agreement


110.05  Service Requirements
 
 



 



110.01    FRANCHISE GRANTED.



There is hereby granted to INTERSTATE POWER AND LIGHT COMPANY, hereinafter
referred to as the "Company," its successors and assigns, the right,
franchise and privilege for the term of twenty-five (25) years from and after
the passage, adoption, approval and acceptance of the ordinance codified by
this chapter,† to lay down, maintain and operate the necessary pipes, mains
and other conductors and appliances in, along and under the streets, avenues,
alleys and public places in the City as now or hereafter constituted, for the
purpose of distributing, supplying and selling gas to said City and the
residents thereof and to persons and corporations beyond the limits thereof;
also the right of eminent domain as provided in Section 364.2 of the Code of
Iowa. The term "gas" as used in this franchise shall be construed to mean
natural gas only.



† EDITOR'S NOTE:  Ordinance No. 1395 adopting a gas franchise for the City
was passed and adopted by the Council on June 2, 2014.



110.02    MAINS AND PIPES; INDEMNIFICATION.



The mains and pipes of the Company must be so placed as not to interfere
unnecessarily with water pipes, drains, sewers and fire plugs which have been
or may hereafter be placed in any street, alley and public places in said
City nor unnecessarily interfere with the proper use of the same, including
ordinary drainage, or with the sewers, underground pipe and other property of
the City, and the Company, its successors and assigns shall hold the City
free and harmless from all damages arising from the negligent acts or
omissions of the Company in the laying down, operation and maintenance of
said natural gas distribution system.



110.03    EXCAVATIONS.



In making any excavations in any street, alley, or public place, Company, its
successors and assigns, shall protect the site while work is in progress by
guards, barriers or signals, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of the
streets, and shall back fill all openings in such manner as to prevent
settling or depressions in surface, pavement or sidewalk of such excavations
with same materials, restoring the condition as nearly as practical.  The
Company shall not be required to restore or modify public right of way,
sidewalks or other areas in or adjacent to the Company project to a condition
superior to its immediate previously existing condition. 



110.04    CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.



The Company shall, at its cost, locate and relocate its existing facilities
or equipment in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the City in
such a manner as the City may at any time reasonably require for the purposes
of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of
the street or alley or any public improvement thereof, in or about any such
street or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such
improvement.  If the City orders or requests the Company to relocate its
existing facilities or equipment for any reason other than as specified
above, or as the result of the initial request of a commercial or private
developer, the Company shall receive payment for the cost of such relocation
as a precondition to relocating its existing facilities or equipment.  The
City shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its public works
projects so as not arbitrarily to cause the Company unreasonable additional
expense in exercising its authority under this section.  The City shall also
provide a reasonable alternative location for the Company’s facilities as
part of its relocation request.  Prior to the City abandoning or vacating
any street, avenue, alley or public ground where the Company has electric
facilities, the City shall grant the Company a utility easement for said
facilities.  If the City fails to grant the Company a utility easement for
said facilities prior to abandoning or vacating a street, avenue, alley or
public place, the City shall at its cost and expense obtain easements for
existing Company facilities.  The Company shall not be required to relocate,
at its cost and expense, Company facilities in the public right of way that
have been relocated at Company expense at the direction of the City in the
previous ten years.



110.05    SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.



Said Company, its successors and assigns, shall throughout the term of the
franchise distribute to all consumers gas of good quality and shall furnish
uninterrupted service, except as interruptible service may be specifically
contracted for with consumers; provided, however, that any prevention of
service caused by fire, act of God or unavoidable event or accident shall not
be a breach of this condition if the Company resumes service as quickly as is
reasonably practical after the happening of the act causing the interruption.



110.06    FRANCHISE FEES.



   1.   In its monthly billing the Company shall include a franchise
fee of one percent (1%); provided, however, that such fee shall increase to
four percent (4%) effective January 1, 2016, on the gross receipts from the
sale of natural gas to the Company’s natural gas customers located within
the corporate limits of the City.



   2.   The franchise fee shall be applied to all customers’ bills in
accordance with Iowa Code Chapter 364.2 and 423B.5.  The amount of the
franchise fee shall be shown separately on the utility bill to each customer.



   3.   The Company will commence collecting franchise fees on or
before the first Company billing cycle of the first calendar month following
ninety (90) days of receipt of information required of the City to implement
the franchise fee. This information shall include but not be limited to a
copy of the City’s Revenue Purpose Statement and written proof of legal
adoption and publication of the Revenue Purpose Statement, City’s list of
City utility accounts exempt per Iowa law from the franchise fee, signed
Nondisclosure Agreement pertaining to the protection of the confidentiality
of utility service address information provided by the Company to the City,
and the City’s verified utility customer service address list.  The
Company shall not commence assessing the franchise fee until it has received
written approval of its amended tax rider tariff from the Iowa Utilities
Board.



   4.   The City recognizes that the costs of franchise fee
administration are not charged directly to the City and the City and Company
agree that the Company may only charge such administrative fees as are
provided for in state statute.



   5.   Upon receipt of a final and unappealable order or approval
authorizing annexation, or changes in the corporate limits of said City, the
City Clerk shall provide written notification by certified mail to an officer
of Company of such annexation or change in the limits of said City, and the
Company shall apply the franchise fee to its customers who are affected by
the annexation or change in the corporate limits of the City, commencing on
an agreed upon date which is not less than ninety (90) days from receipt of
the information required of the City to implement the franchise fee.



   6.   The Company shall have no obligation to collect franchise fees
from customers in any annexed area until and unless the following have all
been provided to the Company by certified mail:  such final and unappealable
orders or approvals, the City’s list of City utility accounts exempt from
the franchise fee in the annexed area, and the City’s verified utility
customer service address list for the annexed area.



   7.   The City shall indemnify the Company from claims of any nature
arising out of or related to the imposition and collection of the franchise
fee. In addition, the Company shall not be liable for collecting franchise
fees from any customer originally or subsequently identified, or incorrectly
identified, by the City as being subject to the franchise fee or being exempt
from the imposition of franchise fees.



   8.   The Company shall remit franchise fee receipts to the City no
more frequently than on or before the last business day of the month
following each calendar year quarter.  Company shall notify City at least
thirty (30) days in advance of any changes made in this collection schedule,
including any alterations in the calendar quarters or any other changes in
the remittance periods.



   9.   The City shall give the Company a minimum six-month notice
prior to the request to implement any adjustment in the percentage of
franchise fee to be collected pursuant to Section 6 hereof.  The City agrees
to modify the level of franchise fees imposed only once in any 24-month
period. When any such ordinance increasing, decreasing, modifying or
eliminating the franchise fee shall become effective, billings reflecting the
change shall commence on an agreed upon date which is not less than ninety
(90) days following written notice to the Company by certified mail. The
Company shall not be required to implement such new percentage unless and
until it determines that it has received appropriate official documentation
of final action by the city council.  In no event may the percentage of
franchise fee exceed the statutory amount authorized by Iowa law.



   10.   The City shall be solely responsible for the proper use of any
amounts collected as franchise fees, and shall only use such fees as
collected for a purpose as allowed by applicable law.



   11.   The Company shall not, under any circumstances be required to
return or refund any franchise fees that have been collected from City
customers and remitted to the City. In the event the Company is required to
provide data or information in defense of the City’s imposition of
franchise fees or the Company is required to assist the City in identifying
customers or calculating any franchise fee refunds for groups of customers or
individual customers, the City shall reimburse the Company for the expenses
incurred by the Company to provide such data or information.



   12.   Collection of the franchise fee shall cease at the earlier of
the modification or repeal of the franchise fee or the end of the franchise
term.



      A.   The obligation to collect and remit the fee imposed by
this Chapter is modified if:



         (1)   Any other person is authorized to sell natural gas
to customers within the corporate limits of the City and the City imposes a
franchise fee or its lawful equivalent at zero or a lesser rate than provided
in this Chapter, in which case the obligation of Company to collect and remit
franchise fee shall be modified to zero or the lesser rate; or



         (2)   The City adds additional territory by annexation
or consolidation and is unable or unwilling to impose the franchise fee upon
all persons selling natural gas to consumers within the additional territory,
in which case the franchise fee imposed on the revenue from sales by Company
in the additional territory shall be zero or equal to that of the lowest fee
being paid by any other retail seller of natural gas within the City; or



         (3)   The Iowa General Assembly enacts legislation, or
any Iowa court issues a final judicial decision regarding franchise fees, or
the Iowa Utilities Board issues a final nonappealable order (collectively,
“Final Franchise Fee Action”) that modifies, but does not repeal, the
ability of the City to impose a franchise fee or the ability of Company to
collect from City customers and remit franchise fees to City. Within sixty
(60) days of Final Franchise Fee Action, the City shall notify Company and
the parties shall meet to determine whether this ordinance can be revised,
and, if so, how to revise the franchise fee on a continuing basis to meet
revised legal requirements. After Final Franchise Fee Action and until
passage by the City of revisions to the franchise fee ordinance, Company may
temporarily discontinue collection and remittance of the franchise fee if in
its sole opinion it believes it is required to do so in order to comply with
revised legal requirements.



      B.   The obligation to collect and remit the fee imposed by
this Chapter is repealed, effective as of the date specified below with no
liability therefor, if:



         (1)   The imposition, collection or remittance of a
franchise fee is judicially determined to be unlawful by a court of competent
jurisdiction within the State of Iowa.  Such determination shall be
effective only after all available appeals have either been exhausted or have
expired; or



         (2)   The Iowa General Assembly enacts legislation
making imposition, collection or remittance of a franchise fee unlawful,
effective as of the date lawfully specified by the General Assembly; or



         (3)   The Iowa Utilities Board, or any successor agency,
denies the Company the right to impose, collect or remit a franchise fee
provided such denial is affirmed by the Supreme Court of Iowa, effective as
of the date of the final agency order from which the appeal is taken.



   13.   That said franchise fee shall be in lieu of any other payments
to the City for the Company’s use of streets, avenues, alleys and public
places in the said City and other administrative or regulatory costs with
regard to said franchise; and said pipes, mains, and other conductor and
appliances in, along and under the streets, avenues, alleys and public places
in the said City for the purpose of distributing, supplying and selling gas
to said City and the residents thereof and to persons and corporations beyond
the limits thereof shall be exempt from any special tax, assessment, license
or rental charge during the entire term of this chapter.



110.07    MANAGEMENT FEES.



The City shall not, pursuant to Chapter 480A.6 of the Code of Iowa, impose or
charge right-of-way management fees upon the Company or fees for permits for
Company construction, maintenance, repairs, excavation, pavement cutting or
inspections of Company work sites and projects or related matters.



110.08    TERM OF FRANCHISE.



The term of the franchise granted by this Chapter and the rights granted
thereunder shall continue for the period of twenty-five (25) years from and
after its acceptance by the said Company.



110.09    ENTIRE AGREEMENT.



This Chapter sets forth and constitutes the entire agreement between the
Company and the City with respect to the rights contained herein, and may not
be superseded, modified or otherwise amended without the approval and
acceptance of the Company.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall
the City enact any ordinance or place any limitations, either operationally
or through the assessment of fees, that create additional burdens upon the
Company, or which delay utility operations.



(Ch. 110 - Ord. 1395 - Oct. 14 Supp.)



CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE



 

111.01  Franchise Granted
 
111.07  Nonexclusive



111.02  Poles and Wires; Indemnification

 
111.08  Continuous Service



111.03  Excavations

 
111.09  Franchise Fee



111.04  Construction and Maintenance

 
111.10  Management Fees



111.05  Pruning Trees

 
111.11  Term of Franchise



111.06  System Requirements

 
111.12  Entire Agreement



 



111.01    FRANCHISE GRANTED.



There is hereby granted to INTERSTATE POWER AND LIGHT COMPANY, hereinafter
referred to as the "Company," its successors and assigns, the right and
franchise to acquire, construct, reconstruct, erect,  maintain  and 
operate  in  the  City, works and plants for the manufacture and
generation of electricity and a distribution system for electric light, heat
and power and the right to erect and maintain the necessary poles, lines,
wires, conduits and other appliances for the distribution of electric current
along, under and upon the streets, alleys and public places in the said City
to supply individuals, corporations, communities, and municipalities both
inside and outside of said City with electric light, heat and power for the
period of twenty-five (25) years†, subject to a limited right of
cancellation at the end of the tenth (10th) and twentieth (20th) year
anniversaries of the Anniversary Date of this franchise; also the right of
eminent domain as provided in Section 364.2 of the Code of Iowa.



† EDITOR'S NOTE:  Ordinance No. 1394 adopting an electric franchise for
the City was passed and adopted on June 2, 2014.



111.02    POLES AND WIRES; INDEMNIFICATION.



The poles, lines, wires, circuits, and other appliances shall be placed and
maintained so as not to unnecessarily interfere with the travel on said
streets, alleys, and public places in said City nor unnecessarily interfere
with the proper use of the same, including ordinary drainage, or with the
sewers, underground pipe and other property of the City, and the said
Company, its successors and assigns shall hold the City free and harmless
from all damages to the extent arising from the negligent acts or omissions
of the Company in the erection or maintenance of said system.



111.03    EXCAVATIONS.



In making any excavations in any street, alley, or public place, Company, its
successors and assigns, shall protect the site while work is in progress by
guards, barriers or signals, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of the
streets, and shall back fill all openings in such manner as to prevent
settling or depressions in surface, pavement or sidewalk of such excavations
with same materials, restoring the condition as nearly as practical.  The
Company shall not be required to restore or modify public right of way,
sidewalks or other areas in or adjacent to the Company project to a condition
superior to its immediate previously existing condition.



111.04    CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.



The Company shall, at its cost, locate and relocate its existing facilities
or equipment in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the City in
such a manner as the City may at any time reasonably require for the purposes
of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of
the street or alley or any public improvement thereof, in or about any such
street or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such
improvement.  If the City orders or requests the Company to relocate its
existing facilities or equipment for any reason other than as specified
above, or as the result of the initial request of a commercial or private
developer, the Company shall receive payment for the cost of such relocation
as a precondition to relocating its existing facilities or equipment.  The
City shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its public works
projects so as not arbitrarily to cause the Company unreasonable additional
expense in exercising its authority under this section.  The City shall also
provide a reasonable alternative location for the Company’s facilities as
part of its relocation request.  Prior to the City abandoning or vacating
any street, avenue, alley or public ground where the Company has electric
facilities, the City shall grant the Company a utility easement for said
facilities.  If the City fails to grant the Company a utility easement for
said facilities prior to abandoning or vacating a street, avenue, alley or
public place, the City shall at its cost and expense obtain easements for
existing Company facilities.  The Company shall not be required to relocate,
at its cost and expense, Company facilities in the public right of way that
have been relocated at Company expense at the direction of the City in the
previous ten years.



111.05    PRUNING TREES.



The Company is authorized and empowered to prune or remove at Company expense
any tree extending into any street, alley or public grounds to maintain
electric reliability, safety, to restore utility service and to prevent
limbs, branches or trunks from interfering with the wires and facilities of
the Company.  The pruning and removal of trees shall performed in accordance
with Company’s then current line clearance vegetation plan as filed and
approved by the Iowa Utilities Board, as well as all applicable codes and
standards referenced therein.



111.06    SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.



During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish electric energy
in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board and
the Company’s tariffs.  The Company will maintain compliance with Iowa
Utilities Board regulatory standards for reliability.



111.07    NONEXCLUSIVE.



The franchise granted by this Chapter shall not be exclusive.



111.08    CONTINUOUS SERVICE.



Service to be rendered by the Company under this franchise shall be
continuous unless prevented from doing so by fire, acts of God, unavoidable
accidents or casualties, or reasonable interruptions necessary to properly
service the Company's equipment, and in such event service shall be resumed
as quickly as is reasonably possible.



111.09    FRANCHISE FEE. 



   1.   In its monthly billing the Company shall include a franchise
fee of one percent (1%) effective October 1, 2014; provided, however, that
such fee shall increase to four percent (4%) effective January 1, 2016, on
the gross receipts from the sale of electricity to the Company’s electric
customers located within the corporate limits of the City.



   2.   The franchise fee shall be applied to all customers’ bills in
accordance with Iowa Code Chapter 364.2 and 423B.5.  The amount of the
franchise fee shall be shown separately on the utility bill to each customer.



   3.   The Company will commence collecting franchise fees on or
before the first Company billing cycle of the first calendar month following
ninety (90) days of receipt of information required of the City to implement
the franchise fee. This information shall include but not be limited to a
copy of the City’s Revenue Purpose Statement and written proof of legal
adoption and publication of the Revenue Purpose Statement, City’s list of
City utility accounts exempt per Iowa law from the franchise fee, signed
Nondisclosure Agreement pertaining to the protection of the confidentiality
of utility service address information provided by the Company to the City,
and the City’s verified utility customer service address list.  The
Company shall not commence assessing the franchise fee until it has received
written approval of the amended tax rider tariff from the Iowa Utilities
Board.



   4.   The City recognizes that the costs of franchise fee
administration are not charged directly to the City and the City and Company
agree that the Company may only charge such administrative fees as are
provided for in state statute.



   5.   Upon receipt of a final and unappealable order or approval
authorizing annexation, or changes in the corporate limits of said City, the
City Clerk shall provide written notification by certified mail to an officer
of Company of such annexation or change in the limits of said City, and the
Company shall apply the franchise fee to its customers who are affected by
the annexation or change in the corporate limits of the City, commencing on
an agreed upon date which is not less than ninety (90) days from receipt of
the information required of the City to implement the franchise fee.  The
Company shall have no obligation to collect franchise fees from customers in
any annexed area until and unless the following have all been provided to the
Company by certified mail:  such final and unappealable orders or approvals,
the City’s list of City utility accounts exempt from the franchise fee in
the annexed area, and the City’s verified utility customer service address
list for the annexed area.



   6.   The City shall indemnify the Company from claims of any nature
arising out of or related to the imposition and collection of the franchise
fee. In addition, the Company shall not be liable for collecting franchise
fees from any customer originally or subsequently identified, or incorrectly
identified, by the City as being subject to the franchise fee or being exempt
from the imposition of franchise fees.



   7.   The Company shall remit franchise fee receipts to the City no
more frequently than on or before the last business day of the month
following each calendar year quarter.  Company shall notify City at least
thirty (30) days in advance of any changes made in this collection schedule,
including any alterations in the calendar quarters or any other changes in
the remittance periods.



   8.   The City shall give the Company a minimum 6-month notice prior
to the request to implement any adjustment in the percentage of franchise fee
to be collected pursuant to Section 9 hereof.  The City agrees to modify the
level of franchise fees imposed only once in any 24-month period. When any
such ordinance increasing, decreasing, modifying or eliminating the franchise
fee shall become effective, billings reflecting the change shall commence on
an agreed upon date which is not less than ninety (90) days following written
notice to the Company by certified mail. The Company shall not be required to
implement such new percentage unless and until it determines that it has
received appropriate official documentation of final action by the city
council.  In no event may the percentage of franchise fee exceed the
statutory amount authorized by Iowa law.



   9.   The City shall be solely responsible for the proper use of any
amounts collected as franchise fees, and shall only use such fees as
collected for a purpose as allowed by applicable law.



   10.   The Company shall not, under any circumstances be required to
return or refund any franchise fees that have been collected from City
customers and remitted to the City. In the event the Company is required to
provide data or information in defense of the City’s imposition of
franchise fees or the Company is required to assist the City in identifying
customers or calculating any franchise fee refunds for groups of customers or
individual customers, the City shall reimburse the Company for the expenses
incurred by the Company to provide such data or information.



   11.   Collection of the franchise fee shall cease at the earlier of
the modification or repeal of the franchise fee or the end of the franchise
term.



      A.   The obligation to collect and remit the fee imposed by
this Chapter is modified if:



         (1)   Any other person is authorized to sell electricity
to customers within the corporate limits of the City and the City imposes a
franchise fee or its lawful equivalent at zero or a lesser rate than provided
in this Chapter, in which case the obligation of Company to collect and remit
franchise fee shall be modified to zero or the lesser rate; or



         (2)   The City adds additional territory by annexation
or consolidation and is unable or unwilling to impose the franchise fee upon
all persons selling electricity to consumers within the additional territory,
in which case the franchise fee imposed on the revenue from sales by Company
in the additional territory shall be zero or equal to that of the lowest fee
being paid by any other retail seller of electricity within the City; or



         (3)   The Iowa General Assembly enacts legislation, or
any Iowa court issues a final judicial decision regarding franchise fees, or
the Iowa Utilities Board issues a final nonappealable order (collectively,
“Final Franchise Fee Action”) that modifies, but does not repeal, the
ability of the City to impose a franchise fee or the ability of Company to
collect from City customers and remit franchise fees to City. Within sixty
(60) days of Final Franchise Fee Action, the City shall notify Company and
the parties shall meet to determine whether this Chapter can be revised, and,
if so, how to revise the franchise fee on a continuing basis to meet revised
legal requirements. After Final Franchise Fee Action and until passage by the
City of revisions to the franchise fee ordinance, Company may temporarily
discontinue collection and  remittance of the franchise fee if in its sole
opinion it believes it is required to do so in order to comply with revised
legal requirements.



      B.   The obligation to collect and remit the fee imposed by
this Chapter is repealed, effective as of the date specified below with no
liability therefor, if:



         (1)   Any of the imposition, collection or remittance of
a franchise fee is ruled to be unlawful by the Supreme Court of Iowa,
effective as of the date of such ruling or as may be specified by that Court;
or



         (2)   The Iowa General Assembly enacts legislation
making imposition, collection or remittance of a franchise fee unlawful,
effective as of the date lawfully specified by the General Assembly; or



         (3)   The Iowa Utilities Board, or any successor agency,
denies the Company the right to impose, collect or remit a franchise fee
provided such denial is affirmed by the Supreme Court of Iowa, effective as
of the date of the final agency order from which the appeal is taken.



   12.   The franchise fee shall be in lieu of any other payments to
the City for the Company’s use of streets, alleys and public places in the
said City and other administrative or regulatory costs with regard to said
franchise; and said poles, lines, wires, conduits and other appliances for
the distribution of electric current along, under and upon the streets,
alleys and public places in the said City to supply individuals,
corporations, communities, and municipalities both inside and outside of said
City with electric light, heat and power shall be exempt from any special
tax, assessment, license or rental charge during the entire term of this
franchise ordinance.



111.10    MANAGEMENT FEES.



The City shall not, pursuant to Chapter 480A.6 of the Code of Iowa, impose or
charge right-of-way management fees upon the Company or fees for permits for
Company construction, maintenance, repairs, excavation, pavement cutting or
inspections of Company work sites and projects or related matters.



111.11    TERM OF FRANCHISE.



The term of the franchise granted by this Chapter and the rights granted
thereunder shall continue for the period of twenty-five (25) years from and
after its acceptance by the said Company, except that the City may cancel
this franchise on the tenth (10th) or twentieth (20th) anniversary of the
Anniversary Date of this franchise by notifying Company in writing of its
desire to do so, said notification to be given within ninety (90) days of the
tenth (10th) or twentieth (20th) anniversary respectively of this
franchise.  If Company is not notified of the cancellation by the tenth
(10th) or twentieth (20th) anniversary then this franchise shall continue
without cancellation until the twenty-fifth (25th) year from and after its
acceptance by the said Company



111.12    ENTIRE AGREEMENT.



This Chapter sets forth and constitutes the entire agreement between the
Company and the City with respect to the rights contained herein, and may not
be supplemented, superseded, modified or otherwise amended without the
written approval and acceptance of the Company.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, in no event shall the City enact any ordinance or place any
limitations, either operationally or through the assessment of fees other
than those approved and accepted by the Company within this Chapter, that
create additional burdens upon the Company, or which delay utility operations.



(Ch. 111 – Ord. 1394 – Oct. 14 Supp.)



CHAPTER 112
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE



 



112.01  Definition of Terms
 
112.12  Police Powers


112.02  Term of Franchise
 
112.13  Temporary Drops


112.03  Compliance to Regulatory Ordinance
 
112.14  Local Office


112.04  Franchise Fee
 
112.15  Annual Report


112.05  System Design
 
112.16  Indemnification


112.06  System Upgrade
 
112.17  Insurance Coverage and Notifications


112.07  Capital Equipment Grant; Government and Educational Programming
 
112.18  Transfer of Franchise


112.08  Service Area
 
112.19  Enforcement and Termination


112.09  Restoration of Public Ways
 
112.20  Bonding Requirements


112.10  Service to Public Buildings
 
112.21  Equal Protection


112.11  Franchise Nonexclusive
 
112.22  Entire Agreement


 
112.23  Notices




 



112.01    DEFINITION OF TERMS.



For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
abbreviations are defined.



   1.   “Basic cable” means the lowest priced tier of service that
includes the retransmission of local broadcast television signals and any
public, educational, and governmental channels.



   2.   “Cable Act” collectively means the Cable Communications
Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as
amended.  Any reference to the Cable Act means the most current version of
the Act.



   3.   “Cable operator” is defined as the same definition used in
the Cable Act.



   4.   “Cable service” is defined as the same definition used in
the Cable Act.



   5.   “Cable system” is defined as the same definition used in
the Cable Act.



   6.   “FCC” means Federal Communications Commission or successor
governmental entity thereto.



   7.   “Franchise” means the initial authorization, or renewal
thereof, issued by the City, whether such authorization is designated as a
franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise,
which authorizes construction, upgrade and operation of the cable system.



   8.   “Grantee” means any person, firm, corporation, or other
entity granted a franchise hereunder, or the lawful successor, transferee, or
assignee thereof.



   9.   “Gross revenues” means any and all revenue received by the
Grantee from subscribers from the operation of the cable system to provide
cable service in the service area, provided, however, that such phrase does
not include any fees or franchise fees or taxes which are imposed directly or
indirectly on any subscriber thereof by any governmental unit or agency, and
which are collected by the Grantee on behalf of such governmental unit or
agency.



   10.   “Headend” means the land, electronic processing equipment,
antennas, tower, building, and other appurtenances normally associated with
and located at the starting point of a cable system.



   11.   “House drop” or “drop” means a cable that connects
each building or home to the nearest feeder line of the cable network.



   12.   “Normal business hours” means those hours during which
most similar businesses in the community are open to serve subscribers.  In
all cases, “normal business hours” as a minimum includes those hours when
the offices of the City are open to serve citizens.



   13.   “Normal operating conditions” means those service
conditions which are within the control of the Grantee.  Those conditions
which are not within the control of the Grantee include (but are not limited
to):  natural disasters, strikes, civil disturbances, power outages,
telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions.  Those
conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the Grantee include
(but are not limited to) special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate
increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or
upgrade of the cable system.



   14.   “Outlet” means the point of connection of the cable or
wire to a television.



   15.   “Person” means an individual, partnership, association,
joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity.



   16.   “Private property” means all property, real, personal or
mixed, owned by a private person, including property owned by a public
utility not owned or operated by the City.



   17.   “Property of the Grantee” means all property – real,
personal or mixed – owned or used by the Grantee, however arising from or
related to or connected with the franchise.



   18.   “Public access channel” means channel capacity designated
for public access use.



   19.   “Public property” means all property – real, personal or
mixed – owned or used by the City, including property owned or used by a
public utility owned or operated by the City.



   20.   “Public way” means the surface of, and the space above and
below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court,
boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way lane, public way, drive circle, or other
public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements,
dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and
any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or
hereafter held by the City in the service area which shall entitle the City
and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating,
repairing, and maintaining the system.  “Public way” also means any
easement now or hereafter held by the City within the service area for the
purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for
compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall
within their proper use and meaning entitle the City and the Grantee to the
use thereof for the purposes of installing and operating the Grantee’s
cable system over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be
ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system.



   21.   “Service area” means the present municipal boundaries of
the City.



   22.   “Service interruption” means the loss of video or audio on
one or more channels.



   23.   “Service tier” means a category of cable service or other
services provided by a cable operator and for which a separate rate is
charged by the cable operator.



   24.   “Subscriber” means a person or user of the system who
elects to lawfully receive cable services and other authorized services
therefrom with the Grantee’s express permission.



112.02    TERM OF FRANCHISE.



MCC Iowa LLC, its successors and assignees are hereby granted a renewal of
their nonexclusive right, franchise and authority for a period of ten (10)
years to erect, maintain and operate a cable system in Grinnell, Iowa, and to
sell and supply individuals, firms and corporations within the corporate
limits of the City, cable service and other services in, along, among, upon,
across, above, over, under, or in any manner connected with public ways
within the service areas and for that purpose to erect, install, construct,
repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain or retain in, on, over, under, upon,
across, or along any public way and all extensions thereof and additions
thereto, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other related
property or equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the cable system,
subject to the conditions and restrictions provided and subject to the cable
franchise regulatory ordinance, passed and adopted on May 6, 2002, and all
applicable law of the State of Iowa and United States of America.  The term
of the franchise will be automatically extended five (5) additional years for
a total term of fifteen (15) years if the Grantee completes the upgrade of
the cable system as required by Section 112.06 of this chapter prior to
December 31, 2002.  The term of the franchise will expire three (3) years
following permanent disruption of interconnection to a master headend
facility serving more than ten thousand (10,000) customers if the franchise
is transferred to an entity not held in common control with the original
grantee of the franchise and the quality, level and mix of programming and
services is diminished. †



112.03    COMPLIANCE TO REGULATORY ORDINANCE.



The Grantee shall comply with all of the lawful conditions and provisions of
the cable franchise regulatory ordinance passed and adopted on May 6, 2002,
and codified in Chapter 113 of this Code of Ordinances, unless an exemption
or modification is so specified in this chapter.  In the event of a conflict
or ambiguity between this and the regulatory ordinance, the terms of this
chapter shall control.  The Grantee, but no transferee or assignee other
than an entity held in common control with the parent company of MCC Iowa
LLC, shall be exempted from compliance with the following sections of the
cable television regulatory ordinance:



   1.   Section 113.05 – Application for Franchise.



   2.   Section 113.19(8) – Security Fund.



112.04    FRANCHISE FEE.



   1.   Franchise Fee Payment.  In consideration for the use of the
streets and public ways of the City for the construction, operation,
maintenance, and reconstruction of a cable system within the City, the
Grantee shall pay to the City an annual amount equal to five percent (5%) of
a Grantee’s gross revenues as defined in Section 113.01 of this Code of
Ordinances.



   2.   Quarterly Payments.  Payment due to the City under the
franchise agreement shall be made quarterly at the Clerk’s office not later
than forty-five (45) days following March 31, June 30, September 30 and
December 31 of each year.  Any fee not paid when due shall bear interest at
a rate of one and one-half percent (1½%) per month from the date due.  Each
payment shall be accompanied with a detailed report showing the basis for the
computation, specific income categories, and such other relevant facts as may
be required by the City necessary to determine the accuracy of the franchise
payment as specified in of this chapter.  The acceptance of any payment
shall not be construed as an accord that the amount paid is, in fact, the
correct amount; nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a
release of any claim the City may have for additional sums payable by the
Grantee.  All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by
the City.



   3.   Franchise Fee Audit.  A Grantee will fully cooperate with a
franchise fee audit performed by a professional firm that is chosen by the
City.  The costs associated with the audit will be paid for by the City,
except that the Grantee shall pay for the costs if the audit shows an
underpayment of franchise fees in excess of five percent (5%) or more.



   4.   Franchise Fee Increases.  The City may request an increase in
franchise fees at any time during the term of the franchise, equal to the
maximum allowed by Federal law.  However, such request shall be made in
writing and the Grantee will not be liable for said increase until proper
notice, as defined by Federal law, is given to its subscribers.  Prior to
making a final decision regarding an increase in franchise fees, the City
shall conduct a public hearing and shall grant an opportunity to the Grantee
to discuss the proposed increase in franchise fee.



   5.   Limitation on Franchise Fee Actions.  The period of limitation
for recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be five (5) years
from the date on which payment by a Grantee is due.



   6.   Annual Review.  On an annual basis, Grantees shall provide the
City with a statement of annual gross revenues signed by an authorized
representative of the Grantee, reflecting the amount of franchise fees paid
to the City and the method the amount was computed.  The Grantee agrees to
permit the City, upon request with reasonable notice, to review at
Grantee’s local office its gross revenue records as may be necessary to
monitor compliance with Section 113.09 of this Code of Ordinances.



112.05    SYSTEM DESIGN.



   1.   As of the effective date of the franchise, the Grantee will
make available a minimum of forty (40) channels of programming.



   2.   The system will be designed so as to be two-way capable, and
will be constructed in a manner that will meet or exceed FCC specifications.



   3.   The Grantee shall provide for the installation and operation of
an emergency alert override system pursuant to FCC regulations.



   4.   The Grantee shall provide an “upstream capability” to allow
live broadcast upon completion of the upgrade required by this agreement on
the education and government channel from the following locations: the GET-19
Cable Access Office, Community Center Council Chambers, School Board Room,
Community Center Senior Citizen Room, Grinnell Community High School,
Grinnell Middle School, Grinnell Community Theatre, Grinnell Public Library,
and Grinnell Memorial Building.  The Grantee shall provide all modulators
and all equipment necessary to activate the line broadcast capability for all
the locations.  The cost of the modulators shall be considered a capital
grant for educational and government access and may be passed through to
subscribers as a separate line item on billing invoices.  The City shall be
responsible for the cost of internal wiring beyond the point of demarcation
at the ground block for each location.  One (1) modulator will be provided
for the sites located in the community building.



   5.   The Grantee will provide two (2) channels to be used for
educational and governmental access.  The Grantee will activate this channel
from the City Hall in Grinnell and purchase all of the necessary equipment
and modulators to activate the return.



112.06    SYSTEM UPGRADE.



The Grantee shall upgrade the cable system to a minimum capacity of one
hundred ten (110) channels no later than July 17, 2004.  Grantee shall
provide written notice to the City verifying completion of the system
upgrade.  The upgraded cable system shall be constructed in accordance with
performance standards which meet or exceed FCC regulations.  The rebuilt
cable system shall include or provide pay-per view capabilities and the
following:



   1.   Conversion.  Subscribers shall not be charged by Grantee for
conversion from the existing cable system to the new cable system.  In the
event that special additional or customized equipment is requested by any
subscriber or is required to provide service to any subscriber, Grantee may
charge the subscriber for such equipment.  Grantee will notify subscribers
and the public in general of the cutover, using at least two (2) of the
following: bill stuffers; direct mail; news releases; radio announcements;
CSR training; and community bulletin board announcements. 



   2.   Drop Maintenance.  Grantee shall maintain and replace
subscriber drops during its normal operation of the cable system that do not
meet the standards of the National Electric Code.  The cable system shall be
designed to allow each subscriber drop to provide service to three (3)
television outlets.  The Grantee shall provide a billing message with
service information regarding drop maintenance no later than six (6) months
following completion of the system upgrade. 



   3.   Local Channel.  The local government and education channel
shall be provided on the basic tier of service. 



   4.   Additional Programming.  The expanded basic tier of service
should include additional types programming such as religious programming,
educational programming, news and information, sporting events, arts,
children’s programming, comedy programming and public affairs programming. 



112.07    CAPITAL EQUIPMENT GRANT; GOVERNMENT AND EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMMING.



The Grantee shall provide the City with $4,500.00 for government and
educational access channel capital needs no later than January 15, 2003,
provided that the City supplies documentation that City has spent a minimum
of 75% of its franchise fee revenues received from the Grantee from the
previous year to support government and educational access.  The Grantee
shall provide the City with a second grant of $4,500.00 for government and
educational access capital needs no later than January 15, 2006, provided
that the City supplies documentation that the City has utilized a minimum of
75% of the franchise fees received from the Grantee to support government and
educational access. The $4,500.00 payment will be adjusted for inflation
using the consumer price index.  The Grantee shall provide the City with a
third grant of $4,500.00 for government and educational access capital needs
no later than January 15, 2009, provided that the City supplies documentation
that the City has utilized a minimum of 75% of the franchise fees received
from the Grantee to support government and educational access.  The
$4,500.00 payment will be adjusted for inflation using the consumer price
index.  The Grantee shall provide the City with a fourth grant of $4,500.00
for government and educational access capital needs no later than January 15,
2012, provided that the City supplies documentation that the City has
utilized a minimum of 75% of the franchise fees received from the Grantee to
support government and educational access.  The $4,500.00 payment will be
adjusted for inflation using the consumer price index.  The Grantee shall
only be required to make this fourth grant if the franchise term has been
extended to a total term of fifteen years in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.  The City shall indemnify and hold the Grantee harmless
from any claims by any person that the government and educational capital
support grant violates applicable law.



112.08    SERVICE AREA.



   1.   Service to Potential Subscribers.  Grantee shall offer cable
television residential service to all areas of the City which are in the
corporate limits of the City on the effective date of the franchise that meet
the density requirement of at least fifteen (15) homes per mile of proposed
trunk and feeder cable route. 



   2.   Extensions of Service.  The Grantee shall, at its expense,
promptly extend its system to have service available to all residents of: 



      A.   Newly annexed areas to the City not then served by a
cable system where the average density is at least fifteen (15) dwelling
units per mile of proposed trunk and feeder cable route.



      B.   New housing areas developed within the City limits,
providing the new areas developed meet the requirements of paragraph A of
this subsection.



      C.   Any new single family dwelling unit, multiple dwelling
unit or other residential unit or commercial establishment within one hundred
fifty (150) feet of existing distribution system in the City shall be
extended cable simultaneously with electric power and telephone utilities,
unless such areas are exempted.



112.09    RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS.



If during the course of the Grantee’s construction, operation, or
maintenance of the cable system there occurs a disturbance of any public way
by the Grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace and restore such public way
to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the public way
existing immediately prior to such disturbance consistent with City
permitting process and/or applicable law..



112.10    SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS.



The Grantee shall upon request, provide without charge, one outlet of basic
service and expanded basic service to the following public buildings:



   1.   City Hall.



   2.   Fire Station.



   3.   Police Station.



   4.   Library.



   5.   All public school buildings.



   6.   Public service buildings – parks, streets, and storage
buildings.



   7.   Water Department building.



   8.   Senior Citizen Center.



The outlets shall not be used to distribute or sell services in or throughout
such buildings.  Users of such outlets shall hold the Grantee harmless from
any and all liability or claims arising out of their use of such outlets,
including but not limited to, those arising from copyright liability.  If
additional outlets are provided to such buildings, the building owner shall
pay the usual installation fees associated there with, including (but not
limited to) labor and materials.



112.11    FRANCHISE NONEXCLUSIVE.



Consistent with the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 113, the
franchise shall not be construed as any limitation upon the right of the City
to grant to other qualified persons rights, privileges, or authorizations
herein set forth, in the same streets, alleys, or other public ways or public
places.  The City specifically reserves the right to grant at any time
during the term of this franchise or renewal thereof, if any, such additional
franchises for a cable system as lawfully appropriate.



112.12    POLICE POWERS.



In accepting the franchise, Grantee acknowledges that its rights hereunder
are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary for the safety and welfare of the public and it agrees
to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the City
pursuant to such powers.



112.13    TEMPORARY DROPS.



Temporary drops shall be buried within two (2) months of installation, except
during the winter months which shall be defined as November 15 to April 1. 
In the event that the Grantee fails to bury any cable drops, within the
two-month period and after notice from the City, the Grantee shall provide
basic and expanded basic cable service without charge to the affected cable
subscriber from the last date that the drop was to have been buried to that
actual date that it is buried.



112.14    LOCAL OFFICE.



In lieu of a local office located within the City, the Grantee shall provide
an agent of the Grantee or a payment drop location in the service area at a
site readily available to the general public.



112.15    ANNUAL REPORT.



No later than ninety (90) days after the close of the Grantee’s fiscal
year, and upon written request, the Grantee shall submit a detailed written
informative report to the City, including the following information
pertaining only to the Grinnell franchise:



   1.   A summary of the previous year’s activities in development of
the cable system, including, but not limited to, services begun or dropped.



   2.   A detailed revenue statement including a breakdown of all
revenue sources upon which the City can verify franchise fee accuracy.  The
list of revenues shall include but not be limited to, a specific breakdown of
gross revenues.  The Grantee shall provide a statement of revenues for
January and December.



   3.   A summary of complaints, identifying the number and specific
nature of complaints and their disposition.



   4.   A list of key management for the Grinnell franchise along with
their addresses and job titles.



   5.   The annual report of the parent company, if a public
corporation.  Such report shall be construed to mean the report of the
previous year.



112.16    INDEMNIFICATION.



The Grantee shall indemnify, protect, hold harmless, and defend the City, its
officers, boards and employees, from and against any liability for damages
and for any liability or claims resulting from property damage or bodily
injury, including death, for any person, firm, entity or anyone whatsoever,
which may arise directly or indirectly out of the Grantee’s construction,
operation, or maintenance of its cable system by Grantee, its employees,
officers or agents, including (but not limited to) reasonable attorney’s
fees and costs, provided that the City shall give the Grantee written notice
of its obligation to indemnify the City within thirty (30) days following
service of a petition or other similar pleading.  If the City determines
that it is necessary for it to employ separate counsel, the costs for such
separate counsel shall be the responsibility of the City.



112.17    INSURANCE COVERAGE AND NOTIFICATIONS.



The Grantee shall maintain insurance in such amounts and kinds of coverage as
may be specified by the City in the franchise agreement.  Such coverage may
be reasonably adjusted by the City with ninety-day notification, provided
that the City demonstrates the need for increases in coverage.  The Grantee
shall maintain such insurance with insurance underwriters authorized to do
business in the State of Iowa.  All policies shall name the City, its
employees, servants, agents, and officers as additional insured parties. 
Each policy shall provide that it may not be canceled or the amount of
coverage altered until thirty (30) days after receipt by the Clerk of a
registered mail notice of such intent to cancel or alter coverage.  The
Grantee shall provide a certificate of insurance designating the City as an
“additional insured.”  The Grantee shall maintain and provide to the
City proof of public liability insurance for not less than the following
amounts:



   1.   $2,000,000.00 – any one occurrence, bodily injury or property
damage.



   2.   $2,000,000.00 – products/completed operations annual
aggregate liability.



   3.   $2,000,000.00 – general aggregate.



   4.   $2,000,000.00 – umbrella liability.



112.18    TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.



The Grantee’s right, title, or interest in the franchise shall not be sold,
transferred, assigned, or otherwise encumbered, other than to an entity,
controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the Grantee, without
the prior consent of the City.  Such consent not to be unreasonably
withheld.  No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in
trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights,
title, or interest of the Grantee in the franchise in order to secure
indebtedness.  Within thirty (30) days of receiving the request for
transfer, the City shall in accordance with FCC rules and regulations, notify
the Grantee in writing of the information it requires to determine the legal,
financial and technical qualifications of the transferee.



112.19    ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION.



   1.   Notice of Violation.  In the event that the City believes that
the Grantee has not complied with the terms of the franchise, it shall notify
the Grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance. 



   2.   Grantee’s Right to Cure or Respond.  The Grantee shall have
thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice described in subsection 1:  (i)
to respond to the City, contesting the assertion of noncompliance; or (ii) to
cure such default; or (iii) in the event that, by the nature of default, such
default cannot be cured within the 30-day period, initiate reasonable steps
to remedy such default and notify the City of the steps being taken and the
projected date that they will be completed. 



   3.   Public Hearing.  In the event that the Grantee fails to
respond to the notice described in subsection 1 pursuant to the procedures
set forth in subsection 2, or in the event that the alleged default is not
remedied within thirty (30) days or the date projected pursuant to subsection
2 above, the City shall schedule a public hearing to investigate the
default.  The City shall notify the Grantee in writing of the time and place
of such meeting no less than five business days in advance and provide the
Grantee with an opportunity to be heard.  The City shall notify the Grantee
in writing of the time and place of such meeting no less than five business
days in advance and provide the Grantee with an opportunity to be heard. 



   4.   Enforcement.  Subject to applicable Federal and State law, and
after such public hearing, the City may determine that the Grantee is in
default of any provision of the franchise and may: 



      A.   Seek specific performance of any provision, which
reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages;



      B.   Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek
other equitable relief; or



      C.   In the case of a substantial default of a material
provision of the franchise, declare the franchise agreement to be revoked in
accordance with the procedures outlined in this section.



The City shall give written notice to the Grantee of its intent to revoke the
franchise on the basis of noncompliance by the Grantee, including one or more
instances of substantial noncompliance with a material provision of the
franchise.  The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the
noncompliance.  The Grantee shall have ninety (90) days from such notice to
object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection.  In the event
the City has not received a response satisfactory from the Grantee, it may
then seek termination of the franchise at a public meeting.  The City shall
cause to be served upon the Grantee, at least ten (10) days prior to such
public meeting, a written notice specifying the time and place of such
meeting and stating its intent to request such termination.  At the
designated meeting, the City shall give the Grantee an opportunity to state
its position on the matter, after which it shall determine whether or not the
franchise shall be revoked.  The Grantee may appeal such determination to an
appropriate court, which shall have the power to review the decision of the
City de novo and to modify or reverse such decision as justice may require. 
Such appeal to the appropriate court must be taken within sixty (60) days of
the issuance of the determination of the City.  The City may, at its sole
discretion, take any lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce the
City’s rights under the franchise in lieu of revocation of the franchise. 
Furthermore, the parties hereby agree that it is not the City’s intention
to subject the Grantee to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of the
franchise for violations of the franchise where the violation was a good
faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the subscribers
within the service area, or where strict performance would result in
practical difficulties and hardship to the Grantee which outweigh the benefit
to be derived by the City and/or subscribers.



112.20    BONDING REQUIREMENTS.



The Grantee shall provide a Performance Bond executed in the amount of
$100,000.00 to secure the faithful performance by the Grantee of its
obligations under the franchise agreement.  This guarantee, however, shall
not limit the liability of the Grantee for any failure to perform its
obligations under the franchise agreement.



112.21    EQUAL PROTECTION.



In the event the City enters into a franchise, permit, license,
authorization, or other agreement of any kind with any other person or entity
other than the Grantee to enter into the City’s streets and public ways for
the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable
service to any part of the service area, the material provisions thereof
shall be reasonably comparable to those contained herein, in order that one
operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another, and to
provide all parties equal protection under the law.



112.22    ENTIRE AGREEMENT.



The franchise agreement constitutes the entire understanding and agreement
between the City and Grantee and supersedes all prior franchise agreements. 
The franchise may only be modified, amended or supplemented with the mutual
written consent of the City and the Grantee.  The City may, from time to
time, amend the cable regulatory ordinance pursuant to its lawful police
powers; provided, however, such amendments shall not serve to impair the
rights or increase the obligations of the Grantee pursuant to the franchise
except if any said amendments are required by Federal law.



112.23    NOTICES.



Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or
response required by the franchise to be served upon the City or the Grantee
shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the
required party five (5) business days after having been posted in a properly
sealed and correctly addressed envelope when hand delivered or sent by
certified or registered mail, postage prepaid.



 


Notes

† 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  Ordinance No. 1203 adopting a cable television
franchise for the City was passed and adopted on May 6, 2002.



CHAPTER 113
CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS



 



113.01  Definition of Terms
 
113.11  Franchise Renewal


113.02  Franchise Required
 
113.12  Conditions of Sale


113.03  Grant of Franchise
 
113.13  Transfer of Franchise


113.04  Rights Reserved to City
 
113.14  Right of Inspection of Construction


113.05  Application for Franchise
 
113.15  New Developments


113.06  Acceptance and Effective Date of Franchise
 
113.16  City’s Right to Purchase System


113.07  Standards of Service
 
113.17  Compliance and Monitoring


113.08  System Design and Equipment Requirements
 
113.18  Insurance and Indemnification


113.09  Franchise Fee
 
113.19  Enforcement and Termination of Franchise


113.10  Rates and Charges
 
113.20  Miscellaneous Provisions




 



113.01    DEFINITION OF TERMS.



For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. 



   1.   “Basic cable” means the lowest priced tier of service that
includes the retransmission of local broadcast television signals and any
public, educational, and governmental channels. 



   2.   “Cable Act” means collectively means the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of
1996, as amended.  Any reference to the Cable Act shall mean the most
current version of the Act. 



   3.   “Cable operator” is defined as the same definition used in
the Cable Act. 



   4.   “Cable system” is defined as the same definition used in
the Cable Act. 



   5.   “Cable service” is defined as the same definition used in
the Cable Act. 



   6.   “FCC” means Federal Communications Commission, or successor
governmental entity thereto. 



   7.   “Franchise” means the initial authorization, or renewal
thereof, issued by the City, whether such authorization is designated as a
franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise,
which authorizes construction, upgrade and operation of the cable system. 



   8.   “Grantee” means any person, firm, corporation, or other
entity granted a franchise hereunder, or the lawful successor, transferee, or
assignee thereof. 



   9.   “Gross revenues” means any and all revenue received by the
Grantee from subscribers from the operation of the cable system to provide
cable service in the service area, provided, however, that such phrase does
not include any fees or franchise fees or taxes which are imposed directly or
indirectly on any subscriber thereof by any governmental unit or agency, and
which are collected by the Grantee on behalf of such governmental unit or
agency. 



   10.   “Headend” means the land, electronic processing equipment,
antennas, tower, building, and other appurtenances normally associated with
and located at the starting point of a cable system. 



   11.   “House drop” or “drop” means a cable that connects
each building or home to the nearest feeder line of the cable network. 



   12.   “Normal business hours” means those hours during which
most similar businesses in the community are open to serve subscribers.  In
all cases, “normal business hours” as a minimum shall include those hours
when the offices of the City of Grinnell are open to serve citizens. 



   13.   “Normal operating conditions” means those service
conditions which are within the control of the Grantee.  Those conditions
which are not within the control of the Grantee include (but are not limited
to) natural disasters, strikes, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone
network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions.  Those conditions
which are ordinarily within the control of the Grantee include (but are not
limited to) special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular
peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable
system. 



   14.   “Outlet” means the point of connection of the cable or
wire to a television. 



   15.   “Person” means an individual, partnership, association,
joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity. 



   16.   “Private property” means all property, real, personal or
mixed, owned by a private person, including property owned by a public
utility not owned or operated by the City. 



   17.   “Property of the Grantee” means all property, real,
personal or mixed, owned or used by the Grantee, however arising from or
related to or connected with the franchise.



   18.   “Public access channel” means channel capacity designated
for public access use. 



   19.   “Public property” means all property, real, personal or
mixed, owned or used by the City, including property owned or used by a
public utility owned or operated by the City.



   20.   “Public way” means the surface of, and the space above and
below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court,
boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way lane, public way, drive circle, or other
public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements,
dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and
any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or
hereafter held by the City in the service area which shall entitle the City
and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating,
repairing, and maintaining the system.  “Public way” also means any
easement now or hereafter held by the City within the service area for the
purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for
compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall
within their proper use and meaning entitle the City and the Grantee to the
use thereof for the purposes of installing and operating the Grantee’s
cable system over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be
ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system. 



   21.   “Service area” means the present municipal boundaries of
the City. 



   22.   “Service interruption” means the loss of video or audio on
one or more channels. 



   23.   “Service tier” means a category of cable service or other
services provided by a cable operator and for which a separate rate is
charged by the cable operator. 



   24.   “Subscriber” means a person or user of the system who
elects to lawfully receive cable services and other authorized services
therefrom with the Grantee’s express permission. 



113.02    FRANCHISE REQUIRED.



Subject to Federal and State law, no person, firm, company, corporation or
association shall construct, install, maintain or operate within any public
street in the City, or within any other public property of the City, any
equipment or facilities for the distribution of television signals over a
cable system to any subscriber, unless a franchise authorizing the use of the
streets or properties or areas has first been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and
effect. 



113.03    GRANT OF FRANCHISE.



   1.   Purpose.  The purpose of this chapter is to specify
requirements for the establishment, construction, operation, and maintenance
of a cable system in the City pursuant to I.C.A. Chapter 364, and applicable
Federal law.  If a new applicant submits a proposal acceptable to the City,
meets the requirements of this chapter and those of the FCC, and receives a
majority of the votes cast in a franchise election, the City may then proceed
to enter into a nonexclusive franchise agreement with such prospective
Grantee, subject to the provisions of this chapter.  If the incumbent
operator submits a proposal acceptable under the terms of the Cable Act as
amended, and meets the requirements of the FCC, the City shall proceed to
fulfill its obligations under section 626 of the Telecommunications Act of
1996. 



   2.   Length of Franchise.  The term of a franchise and all rights,
privileges, obligations, and restrictions pertaining thereto shall be
determined by the City in the franchise agreement. 



   3.   Franchise Nonexclusive.  Any franchise granted hereunder by
the City shall not be exclusive and the City reserves the right to grant a
similar franchise to any qualified person at any time. 



   4.   Privileges Must Be Specified.  No privilege of exemption shall
be inferred from the granting of any franchise, unless it is specifically
prescribed. 



   5.   Authority Granted.  Any franchise granted hereunder shall give
to the grantee the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify
and maintain, in, upon, along, above, over and under streets and public ways,
as defined in Section 113.01 herein, which have been or may hereafter be
dedicated and open to public use in the City, towers, antennas, poles,
cables, electronic equipment, and other network appurtenances necessary for
the operation of a cable system in the City, subject to the requirements of
this chapter. 



   6.   Subject to Other Regulatory Agencies Rules and Regulations. 
The Grantee shall at all times during the life of any franchise granted
hereunder be subject to all generally applicable ordinances promulgated
pursuant to the lawful exercise of the police power by the City. 



   7.   Pole Use Agreements Required.  Any franchise granted hereunder
shall not relieve the Grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole or
conduit use agreements from the gas, electric and the telephone companies or
others maintaining poles or conduits in the streets of the City. 



   8.   Chapter Revisions.  Any franchises granted under this chapter
are made subject to the lawful revisions of this chapter and this Code of
Ordinances, provided that such revisions do not materially alter or impair
rights or the obligations of Grantee set forth in any franchise agreement and
are mutually agreed to by the City and grantee. 



113.04    RIGHTS RESERVED TO CITY.



   1.   Right of Amendment Reserved to City.  The City may from time
to time add to, modify or delete provisions of this chapter as it shall deem
necessary in the exercise of its lawful police powers and as may be mutually
agreed to by the City and Grantee.  Such additions or revisions shall be
made only after a public hearing for which the Grantee shall have received
written notice at least thirty (30) days prior to such hearing. 



   2.   No Impairment of City’s Rights.  Nothing herein shall be
deemed or construed to impair or affect in any way to any extent any right of
the City pursuant to State law. 



   3.   Grantee Agrees to City’s Rights.  The grantor reserves every
right and power which is required to be reserved or provided by an ordinance
of the grantor, and the grantee, by its acceptance of the franchise, agrees
to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the
grantor in its exercise of such rights or powers which have been or will be
enacted or established subject to the provisions of 9-17(d)(1). 



   4.   Police Powers of the City.  Neither the granting of any
franchise nor any provision governing the franchise shall constitute a waiver
of any lawful governmental right or power of the City. 



   5.   Grantor Transfer of Functions.  Any administrative right or
power in or administrative duty imposed upon any elected official of the City
shall be subject to transfer by the City to any other elected official,
officer, employee, department or board. 



   6.   Grantor Right of Inspection.  The City reserves the right,
during the life of any franchise granted hereunder, to inspect and oversee
all construction or installation work performed in the public right-of-way. 



   7.   City Right of Network Installation.  The City reserves the
right during the life of any franchise granted hereunder to install and
maintain for a reasonable charge upon the poles of the Grantee and pole
fixtures necessary for municipal networks on the condition that such
installation and maintenance thereof does not interfere with the operation of
the Grantee.  The Grantee agrees that such compensation or charge shall not
exceed those paid by it to public utilities pursuant to the applicable pole
attachment agreement or other authorization relating to the service area and
such use shall be non-commercial and may not be supplied for any municipal
use directly competing with the Grantee. 



113.05    APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE.



No initial franchise may be granted unless the applicant has successfully
completed the application procedure in accordance with the following filing
instructions promulgated by the City: 



   1.   Filing Fee.  Payment of a non-refundable filing fee to the
City of $100.00 which sum shall be due and payable at the time with the
submission of the application. 



   2.   Content.  All applicants must complete an application which
shall include, but not be limited, to the following: 



      A.   The name and business address of the applicant, date of
application, and signature of applicant or appropriate corporate officers.



      B.   A general description of the applicant’s proposed
operation, including but not limited to business hours, operating staff,
maintenance procedures beyond those required in the chapter, management and
marketing staff policies and procedures, and, if available, the rules of
operation for public access.



      C.   A statement of the television and radio services to be
provided, including both off-the-air and locally originated signals.



      D.   A statement setting forth a description of the automated
services proposed as well as a description of the production facilities to be
made available by the Grantee for the public, governmental and educational
channels required to be made available by the provisions of this chapter.



      E.   A statement detailing the corporation organization of the
applicant, if any, including the names and addresses of its officers and
directors and the number of shares held by each officer and director.



      F.   A statement identifying the number of authorized
outstanding shares of applicant’s stock including a current list of the
names and current addresses of its shareholders holding five percent (5%) or
more of the applicant’s outstanding stock.



      G.   A statement describing all inter-company relationships of
the applicant, including parent, subsidiary or affiliated companies.



      H.   A statement setting forth all agreements and
understandings, whether written or oral, existing between the applicant and
any other person with respect to any franchise awarded hereunder and the
conduct of the operation thereof existing at the time of proposal submittal.



      I.   A copy of the financial statements for the two (2)
previous fiscal years.



      J.   A five-year operations pro forma which shall include the
initial and continuing plant investment, annual profit and loss statements
detailing income and expenses, annual balance sheets, and annual levels of
subscriber penetration.  Costs and revenues anticipated for voluntary
services shall, if presented, be incorporated in the pro forma as required in
this chapter, but shall be separately identified in the pro forma.



      K.   Suitable written evidence from a recognized financing
institution, addressed to both applicant’s financial ability and planned
operation have been analyzed by the institution and that the financing
institution is prepared to make the required funds available to applicant if
it is awarded a franchise.  If the planned operation is to be internally
financed, a board resolution shall be supplied authorizing the obtainment and
expenditure of such funds as are required to construct, install and operate
the cable television system contemplated hereunder.



      L.   A description of system construction including the
timetable for provision and extension of service to different parts of the
City.



      M.   A technical description of the type of system proposed by
the applicant, including but not limited to system configuration, (i.e. hub,
dual cable), system capacity, two-way capability, etc.



      N.   A statement of existing franchises held by the applicant
indicating when the franchises were issued and when the cable systems were
constructed and the present state(s) of the cable system(s) in each
respective governmental unit, together with the name and address and phone
number of a responsible governmental official knowledgeable of the applicant.



      O.   A statement as to whether the applicant or any of its
officers or directors or holders of five percent or more of its voting stock
has in the past ten (10) years been convicted of or has any charges pending
for any crime other than a routine traffic offense and the disposition of
each such case.



      P.   A statement detailing the prior cable television
experience of the applicant, including that of the applicant’s officers,
management and staff to be associated, where known, with the proposed
franchise.



   The City reserves the right to require such supplementary, additional
or other information that the City deems reasonably necessary for its
determinations.  Such modifications, deletions, additions or amendments to
the application shall be considered only if specifically requested by the
City.  The Grantee, by the acceptance of any initial franchise awarded
hereunder, agrees that the matters contained in the Grantee’s application
for franchise, except as inconsistent with the FCC rules and regulations, law
or ordinance, shall be incorporated into the franchise as though set out
verbatim.



Should the Grantee fail to comply with this section, it shall acquire no
rights, privileges or authority under this chapter whatever, and the amount
of the proposal bond or certified check in lieu thereof submitted with its
application shall be forfeited in full to the City as liquidated damages.



113.06    ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF FRANCHISE.



   1.   Franchise Acceptance Procedures.  Any initial franchise
awarded hereunder or franchise renewal and the rights, privileges and
authority granted thereby shall take effect and be in force from and after
the award thereof, provided that the Grantee shall file with the City the
following: 



      A.   A statement by the Grantee of the unconditional
acceptance of the franchise,



      B.   A certificate of insurance as set forth in Section
113.18(2).



      C.   Reimbursement to the City for the costs of publication of
the franchise ordinance and the holding of the election connected therewith,
if required by law.



   2.   Grantee to Have No Recourse.  In accordance the Cable Act
Section 635A, the Grantee shall have no monetary recourse whatsoever against
the City for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising out of any provision
or requirement of this chapter or its regulation.  This shall not include
negligent acts of the City, its agents or employees which are performed
outside the regulatory or franchise awarding authority hereunder. 



   3.   Acceptance of Power and Authority of City.  The Grantee
expressly acknowledges that in accepting any franchise awarded hereunder, it
has relied upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and
authority of the City to grant the franchise. 



   4.   Inducements not Offered.  The Grantee, by acceptance of any
franchise awarded hereunder, acknowledges that it has not been induced to
enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement,
whether verbal or written, by or in behalf of the City concerning any term or
condition of the franchise that is not included in this chapter. 



   5.   Grantee Accepts Terms of Franchise.  The Grantee acknowledges
by the acceptance of the franchise and the terms herein and in this chapter
that it has carefully read said terms and conditions and it is willing to and
does accept all other obligations of such terms and conditions and further
agrees that it will not claim that any provision of this chapter as adopted,
or any franchise granted hereunder, is unreasonable or arbitrary. 



113.07    STANDARDS OF SERVICE.



   1.   Geographical Coverage.  The Grantee shall provide a cable
system in such manner as to pass and provide adequate tap off facilities for
every single family dwelling unit, multiple dwelling unit or other
residential unit within the service area, subject to the provisions of the
franchise agreement. 



   2.   Conditions of Street Occupancy.  All transmission and
distribution structures, poles, other lines, and equipment installed or
erected by the Grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located so as to
cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public ways and with
the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property
that adjoins any of such public ways.  A Grantee shall first obtain a permit
from the City prior to commencing construction on the streets, alleys, public
grounds or places and shall be on a form provided by the City.  A Grantee
shall not open or disturb the surface of any street, sidewalk, driveway or
public place for any purpose without having first obtained a permit to do so
in the manner provided by ordinance.  All excavation shall be coordinated
with other utility excavation or construction so as to minimize disruption to
the public. 



   3.   Restoration of Public Ways.  If during the course of the
Grantee’s construction, operation, or maintenance of the cable system there
occurs a disturbance of any public way by the Grantee, it shall, at its
expense, replace and restore such public way to a condition reasonably
comparable to the condition of the public way existing immediately prior to
such disturbance consistent with City permitting process and/or applicable
law. 



   4.   Relocation at Request of the City.  Upon its receipt of
reasonable advance notice, not to be less than ten (10) business days, the
Grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect,
relocate in the public way, or remove from the public way, any property of
the Grantee when lawfully required by the City by reason of traffic
conditions, public safety, street abandonment, freeway and street
construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of
sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of structures or
improvements by the City; but, the Grantee shall in all cases have the right
of abandonment of its property.  If public funds are available to any person
using such street, easement, or right of way for the purpose of defraying the
cost of any of the foregoing, the City shall provide notice to Grantee of
City’s application for such funds and allow the Grantee to apply on its own
behalf for such funds. 



   5.   Safety Requirements.  Construction, installation, and
maintenance of the system shall be performed in an orderly and worker like
manner.  All such work shall be performed in substantial accordance with
applicable FCC or other Federal, State, and local regulations and the
National Electric Safety Code.  The cable system shall not unreasonably
endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the service
area. 



   6.   Pole Agreements.  The Grantee may lease, rent, or in any other
manner by mutual agreement obtain the use of towers, poles, lines, cables,
and other equipment and facilities from utility companies operating within
the City, and use towers, poles, lines, cables, and other equipment and
facilities for the system.  When and where practicable, the poles used by
the Grantee’s distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by
such utility companies operating within the City, provided mutually
satisfactory rental agreements can be reached.  It is the City’s desire
that all holders of public franchises in the City cooperate with the Grantee
and allow the Grantee the use of their poles and pole line facilities
whenever possible so that the number of new or additional poles installed in
the City may be minimized. 



   7.   Grantee’s Poles.  The Grantee shall have the right to erect,
install, and maintain its own towers, poles, guys, anchors, underground
conduits, and manholes as may be necessary for the proper construction and
maintenance of the antenna site, headend, and distribution system, providing
that the Grantee has at the worksite the necessary City permit or copy
thereof, for scheduled work, obtained in advance from the appropriate
department of the City. 



   8.   Rent of Grantee’s Poles.  The Grantee shall have the right
to establish terms, conditions, and specifications governing the form, type,
size, quantity, and location of equipment of others on its poles, and shall
have the further right to charge a fair rental for attachment space or spaces
occupied by the said equipment and plant of others.  Any use by the City for
its attachment to the Grantee’s poles and such use shall be non-commercial
and may not be supplied for any municipal use directly competing with the
Grantee.  The City shall pay any costs incurred by the Grantee in providing
space for the City’s attachments, including any necessary rearrangements of
the Grantee’s equipment and plant to provide room for City’s
attachments.  Upon expiration, termination, or revocation of a franchise, or
should a Grantee wish to dispose of any of its poles, conduit or manholes,
being used by the City, the City shall have the option to purchase them in
place for their fair market value. 



   9.   Underground Facilities.  In those areas of the City where
transmission or distribution facilities of both telephone and power companies
are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, the Grantee shall
likewise construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and
distribution facilities underground to the maximum extent the then existing
technology permits, in accordance with the most recent National Electrical
Code, and its successor document, as well as in conformance with all
applicable State and municipal ordinances and codes.  If and when necessary,
amplifiers and/or transformers in the Grantee’s transmission and
distribution lines shall be in appropriate housings on the surface of the
ground.  The Grantee shall obtain a permit from the City for such
underground construction of all work required or pursuant to this section. 
Even when not required, underground installation is preferable to the placing
of additional poles. 



   10.   Compliance to Codes.  All transmission and distribution
structures, lines, and equipment erected by the Grantee in the City shall be
located so as not to endanger or interfere with the normal use of streets,
alleys, or other public ways and places so as to cause minimum interference
with the rights or reasonable convenience of the general public and adjoining
property owners and so as not to interfere with existing public utility
installations and so as to comply with the most recent National Electrical
Code, as amended, as well as in conformance with all applicable State and
municipal ordinances and codes of general applicability.  In the case of any
disturbance by the Grantee or its equipment of pavement, sidewalks, driveway,
lawn, or other surfacing the Grantee shall, at its expense and in the manner
required by the City, promptly replace and restore all such surfacing to a
reasonably comparable condition.  The construction, installation, operation,
maintenance, and/or removal of the cable communications system shall meet all
of the following safety, construction, and technical specifications and codes
and standards:



      A.   Occupational Safety and Health Administration Regulations
(OSHA)



      B.   National Electric Code



      C.   National Electrical Safety Code (NESC)



      D.   All Federal, State and Municipal Construction
requirements, including FCC Rules and Regulations



      E.   All Building and Zoning Codes, as the same exist or may
be amended hereafter



      F.   City Standard Specifications



   11.   Interference with Other Utilities.  The Grantee shall not
place poles, conduits, or other fixtures above or below ground where the same
shall interfere with any prior placement of gas, electric, telephone
fixtures, water hydrant, or other utilities, and all such poles, conduits, or
other fixtures above or below ground shall be so placed as to comply with all
the requirements of the City. 



   12.   Moving Permits.  The Grantee shall, on request of any persons
holding a moving permit issued by the City, temporarily move its wires or
fixtures to permit the moving of buildings.  The expense of such temporary
removal shall be paid in advance by the person requesting the same, and the
Grantee shall be given not less than seven (7) business days’ advance
notice to arrange for such temporary changes. 



   13.   Authority to Trim Trees and Shrubbery.  The Grantee shall
have the authority under the supervision and direction of the grantor to trim
trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its cable system in the
street or alley right-of-way so as to prevent branches from coming in contact
with the Grantee’s wires, cables, or other equipment.  The Grantee shall
reasonably compensate the City or property owner for any damages caused by
such trimming, or shall, in its sole discretion, and at its own cost and
expense, reasonably replace all trees or shrubs damaged as a result of any
construction of the cable system undertaken by Grantee.  Such replacement
shall satisfy any and all obligations Grantee may have to the City pursuant
to the terms of this section. 



   14.   Service Area.  The Grantee shall design and construct the
cable system in such a manner as to pass by and provide adequate tap-off
facilities for every single family dwelling, multiple family dwelling,
apartment, school and government building located within the City limits of
Grinnell, Iowa, based upon the corporate boundaries at the time of the
granting of the franchise, provided that such locations meet the density
requirements pursuant to Section 113.07(19) – Extension of Service. 



   15.   Underground Construction.  Grantee shall participate in and
use Iowa One Call and ensure that cable is buried pursuant to standards
established by Iowa One Call or competitive company. 



   16.   Temporary Drops.  Temporary drops shall be buried within two
(2) months of installation, except during the winter months which shall be
defined as November 15 to April 1.  In the event that the Grantee fails to
bury any cable drops, within the two- month period and after notice from the
City, the Grantee shall provide basic and expanded basic cable service
without charge to the affected cable subscriber from the last date that the
drop was to have been buried to that actual date that it is buried. 



   17.   Closing of Streets.  The Grantee shall not be entitled to
damages from the City sustained by the virtue of the closing, vacation, or
relocation of any streets or alleys. 



   18.   Private Easements.  No cable, line, wire, amplifier,
converter or other pieces of equipment owned by the Grantee shall be
installed by the Grantee within private easements without first securing the
written permission of the owner, lessee or tenant of the property involved,
unless a private easement is determined to be available for use by the
grantee in accordance with applicable law. 



   19.   Extension of Service.  Any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter shall require that a Grantee shall, at its expense, promptly extend
its system to have service available to all potential subscribers of: 



      A.   The corporate limits of the City and newly annexed areas
to the City, not then served by a cable system, where the average density is
at least fifteen (15) potential homes per lineal mile of the proposed trunk
and feeder cable route.



      B.   The cable system as constructed as of the date of the
passage and final adoption of this chapter substantially complies with the
material provisions hereof.  Grantee is hereby authorized to extend the
cable system as necessary, as desirable, or as required pursuant to the terms
hereof within the service area.  Whenever Grantee shall receive a request
for service from at least fifteen (15) potential subscribers within 5,280
cable-bearing strand feet (one cable mile) of its trunk or distribution
cable, it shall extend its cable system to such subscribers at no cost to
said subscribers for system extension, other than the usual connection fees
for all subscribers.



      C.   No subscriber shall be refused services arbitrarily. 
The Grantee shall provide service extensions to all new annexed areas to the
City within one year of the annexation.  However, for unusual circumstances,
such as a subscriber’s request to locate the cable drop underground, in an
area where all transmission lines are overhead, existence of more than one
hundred fifty (150) feet of distance from distribution cable to connection of
service to subscribers, or a density of less than fifteen (15) potential
subscribers per 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution
cable, cable service or other service may be made available on the basis of a
capital contribution in aid of construction, including cost of material,
labor, and easements.  For the purpose of determining the amount of capital
contribution in aid of construction to be borne by Grantee and subscribers in
the areas in which cable service may be expanded, Grantee will contribute an
amount equal to the construction and other costs per mile, multiplied by a
fraction whose numerator equals the actual number of potential subscribers
per 5,280 cable- bearing strand feet of its trunk or distribution cable, and
whose denominator equals 15 subscribers.  Potential subscribers will bear
the remainder of the construction and other costs on a pro rata basis. 
Grantee may require that the payment of the capital contribution in aid of
construction borne by such potential subscribers be paid in advance.



   20.   Service to Public Buildings.  Any Grantee shall upon request,
provide without charge, one outlet of basic service and expanded basic
service to those public buildings which identified in its franchise agreement
in accordance with the terms set forth in the franchise agreement. 



   21.   Customer Service Standards – FCC Model.  Grantee of a cable
television franchise shall adhere to the FCC customer service standards.  In
addition to the FCC customer service standards, the Grantee shall also adhere
to the following standards:



      A.   The Grantee shall provide written information on each of
the following areas at the time of installation of service, and at any time
upon request:



         (1)   Products and services offered;



         (2)   Prices and options for services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services;



         (3)   Installation and service maintenance policies;



         (4)   Instructions on how to use the service;



         (5)   Channel positions of programming carried on the
system; and



         (6)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the
address and telephone number of the City’s cable office.



      B.   Subscribers will be notified of any changes in rates,
programming services or channel positions as soon as possible, in accordance
with FCC requirements.  Notice will be given to subscribers a minimum of
thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the
control of the Grantee.



      C.   Bills will be clear, concise and understandable.  Bills
will be fully itemized, with itemization including, but not limited to, basic
and premium service charges and equipment charges.  Bills will also clearly
delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges,
rebates and credits.



      D.   In case of a billing dispute, the Grantee will respond to
a written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) calendar days from
receipt of the complaint.



      E.   Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than
forty-five (45) days.



      F.   Credits for service will be issued no later than the
subscriber’s next billing cycle following the determination that the credit
is warranted.



   22.   Deposits.  If required by Federal law, a Grantee shall bear
interest at the minimum lending rate required by law on any subscriber
deposit or a rate equal to that paid by the City for municipal water and/or
sewer deposits. 



   23.   Subscribers Antennas.  A Grantee shall not require the
removal of any potential or existing subscriber’s antenna as a condition of
provision of service. 



   24.   Disconnection.  There shall be no charge for a total
disconnection of cable service.  If any subscriber fails to pay a fee or
charge, a Grantee may disconnect the subscriber’s service.  Such
disconnection shall not be effected until the subscriber has been given ten
(10) days’ advance written notice of the intention to disconnect.  After
disconnection, upon payment of any required delinquent fee or reconnection
charge, the Grantee shall reinstate the subscriber’s service. 



   25.   Reconnections.  A Grantee shall restore service to customers
wishing restoration of service provided customer shall first satisfy any
previous obligations owed. 



   26.   Downgrades.  Subscribers shall have the right to have cable
service disconnected or downgraded in accordance with FCC rules.  The
reduced billing for such service will be effective immediately and such
disconnection or downgrade shall be made as soon as practicable.  A refund
of unused service charges shall be paid to the customer within thirty (30)
days from the date of termination of service. 



   27.   Termination of Service.  Within thirty (30) days of
termination of service to any subscriber for any reason, a Grantee may, upon
the subscriber’s written request, promptly remove all its aerial facilities
and equipment from the subscriber’s premises, pursuant to FCC rules and
regulations. 



   28.   Notification to City of Service Interruptions.  A Grantee
shall promptly notify the City, in writing, or if appropriate, by oral
communication, of any significant interruption in the operation of the
system.  For the purposes of this section, a “significant interruption in
the operation of the system” shall mean any interruption of audio or video
on one or more channels a duration of at least two hours to at least an
estimated five hundred (500) subscribers. 



   29.   Subscriber Credit for Service Interruptions.  Upon service
interruption of subscriber’s cable service, the following shall apply
except in the case of a cable system upgrade: 



      A.   For service interruptions of over four (4) hours and up
to seven (7) days, the Grantee shall provide, a credit of one-thirtieth
(1/30) of one month’s fees for affected services for each 24-hour period
service is interrupted for four (4) or more hours for all affected
subscribers.



      B.   For interruptions of fifteen (15) days or more in one
month, the grantee shall provide, a full month’s credit for affected
services for all affected subscribers, except in situations beyond the
control of the Grantee.



   30.   Service Repair Standards.  A Grantee shall render efficient
service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and
for the shortest time possible.  Scheduled service interruptions, insofar as
possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of
minimum use of the cable system.  A written log or an equivalent stored in
computer memory and capable of access and reproduction shall be maintained
for all service interruptions, as required by this chapter. 



   31.   Refunds to Subscribers. 



      A.   If a Grantee fails to provide any material service
requested by a subscriber in accordance with the current FCC standards, the
Grantee shall, after adequate notification and being afforded the opportunity
to provide the service, promptly refund all deposits or advance charges paid
for the service in question by the subscriber.



      B.   If any subscriber terminates for any other reason, a
Grantee shall refund the unused portion of any prepaid subscriber service fee
on a daily pro rata basis.  The effective date used to pro rate such refunds
shall be the date that the subscriber contacts the Grantee or a mutually
agreed upon date.



      C.   Any disputes arising under this section shall be resolved
in accordance with Section 113.17(5) of this chapter.



   32.   Channel Card.  A Grantee shall prepare and make available on
annual basis at no charge to all subscribers, an accurate and up-to-date
channel card listing the cable channels and services available over the cable
system.  The channel card shall be distributed to every new subscriber, and
within thirty (30) days after a change or addition in channels or services
offered affecting two (2) or more channels via a newspaper of record, direct
mail, or bill stuffers. 



   33.   Customer Handbook.  A Grantee shall provide written customer
policies or a handbook to all new subscribers and, thereafter, upon
request.  Grantee’s written customer policies or handbook shall, at a
minimum, comply with all notice requirements in this chapter and those
promulgated by the FCC.  If a Grantee’s operating rules are changed,
subscribers shall be notified in a timely manner. 



   34.   Subscriber Privacy.  A Grantee shall be constantly alert to
possible abuses of the right of privacy or other legal rights of any
subscriber, programmer, or general citizen resulting from any device or
signal associated with the cable system.  Any Grantee shall abide by current
Federal law and FCC regulations and Section 631 of the Cable Act regarding
protection of subscriber privacy.



   35.   Discriminatory or Preferential Practices.  A Grantee shall
not, in making available the services or facilities of its cable system, or
in its rules or regulations, or in any other manner, make or grant
preferences or advantages to any subscriber or potential subscriber, or to
any user or potential user, and shall not subject any person to any prejudice
or disadvantage, based on their race, color, national origin or gender. 
This provision shall not prohibit promotional campaigns to stimulate
subscriptions to the cable system or other legitimate uses thereof, or the
establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules
to which any subscriber coming within such classification shall be entitled. 



   36.   Identification of Employees.  Every field service and
installation employee of the Grantee shall be clearly identified by an
identification card, badge or uniform shirt.  All employees of Grantee shall
display proper identification upon request of a subscriber, provided that the
grantor requires all utilities operating in the City to do the same.  Every
field service and installation vehicle of the Grantee shall be clearly marked
by logo or decals. 



113.08    SYSTEM DESIGN AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   1.   Emergency Alert System.  The Grantee shall provide an
emergency alert system (“EAS”) in accordance with FCC regulations.  The
City shall permit only appropriately trained and authorized persons to
operate the EAS equipment and shall take reasonable precautions to prevent
any use of the Grantee’s cable system in any manner that results in
inappropriate use thereof, or any loss or damage to the cable system. 
Except to the extent expressly prohibited by law, the City shall hold the
Grantee, its employees, officers and assigns harmless from any claims arising
out of use of the EAS, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys’
fees and costs. 



   2.   Switching Device.  A Grantee, upon request from any
subscriber, shall install at a reasonable charge a switching device to permit
a subscriber to continue to utilize the subscriber’s television antenna. 
The Grantee shall not require the removal, or offer to remove, any
subscriber’s antenna lead-in wire. 



   3.   Parental Control Devices.  Upon request, and within one
hundred twenty (120) days, Grantee shall provide at a reasonable charge to
subscribers, parental control devices that allow any channel or channels to
be locked out.  Such devices shall block both the video and the audio
portion of such channels to the extent that both are unintelligible.  The
lockout device described herein shall be made available to all subscribers
requesting it beginning on the first day that any cable service is provided. 



   4.   Educational and Governmental Channels.  A Grantee shall
provide non- commercial education and government channels in accordance with
its franchise agreement.  Such channels shall be operated in accord with FCC
rules and regulations.  The City shall exercise sole control over the
operation and shall establish rules providing for access to the education and
government channels. 



   5.   Leased Access Channels.  Any Grantee shall make a portion of
the remaining unused channels available for lease to any organization, group,
or individual on a first-come, first-served basis as provided in this chapter
and as required by Section 612 of the Cable Act. 



   6.   Interference.  The cable system shall be designed, engineered,
and maintained so as not to interfere with the television and radio reception
of residents of the City who are not subscribers on the cable system.  The
City and its departments shall use best efforts to design, engineer, and
maintain any communication or electronic systems not to interfere with any
City’s cable system. 



   7.   Additional Services.  The Grantee is encouraged to make
available such additional video, audio, radio, digital, point-to-point
service, and other services as are requested by subscribers and programmers
who are willing to pay for such services, provided that such services are
technologically and economically feasible.  If no applicable rate exists
when such a service is requested, the rate change procedures established in
Section 113.10 shall be followed. 



   8.   Technical Standards.  The Grantee shall provide, as part of
its cable television service, the signal of all television broadcast signals
consistent with the rules and regulations of the FCC and all other applicable
laws, rules, or regulations of the FCC and all other applicable laws, rules
or regulations. 



      A.   Methods of construction, installation, and maintenance of
the cable television system shall comply with the most recent National
Electrical Code and applicable law.  The Grantee must obtain all necessary
construction or excavation permits in advance from the City.



      B.   Installation and physical dimensions of any tower
constructed for use in the cable television system shall comply with all
appropriate FCC regulations.



      C.   Any antenna structure used in the cable system shall
comply with all appropriate local, State, and Federal regulations.



      D.   All working facilities and conditions used during
construction, installation, and maintenance of the cable system shall comply
with the standards of the occupational safety and health administration.



      E.   Unless it is beyond the knowledge of the Grantee, the
Grantee shall notify the City at least thirty (30) days prior to, or as soon
as it is known by the Grantee, of any of the following changes:



         (1)   Addition to, deletion of, or change in received
channel.



         (2)   Addition to, deletion of, or change in distributed
channel or in channel conversion.



      F.   The cable system permitted to be operated hereunder shall
be maintained and operated in conformance with FCC rules and regulations. 
Any FCC technical standards or guidelines related to the cable system and
facilities shall be deemed to be regulations under this franchise.  At such
time as the FCC does not regulate technical standards, Grantee will continue
to comply with the FCC standards which were effective prior to such
discontinuance of regulation by the FCC. 



   9.   Filing of Maps.  Upon request of the City, the Grantee shall
file with the City strand maps, showing the location of all property and
facilities of the Grantee within the City.  All maps supplied by the Grantee
shall be considered confidential and proprietary. 



113.09    FRANCHISE FEE.



   1.   Franchise Fee Payment.  In consideration for the use of the
streets and public ways of the City for the construction, operation,
maintenance, and reconstruction of a cable system within the City, the
Grantee shall pay to the City an annual amount equal to five percent (5%) of
a Grantee’s gross revenues as defined in Section 113.01 of this chapter. 



   2.   Quarterly Payments.  Payment due to the City under the
franchise agreement shall be made quarterly at the Clerk’s office not later
than forty-five (45) days following March 31, June 30, September 30 and
December 31 of each year.  Any fee not paid when due shall bear interest at
a rate of one and one-half percent (1½%) per month from the date due.  Each
payment shall be accompanied with a detailed report showing the basis for the
computation, specific income categories, and such other relevant facts as may
be required by the City necessary to determine the accuracy of the franchise
payment as specified in of this chapter.  The acceptance of any payment
shall not be construed as an accord that the amount paid is, in fact, the
correct amount; nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a
release of any claim the City may have for additional sums payable by the
Grantee.  All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by
the City. 



   3.   Franchise Fee Audit.  A Grantee will fully cooperate with a
franchise fee audit performed by a professional firm that is chosen by the
City.  The costs associated with the audit will be paid for by the City,
except that the Grantee shall pay for the costs if the audit shows an
underpayment of franchise fees in excess of five percent (5%) or more. 



   4.   Franchise Fee Increases.  The City may request an increase in
franchise fees at any time during the term of the franchise, equal to the
maximum allowed by Federal law.  However, such request shall be made in
writing and the Grantee will not be liable for said increase until proper
notice, as defined by Federal law, is given to its subscriber.  Prior to
making a final decision regarding an increase in franchise fees, the City
shall conduct a public hearing and shall grant an opportunity to the Grantee
to discuss the proposed increase in franchise fee. 



   5.   Limitation on Franchise Fee Actions.  The period of limitation
for recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be five (5) years
from the date on which payment by a Grantee is due. 



   6.   Annual Review.  On an annual basis, Grantees shall provide the
City with a statement of annual gross revenues signed by an authorized
representative of the Grantee, reflecting the amount of franchise fees paid
to the City and the method the amount was computed.  The Grantee agrees to
permit the City, upon request with reasonable notice, to review at
Grantee’s local office its gross revenue records as may be necessary to
monitor compliance with this section.



113.10    RATES AND CHARGES.



The City may regulate rates for the provision of basic cable and equipment as
permitted by the Cable Act.  Any rate adjustments shall be filed with the
Clerk not later than thirty (30) days prior to the implementation of the
adjustment.



113.11    FRANCHISE RENEWAL.



Any proceedings undertaken by the City that relate to the renewal of a
Grantee’s franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of
Section 626 of the Cable Act, as amended, unless the procedures and
substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and
superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provision of Federal law. 



113.12    CONDITIONS OF SALE.



If a renewal or extension of a Grantee’s franchise is denied or the
franchise is lawfully terminated, and the City either lawfully acquires
ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully effects a transfer
of ownership of the cable system to another person, any such acquisition or
transfer shall be at a price determined pursuant to the provisions set forth
in Section 627 of the Cable Act.  In the case of a final determination of a
lawful revocation of the franchise, at the Grantee’s request, which shall
be made in its sole discretion, the grantee shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to effectuate a transfer of its system to a qualified third
party.  During such a period the City further agrees that it shall authorize
the Grantee to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior
franchise.  However, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of
time greater than six (6) months from the effective date of such
revocation.  If, at the end of that time, the Grantee is unsuccessful in
procuring a qualified transferee or assignee of its system which is
reasonably acceptable to the City, the Grantee and the City may avail
themselves of any rights they may have pursuant to Federal or State law. 
The Grantee may continue to operate of its system during the six-month period
and it shall not be deemed to be a waiver or an extinguishment of any right
of either the City or the Grantee.



113.13    TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.



Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be a privilege to be held for
the benefit of the public.  Any franchise so granted cannot, in any event,
be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including, but not
limited to, by forced or voluntary sale, except to entity controlling,
controlled by or under common control with the Grantee, without the prior
written consent of the City.  Such consent, as required by the City, shall
be given or denied no later than 120 days following any request and shall not
be unreasonable withheld.  Prior consent shall not be required when
transferring the franchise between wholly owned subsidiaries of the same
entity, nor shall such consent be required for a transfer in trust, by
mortgage, by other hypothecation, or assignment of any rights, title, or
interest of the Grantee in the cable system in order to secure indebtedness. 



   1.   Ownership or Control.  In the event that the Grantee sells or
otherwise transfers ownership in the cable system, such sale or transfer
shall conform to Section 617 of the Cable Act.  For the purpose of
determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition
of control, the City may in accordance with Section 617 inquire into the
qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the Grantee shall
assist the City in any such inquiry.  In seeking the City’s consent to any
change in ownership or control, the transferee shall have the
responsibility: 



      A.   To show to the satisfaction of the City whether the
proposed purchaser, transferee, or assignee (the “proposed transferee”),
which in the case of a corporation shall include all directors and all
persons having a legal or equitable interest of fifty percent (50%) or more
of the voting stock:



         (1)   Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts
involving moral turpitude including, but not limited to, any violation of
Federal, State or local law or regulations, or is presently under an
indictment, investigation or complaint charging such acts;



         (2)   Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud,
deceit or misrepresentation entered against it, her, him, or them by any
court of competent jurisdiction; or



         (3)   Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or
administrative proceeding arising out of or involving a cable system.



The City retains the right to withhold approval of the transfer until the
transferee has provided the information required in this paragraph.



      B.   To establish the financial solvency of the proposed
transferee by submitting all current financial data for the proposed
transferee and such other data to determine the legal, financial, and
technical qualification of the transferee, as the City may request, where the
same shall be audited, certified and qualified by a certified public
accountant.



      C.   To establish that the technical capability of the
proposed transferee is such as shall enable it to maintain and operate the
cable system for the remaining term of the franchise under the existing
franchise terms.



   2.   Any financial institution having a pledge of the franchise or
its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation
of the franchise shall have the right to notify the franchising authority
that the financial institution, or its designee, as approved in writing by
the City, shall take control and operate the cable system in the event of a
Grantee default in its financial obligations.  Further, said financial
institution shall also submit a plan for such operation that will ensure
continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the
term the financial institution exercises control over the system.  The
financial institution shall not exercise control over the cable system for a
period exceeding one (1) year, unless extended by the City at its discretion,
but during said period of time it shall have the right to petition the City
to transfer the franchise to another Grantee.  Except insofar as the
enforceability of this subsection may be limited by applicable bankruptcy,
insolvency, reorganization, moratorium or similar laws affecting creditors’
rights generally, and further subject to applicable Federal, State or local
law, if the City finds that such transfer, after considering the legal,
financial, character, technical and other public interest qualities of the
proposed transferee, is satisfactory, the City shall transfer and assign the
right and obligations of such franchise as in the public interest.



   3.   The consent or approval of the City to any transfer by the
Grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the City in
and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subject
to the terms and conditions of any franchise.



   4.   In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be
approved without the successor in interest becoming a signatory of the
franchise agreement.



   5.   The City may approve the transfer or deny the transfer pursuant
to Section 617 of the Cable Act.



   6.   When the City approves a transfer under this section, the new
grantee shall indicate acceptance of the franchise as specified in Section
113.06 including the filing of all necessary bonds, funds, proofs of
insurance and certifications.



   7.   The restrictions of this section shall be effective immediately
upon execution of a franchise agreement.



113.14    RIGHT OF INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION.



The City shall have the right to visually inspect all construction or
installation work performed subject to the provisions of this chapter and to
make such visual inspections as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other pertinent provision of law. 



113.15    NEW DEVELOPMENTS.



The Grantee is encouraged to upgrade its facilities, equipment, and service
so that its cable system is advanced.  New developments shall be a topic of
discussion at all review sessions and shall be a factor to be considered in
connection with requests for rate adjustments, pursuant to FCC rules and
regulations. 



113.16    CITY’S RIGHT TO PURCHASE SYSTEM.



Subject to applicable Federal, State and local law, at the expiration or
revocation of the franchise, the City may, in lawful manner and upon the
payment in readily available funds of fair market value, purchase the system
as described in Section 113.12.



113.17    COMPLIANCE AND MONITORING.



   1.   Testing for Compliance.  The Grantee shall meet or exceed all
FCC minimum performance and technical standards.  The City shall have the
right to compel the Grantee to provide results of Grantee’s testing of the
cable system.  In the event City has evidence of noncompliance, the grantor
may also perform technical tests of the cable system during reasonable times
and in a manner which does not unreasonably interfere with the normal
business operations of the grantee or the cable system in order to determine
whether or not the Grantee is in compliance with the terms hereof and
applicable State or Federal laws.  Such tests may be undertaken only after
giving the Grantee reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than ten
business days, and providing a representative of the Grantee has an
opportunity to be present during such tests.  In the event that such testing
demonstrates that the Grantee has substantially failed to comply with a
material requirement hereof, the reasonable costs of such tests shall be
borne by the Grantee.  In the event that such testing demonstrates that the
Grantee has substantially complied with such material provisions hereof, the
cost of such testing shall be borne by the City.  Except in emergency
circumstances, the City agrees that such testing shall be undertaken no more
than once a year, and that the results thereof shall be made available to the
Grantee.  Any such special performance tests or measurements required by the
City shall be reported to the City within fourteen (14) business days after
such test or measurements are performed.  Such report shall include the
following information:  the nature of the complaint which precipitated the
special tests; what system component was tested, the equipment used, and
procedures employed in said testing; the results of such tests; and the
method in which such complaints were resolved.  Any other information
pertinent to the special test shall be recorded.



   2.   Books and Records.  The City or its certified public
accountant upon reasonable notice to the Grantee may review such of its books
and records at the Grantee’s business office, during normal business hours
and on a non-disruptive basis, as is reasonably necessary to ensure
compliance with the terms hereof.  Such records shall include, but shall not
be limited to, any public records required to be kept by the Grantee pursuant
to the rules and regulations of the FCC.  Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary set forth herein, the Grantee shall not be required to disclose
information which it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in
nature under State and Federal rules of evidence.  The City agrees to treat
any information disclosed by the Grantee as confidential and only to disclose
it to employees, representatives, and agents thereof that have a need to
know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof.  The Grantee shall not
be required to provide subscriber information in violation of Section 631 of
the Cable Act. 



   3.   Communications with Regulatory Agencies.  Copies of all
petitions, applications, communications, reports, and all other documents
pertaining to the Grinnell cable system and franchise submitted by the
Grantee or its parent companies to the FCC, Securities Exchange Commission,
or any other Federal or State regulatory commission or agency shall be made
available to the City upon written request to the Grantee. 



   4.   Complaint Records.  A written log or an equivalent stored in
computer memory and capable of access and reproduction shall be maintained
for all service interruptions or complaints regarding system service
problems.  The Grantee shall maintain detailed logs setting forth the date
and substance of each service interruption or complaint regarding the system
service problems received by phone, mail or other means during the preceding
calendar month, and the date and nature of action taken by the Grantee to
respond to such complaints, or, if still pending, the status thereof.  Such
logs shall be available to the City for review for two years thereafter.  A
“complaint” as used herein shall be a written or oral complaint from a
subscriber regarding signal quality or service or service, but not regarding
programming or rates which, in the case of oral complaints is not resolved
within the original telephone call or visit from the subscriber. 



   5.   City Role in Complaints.  Unresolved complaints concerning the
system or its operation or maintenance may be directed to the City Manager. 
The City Manager shall promptly forward the complaint to the Grantee or shall
take the question up by correspondence with the Grantee.  The procedure to
handle complaints and grievances shall be as follows:



      A.   Within thirty (30) days from the occurrence of the facts
and circumstances giving rise to a complaint or grievance, the complainant
shall state the complaint or grievance to the Grantee in writing.  In the
event such a complaint or grievance is received by the City, the same shall
be forwarded to Grantee in writing.



      B.   Within five (5) business days from the receipt by the
Grantee of a complaint from the City, the Grantee shall state to complainant
its intentions with respect to the complaint in writing.



      C.   Unresolved complaints concerning the system or its
operation or maintenance shall be directed to the City Manager.  The City
Manager shall forward the complaint to the Grantee or shall take the question
up by correspondence with the Grantee.  Within such time as may be
prescribed by the City Manager, the Grantee shall resolve the complaint or
advise the City of its refusal or inability to do so.  When the Grantee
resolves the complaint, it shall so notify the City.  If a complaint has not
been resolved, the complainant may petition the City to take any appropriate
action authorized by this chapter.



      D.   All subscribers shall be notified by the Grantee at the
time of their initial installation of these complaint procedures in writing.



      E.   Nothing herein shall limit or alter the requirement or
requirements contained in this chapter for customer service standards as
contained in Appendix A to the ordinance codified in this chapter.



   The City shall be notified of action taken to resolve grievances or
complaints.



   6.   Performance Testing.  Grantee shall perform all cable system
tests and maintenance procedures as required by the FCC and this chapter. 



   7.   Review Sessions. 



      A.   Purpose of Review Sessions.  In recognition of the fact
that a great many technical, financial, marketing and legal uncertainties are
associated with all aspects of cable communications at the present time, it
is the intent of the City to provide for a maximum feasible degree of
flexibility in a franchise throughout its term to achieve an advanced and
modern cable system for the City.  The principal means for accomplishing
this flexibility will be the scheduled review sessions provided for in this
chapter. It is intended that such review sessions will serve as a means of
cooperatively working out solutions to problems that develop.  Furthermore,
such review sessions shall be two-way processes.  For example, if either
party has perceived that some major problem has developed, the session shall
be devoted primarily to working out solutions acceptable to both parties. 



      B.   Topics to be Covered.  The City and the Grantee shall
hold scheduled review sessions on the third, sixth, and ninth anniversary
dates of the effective date of a franchise agreement.  All such review
sessions shall be open to the public and notice thereof shall be published
once, not less than four (4) days or more than twenty (20) days before each
review session, as provided by law.  The published notice shall specify the
topics to be discussed.  The review sessions may be canceled by mutual
agreement of the City and Grantee.  The following topics may be discussed at
every scheduled review session: 



         (1)   Recent and developing judicial and federal
communications rulings



         (2)   Service rate structures



         (3)   Free and discounted services application of new
technology or new developments



         (4)   Cable system performance cable system extension
policy



         (5)   Services provided



         (6)   Programming offered customer complaints review



         (7)   Community development and education



         (8)   Interconnection new services



         (9)   Subscriber privacy abuse issues



         (10)   New developments



         (11)   Franchise fees



Other topics, in addition to those listed, may be added by either party. 
Members of the general public may also request additional topics.



   8.   Regulatory Responsibility.  The City, acting alone or acting
jointly with other franchising authorities, may exercise or delegate the
following responsibilities: 



      A.   Administering the provision of a cable system
franchise(s),



      B.   Coordinating the operation a local access channel and
facilities,



      C.   Providing technical, programming and operational support
to public agency users, such as government departments, schools and health
care institutions,



      D.   Establishing jointly with a Grantee, or as otherwise
specified in the franchise agreement, procedures and standards for use of
channels dedicated to public use and the sharing of public facilities, if
provided for in any franchise agreement,



      E.   Planning the expansion and growth of public benefit cable
services,



      F.   Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable systems
with other local, regional or national telecommunications networks,



      G.   Formulating and recommending long-range
telecommunications policy.



   9.   Annual Report.  No later than ninety (90) days after the close
of the Grantee’s fiscal year, and upon written request, the Grantee shall
submit a detailed written informative report to the City, including the
following information pertaining only to the Grinnell franchise: 



      A.   A summary of the previous year’s activities in
development of the cable system, including, but not limited to, services
begun or dropped.



      B.   A detailed revenue statement including a breakdown of all
revenue sources upon which the City can verify franchise fee accuracy.  The
list of revenues shall include but not be limited to, a specific breakdown of
gross revenues.  The Grantee shall provide a statement of revenues for
January and December.



      C.   A summary of complaints, identifying the number and
specific nature of complaints and their disposition.



      D.   A list of key management for the Grinnell franchise along
with their addresses and job titles.



      E.   The annual report of the parent company, if a public
corporation.  Such report shall be construed to mean the report of the
previous year.



113.18    INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION.



   1.   Indemnification.  Any Grantee shall indemnify, protect, hold
harmless, and defend the City, its officers, boards and employees, from and
against any liability for damages and for any liability or claims resulting
from property damage or bodily injury, including death, for any person, firm,
entity or anyone whatsoever, which may arise directly or indirectly out of
the Grantee’s construction, operation, or maintenance of its cable system
by Grantee, its employees, officers or agents, including but not limited to
reasonable attorney’s fees and costs, provided that the City shall give the
Grantee written notice of its obligation to indemnify the City within 30 days
following service of a petition or other similar pleading.  If the City
determines that it is necessary for it to employ separate counsel, the costs
for such separate counsel shall be the responsibility of the City. 



   2.   Insurance Coverage and Notifications.  A Grantee shall
maintain insurance in such amounts and kinds of coverage as may be specified
by the City in the franchise agreement.  Such coverage may be reasonably
adjusted by the City with 90-day notification, provided that the City
demonstrates the need for increases in coverage.  The Grantee shall maintain
such insurance with insurance underwriters authorized to do business in the
State of Iowa.  All policies shall name the City, its employees, servants,
agents, and officers as additional insured parties.  Each policy shall
provide that it may not be canceled or the amount of coverage altered until
thirty (30) days after receipt by the City Clerk of a registered mail notice
of such intent to cancel or alter coverage.  The Grantee shall provide a
certificate of insurance designating the City as an “additional insured.”



   3.   Insurance for Contractors and Subcontractors.  Any Grantee
shall require coverage for any contractor or subcontractor involved in the
construction, installation, maintenance or operation of its cable system by
either obtaining the necessary endorsements to its insurance policies or
requiring such contractor or subcontractor to obtain appropriate insurance
coverage consistent with this section and appropriate to the extent of its
involvement in the construction, installation, maintenance or operation of
the Grantee’s cable system. 



   4.   Foreclosure.  A foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or
part of the system shall be treated as a change in control of the Grantee. 



   5.   Receivership.  The City shall have the right to cancel the
franchise 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee, to take
over and conduct the business of the Grantee, whether in receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action or proceedings, unless such
receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration
of said 120 days, or less: 



      A.   Within 120 days after being elected or appointed, such
receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all provisions of this
article and remedied all defaults thereunder; and



      B.   Shall have executed an agreement, approved by the court
having jurisdiction, whereby such receiver or trustee agrees to be bound by
this chapter and the franchise granted to the Grantee.



   6.   Continuity of Service. 



      A.   Right to Continuous Service.  It shall be the right of
all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and
other obligations to the Grantee are honored.  In the event that the Grantee
elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the cable system, or the City gives notice
in accordance with the franchise or this chapter to terminate or fails to
renew the franchise, the Grantee shall act so as to ensure that all
subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service for six (6) months. 
In the event of a change of Grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires
the cable system, the original Grantee shall cooperate with the City, new
Grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all
subscribers.  During such period, Grantee shall be entitled to the revenue
for any period during which it operates the cable system, and shall be
entitled to reasonable fees for its services when it no longer operates the
cable system. 



      B.   Right of City to Operate Cable System.  In the event
Grantee fails to operate the system for seven (7) consecutive days without
prior approval of the City or without just cause, the City may, working in
conjunction with any financial institution having a pledge of the franchise
or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or
operation of the franchise, operate the system or designate an operator until
such time as Grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the City
or a permanent operator is selected.  If the City is required to fulfill
this obligation for the Grantee, then during such period as the City fulfills
such obligation, the City shall be entitled to a reasonable management fee. 



   7.   Franchise Publication Costs. 



      A.   Initial Franchises.  For an initial franchise awarded,
the costs to be borne by the Grantee shall include, but shall not be limited
to, all costs of publication of notices prior to any public meeting,
publication of relevant ordinances and franchise agreements, incurred by the
City. 



      B.   Franchise Renewal.  For a franchise renewal, the Grantee
shall reimburse the City cost of publication of notices, publication of,
relevant ordinances, and publication of franchise agreements. 



      C.   Franchise Transfer.  For a franchise transfer, the
transferee shall reimburse the City the cost of publication of notices,
publication of relevant ordinances and publication of franchise agreements. 
The City reserves the right to withhold approval of such transfer until all
such costs have been reimbursed by the transferee. 



      D.   Other Costs.  The publication costs provided for in this
section shall be in addition to any other inspection or permit fee or other
fees due to City under any other ordinance of general applicability. 



   8.   Taxes.  Subject to Federal and State law, the Grantee shall
pay all real estate taxes, special assessments, personal property taxes,
license fees, permit fees and other generally applicable charges of a like
nature which may be taxed, charged, assessed, levied, or imposed upon the
property of the Grantee and upon any services rendered by the Grantee. 



113.19    ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE.



   1.   Notice of Violation.  In the event that the City believes that
the Grantee has not complied with the terms of the franchise, it shall notify
the Grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance. 



   2.   Grantee’s Right to Cure or Respond.  The Grantee shall have
thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice described in subsection 1:  (i)
to respond to the City, contesting the assertion of noncompliance; or (ii) to
cure such default; or (iii) in the event that, by the nature of default, such
default cannot be cured within the 30-day period, initiate reasonable steps
to remedy such default and notify the City of the steps being taken and the
projected date that they will be completed. 



   3.   Public Hearing.  In the event that the Grantee fails to
respond to the notice described in subsection 1 pursuant to the procedures
set forth in subsection 2, or in the event that the alleged default is not
remedied within thirty (30) days or the date projected pursuant to subsection
2 above, the City shall schedule a public hearing to investigate the
default.  The City shall notify the Grantee in writing of the time and place
of such meeting no less than five (5) business days in advance and provide
the Grantee with an opportunity to be heard.  The City shall notify the
Grantee in writing of the time and place of such meeting no less than five
(5) business days in advance and provide the Grantee with an opportunity to
be heard. 



   4.   Enforcement.  Subject to applicable Federal and State law, and
after such public hearing, the City may determine that the Grantee is in
default of any provision of the franchise, and may: 



      A.   Seek specific performance of any provision, which
reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages;



      B.   Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek
other equitable relief; or



      C.   In the case of a substantial default of a material
provision of the franchise, declare the franchise agreement to be revoked in
accordance with the procedures outlined in this section.



   The City shall give written notice to the Grantee of its intent to
revoke the franchise on the basis of noncompliance by the Grantee, including
one or more instances of substantial noncompliance with a material provision
of the franchise.  The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the
noncompliance.  The Grantee shall have ninety (90) days from such notice to
object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection.  In the event
the City has not received a response satisfactory from the Grantee, it may
then seek termination of the franchise at a public meeting.  The City shall
cause to be served upon the Grantee, at least ten (10) days prior to such
public meeting, a written notice specifying the time and place of such
meeting and stating its intent to request such termination.  At the
designated meeting, the City shall give the Grantee an opportunity to state
its position on the matter, after which it shall determine whether or not the
franchise shall be revoked.  The Grantee may appeal such determination to an
appropriate court, which shall have the power to review the decision of the
City de novo and to modify or reverse such decision as justice may require. 
Such appeal to the appropriate court must be taken within sixty (60) days of
the issuance of the determination of the City.  The City may, at its sole
discretion, take any lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce the
City’s rights under the franchise in lieu of revocation of the franchise.



   5.   Reservation of Rights.  A Grantee shall not be relieved of its
obligation to comply with this chapter by reason of the City’s failure to
enforce prompt compliance. 



   6.   Impossibility of Performance.  A Grantee shall not be held in
default under or in noncompliance with the provisions of the franchise, or
suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default
(including termination, cancellation or revocation of the franchise), where
such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by circumstances reasonably
beyond its control including but not limited to strike, riot, war,
earthquake, flood, tidal wave, unusually severe rain or snow storms,
hurricane, tornado or other catastrophic acts of nature, labor disputes,
governmental, administrative or judicial or regulation.  This provision also
covers work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or
monitor there own utility poles on which the Grantee’s cable and/or
equipment is attached, as well as unavailability of materials and/or labor to
perform the work necessary. 



   7.   Termination of Franchise. 



      A.   Grounds for Revocation.  The City reserves the right to
revoke any franchise and rescind all rights and privileges associated with
the franchise in the following circumstances: 



         (1)   If the Grantee should default in the performance
of any of its material obligations under this chapter or the franchise and
fails to cure the default within sixty (60) days after receipt of written
notice of the default from the City, or such longer time as specified by the
City.



         (2)   If a petition is filed by or against the Grantee
under the Bankruptcy Act or any other insolvency or creditors’ rights law,
State or Federal, and the Grantee shall fail to have it dismissed.



         (3)   If a receiver, trustee or liquidator of the
Grantee is applied for or appointed for all or part of the Grantee’s assets.



         (4)   If the Grantee makes an assignment for the benefit
of creditors.



         (5)   If the Grantee violates any order or ruling of any
State or Federal regulatory body having jurisdiction over the Grantee, unless
the Grantee or any party similarly affected is lawfully contesting the
legality or applicability of such order or ruling and has received a stay
from a court of appropriate jurisdiction.



         (6)   If the Grantee evades any of the provisions of
this chapter or the franchise agreement.



         (7)   If the Grantee practices any intentional fraud or
deceit upon the City or cable subscribers.



         (8)   If the Grantee materially misrepresents facts in
the application for a franchise.



         (9)   If the Grantee ceases to provide services over the
cable system for seven (7) consecutive days for any reason within the control
of the Grantee.



      B.   Restoration of Property.  In removing its plant,
structures and equipment, the Grantee shall refill at its own expense any
excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and
places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the Grantee’s
removal of its equipment and appliances, without affecting the electric or
telephone cables, wires or attachments.  The City shall inspect and approve
the condition of the public ways and public places and cables, wires,
attachments and poles after removal.  Liability insurance indemnity provided
in Section 113.18(2) and the performance bond in subsection 9 of this section
shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal. 



      C.   Reimbursement of Costs.  In the event of a failure by
the Grantee to complete any work as required above or any work required by
law or ordinance within the time established and to the reasonable
satisfaction of the City, after due notice and opportunity to cure, the city
may cause such work to be done and the Grantee shall reimburse the City the
costs thereof within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of
such costs or the City may recover such costs as provided in subsection 8 of
this section.



   8.   Security Fund. 



      A.   Within ten (10) days after execution of the franchise
agreement, a Grantee shall deposit with the Clerk, and maintain on deposit
through the term of the franchise, the sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) as security for the faithful performance by it of all the
provisions of the franchise and compliance with all orders, permits, and
directions of any agency of the City having jurisdiction over its acts or
defaults under the franchise, and the payment by a Grantee of any claims,
liens, and taxes due the City which arise by reason of the construction,
operation, or maintenance of the system.



      B.   Within ten (10) days after notice that any amount has
been withdrawn from the security fund deposited pursuant to paragraph A of
this subsection, a Grantee shall pay to, or deposit with, the Clerk a sum of
money sufficient to restore such security fund to the original amount of
$10,000.00.



      C.   If a Grantee fails to pay to the City any compensation
within the time fixed herein; or fails after ten (10) days notice to pay to
the City any taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay to the City within such
10 days any damages, costs, or expenses which the City shall be compelled to
pay by reason of any act or default of a Grantee in connection with the
franchise; or fails after three (3) days’ notice of such failure by the
City to comply with any provision of the franchise which the City reasonably
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of the security, the Clerk may
immediately withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties,
from the security fund.  Upon such withdrawal, the Clerk shall notify the
Grantee of the amount and date thereof.



      D.   The security fund deposited pursuant to this section
shall become the property of the City in the event that the franchise is
canceled by reason of the default of the Grantee.  A Grantee, however, shall
be entitled to the return of such security fund, or portion thereof, as
remains on deposit at the expiration of the term of the franchise, provided
that there is then no outstanding default on the part of a Grantee. 
Interest earned by the investment of the security fund will accrue to a
Grantee.



      E.   The rights reserved to the City with respect to the
security fund are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether
reserved by the franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding, or
exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other
right the City may have.



   9.   Faithful Performance Bond.  If required by the franchise, upon
acceptance of a franchise, a Grantee shall submit and maintain throughout the
term of the franchise, a faithful performance bond an amount specified in the
franchise.  The bond shall insure compliance with all applicable laws,
regulations, ordinances and provisions of the franchise, shall provide for
recoverable loss or damages, compensation, indemnification, reasonable
attorney fees, cost of removal or abandonment of Grantee’s property. 



   10.   Violations and Penalties.  If a Grantee fails to comply with
the requirements of this chapter, and a cable franchise agreement, then the
City may invoke and secure compliance in accordance with Chapter 3 of this
Code of Ordinances and as authorized by I.C.A. § 364.22. 



113.20    MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   1.   Actions of Parties.  In any action by the City or a Grantee
that is mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in
a reasonable, expeditious, and timely manner.  Furthermore, in any instance
where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval
or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 



   2.   Equal Protection.  In the event the City enters into a
franchise, permit, license, authorization, or other agreement of any kind
with any other person or entity other than the Grantee to enter into the
City’s streets and public ways for the purpose of constructing or operating
a cable system or providing cable service to any part of the service area,
the material provisions thereof shall be reasonably comparable to those
contained herein, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair
competitive advantage over another, and to provide all parties equal
protection under the law. 



   3.   Notices.  Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the
parties, every notice or response required by a franchise to be served upon
the City or the Grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been
duly given to the required party five (5) business days after having been
posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope when hand
delivered or sent by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid or express
mail service. 



   4.   Descriptive Headings.  The captions to sections contained
herein are intended solely to facilitate the reading thereof.  Such captions
shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of the text herein. 



   5.   Waiver or Exemption.  The City reserves the right to waive
provisions of this chapter or exempt all Grantees from meeting provisions of
this ordinance, if the City determines such waiver or exemption is in the
public interest. 



CHAPTER 114
CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS



 

114.01  Purpose
 
114.04  Certification


114.02  Authorization
 
114.05  Notice of Rate Change


114.03  Opportunity to be Heard
 
114.06  Delegation of Authority



 



114.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to establish a local law concerning the
regulation of rates charged by cable television operators for the basic
service tier and related equipment, and for the cable programming service
tier and related equipment.



114.02    AUTHORIZATION.



The City has the legal authority to administer and shall enforce against any
non-municipally owned cable television system operator, as permitted therein,
the provisions of Part 76, Subpart N of the Rules and Regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission, concerning Cable Rate Regulation, 47
C.F.R. §§ 76.900 et seq., as they currently read and hereafter may be
amended, which are herewith incorporated by reference.



114.03    OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD.



Any rate regulation proceedings conducted under this chapter shall provide a
reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of any interested
party, including (but not limited to) the City or its designee, the cable
operator, subscribers, and residents of the franchise area.  In addition to
all other provisions required by the laws of the State of Iowa and the City
for such proceedings, and in order to provide for such opportunity for
consideration of the views of any interested party, the City shall take the
following actions:



   1.   The City shall publish in a local newspaper; post in a
conspicuous place in Grinnell City Hall, and mail, by certified mail, to the
cable operator a public notice of the intent to conduct public proceedings on
basic service tier rates and/or charges for equipment to receive such basic
service tier, as defined by the FCC.



   2.   Said public notice shall state, among other things, that cable
television rates are subject to municipal review and explain the nature of
the rate review in question; that any interested party has a right to
participate in the proceeding; that public views may be submitted in the
proceeding, explaining how they are to be submitted and the deadline for
submitting any such views; that a decision concerning the reasonableness of
the cable television rates in question will be governed by the Rules and
Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (“FCC”); and that
the decision of the City is subject to review by the FCC.



   3.   The City shall conduct a public proceeding to determine whether
or not the rates or proposed rate increase are reasonable.  The City may
delegate the responsibility to conduct the proceeding to any duly qualified
and eligible individual or entity.  If the City or its designee cannot
determine the reasonableness of a proposed rate increase within the time
period permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, it may toll the effective
date of the proposed rates for an additional period of time as permitted by
the FCC Rules and Regulations, and issue any other necessary or appropriate
order and give public notice accordingly.



   4.   In the course of the rate regulation proceeding, the City may
request additional information from the cable operator that is reasonably
necessary to determine the reasonableness of the basic service tier rates and
equipment charges.  Any such additional information submitted to the City
shall be verified by an appropriate official of the cable television system
supervising the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and
submitted by way of affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the
response is true and accurate to the best of that person’s knowledge,
information and belief formed after reasonable inquiry.  The City may
request proprietary information, provided that the City shall consider a
timely request from the cable operator that said proprietary information
shall not be made available for public information, consistent with the
procedures set forth in Section 0.459 of the FCC Rules and Regulations. 
Furthermore, said proprietary information may be used only for the purpose of
determining the reasonableness of the rates and charges or the appropriate
rate level based on a cost-of-service showing submitted by the cable
operator.  The City may exercise all powers under the laws of evidence
applicable to administrative proceedings under the laws of the State of Iowa
and the City of Grinnell to discover any information relevant to the rate
regulation proceeding, including, but not limited to, subpoena,
interrogatories, production of documents, and deposition.



   5.   Upon termination of the rate regulation proceeding, the City
shall adopt and release a written decision as to whether or not the rates or
proposed rate increase are reasonable or unreasonable, and, if unreasonable,
its remedy, including prospective rate reduction, rate prescription, and
refunds.



   6.   The City may not impose any fines, penalties, forfeitures or
other sanctions, other than permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, for
charging an unreasonable rate or proposing an unreasonable rate increase. 
However, the City may impose fines or monetary forfeitures on a cable
operator that does not comply with a rate decision or refund order of the
City, directed specifically at the cable operator, pursuant to the laws of
the State of Iowa and codes, rules, and regulations of the City.



   7.   Consistent with FCC Rules and Regulations, the City’s
decision may be reviewed only by the FCC.



   8.   The City shall be authorized, at any time, whether or not in
the course of a rate regulation proceedings, to gather information as
necessary to exercise its jurisdiction as authorized by the laws of the State
of Iowa, the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and the FCC Rules and
Regulations.  Any information submitted to the City shall be verified by an
appropriate official of the cable television system supervising the
preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and submitted by way of
affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the response is true and
accurate to the best of that person’s knowledge, information and belief
formed after reasonable inquiry.



114.04    CERTIFICATION.



The City shall file with the FCC the required Certification Form (FCC Form
328) on September 1, 1993, or as soon thereafter as appropriate.  Thirty
(30) days later, or as soon thereafter as appropriate, the City shall notify
the cable operator the franchising authority has been certified by the FCC
and that it has adopted all necessary regulations so as to begin regulating
basic service tier cable television rates and equipment charges.



114.05    NOTICE OF RATE CHANGE.



With regard to the cable programming service tier, as defined by the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and the FCC Rules and Regulations,
and over which the City is not empowered to exercise rate regulation, the
cable operator shall give notice to the City of any change in rates for the
cable programming service tier or tiers, any change in the charge for
equipment required to receive the tier or tiers, and any changes in the
nature of the services provided, including the program services included in
the tier or tiers.  Said notice shall be provided within five (5) business
days after the change becomes effective.



114.06    DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.



The City may delegate its powers to enforce this law to municipal employees
or officers (“cable official”). The cable official will have the
authority to:



   1.   Administer oaths and affirmations;



   2.   Issue subpoenas;



   3.   Examine witnesses;



   4.   Rule upon questions of evidence;



   5.   Take or cause depositions to be taken;



   6.   Conduct proceedings in accordance with this law;



   7.   Exclude from the proceeding any person engaging in contemptuous
conduct or otherwise disrupting the proceedings;



   8.   Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the
issues by consent of the parties; and



   9.   Take actions and make decisions or recommend decisions in
conformity with this law.



CHAPTER 115
CEMETERY



 

115.01  Definition
 
115.05  Records


115.02  Trusteeship
 
115.06  Sale of Interment Rights


115.03  Cemetery Operation
 
115.07  Perpetual Care


115.04  Duties of Department
 
115.08  Rules and Regulations



 



115.01    DEFINITION.



The term “cemetery” means the Hazelwood Cemetery, which is a municipal
cemetery under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and which
shall be operated under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa
and this chapter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.501)



115.02    TRUSTEESHIP.



Pursuant to Section 523I.502 of the Code of Iowa, the City Council hereby
states its willingness and intention to act as the trustee for the perpetual
maintenance of the cemetery property.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.502)



115.03    CEMETERY OPERATION.



The Public Service Department shall operate the cemetery in accordance with
the rules and regulations therefor and under the direction of the Council. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



115.04    DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT.



The duties of the department are as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   Supervise Openings.  Supervise the opening of all graves and
be present at every interment in the cemetery; 



   2.   Maintenance.  Be responsible for the maintenance of the
cemetery buildings, grounds and equipment.



115.05    RECORDS.



It is the duty of the Clerk to make and keep complete records identifying the
owners of all interment rights sold by the cemetery and historical
information regarding any transfers of ownership.  The records shall include
all of the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.311)



   1.   Sales or Transfers of Interment Rights.



      A.   The name and last known address of each owner or previous
owner of interment rights.



      B.   The date of each purchase or transfer of interment rights.



      C.   A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that
identifies the location of each interment space sold by the cemetery.



   2.   Interments. 



      A.   The date the remains are interred.



      B.   The name, date of birth and date of death of the decedent
interred, if those facts can be conveniently obtained.



      C.   A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that
identifies the location of each interment space where the remains are
interred.



115.06    SALE OF INTERMENT RIGHTS.



The sale or transfer of interment rights in the cemetery shall be evidenced
by a certificate of interment rights or other instrument evidencing the
conveyance of exclusive rights of interment upon payment in full of the
purchase price.  The agreement for interment rights shall disclose all
information required by Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa.  The payment of
all fees and charges shall be made at the office of the Clerk where receipts
will be issued for all amounts paid.  Said fees and charges shall be based
upon the charges as established by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.310)



115.07    PERPETUAL CARE.



The Council, by resolution, shall accept, receive and expend all moneys and
property donated or left to them by bequest for perpetual care, and that
portion of interment space sales or permanent charges made against interment
spaces which has been set aside in a perpetual care fund.  The assets of the
perpetual care fund shall be invested in accordance with State law.  The
Council, by resolution, shall provide for the payment of interest annually to
the appropriate fund, or to the cemetery, or to the person in charge of the
cemetery to be used in caring for or maintaining the individual property of
the donor in the cemetery, or interment spaces which have been sold with
provisions for perpetual care, all in accordance with the terms of the
donation or bequest, or the terms of the sale or purchase of an interment
space and Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.503, 523I.507 & 523I.508)



115.08    RULES AND REGULATIONS.



The rules and regulations for the cemetery shall be adopted, and may be
amended from time to time, by resolution of the Council and shall cover the
hours of opening and closing, the use of roads within the cemetery, the hours
for burials, the decorating of graves, the fees for services rendered in
connection with interments or the placing of markers and the cost of lots or
payments for perpetual care as deemed necessary. The Council shall also adopt
and enforce a rule allowing any veteran who is a landowner or who lives
within the City to purchase an interment space and to be interred within the
cemetery.



CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS



 

120.01  License or Permit Required
 
120.05  Prohibited Sales and Acts


120.02  General Prohibition
 
120.06  Amusement Devices


120.03  Investigation
 
120.07  Minors Prohibited on Certain Premises


120.04  Action by Council
 



 



120.01    LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.



No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for
sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor control
license, wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171)



120.02    GENERAL PROHIBITION.



It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale, possess
or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the
Code of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil
penalty may be imposed for a violation thereof. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)



120.03    INVESTIGATION.



Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer permit, the
Clerk may forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an
investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts
averred in the application.  The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to
determine if they conform to the requirements of the City.  The Council
shall not approve an application for a license or permit for any premises
which does not conform to the applicable law and ordinances, resolutions and
regulations of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)



120.04    ACTION BY COUNCIL.



The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of the liquor
control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its approval
or disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application, necessary
fee and bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic Beverages
Division of the State Department of Commerce for such further action as is
provided by law. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])



120.05    PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.



A person or club holding a liquor license or retail wine or beer permit and
the person’s or club’s agents or employees shall not do any of the
following:



   1.   Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one
simulating intoxication, any alcoholic beverage.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])



(Ord. 1456 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



   2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on the
premises covered by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday, and between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday; however,
a holder of a license or permit granted the privilege of selling alcoholic
liquor, beer or wine on Sunday may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, beer or
wine between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. of the following
Monday, and further provided that a holder of any class of liquor control
license or the holder of a class “B” beer permit may sell or dispense
alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on Monday when that Monday is New
Year’s Day and beer for consumption off the premises between the hours of
8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is
the day before New Year’s Day.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b and 2k] & 123.150)



   3.   Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a
bona fide credit card.  This provision does not apply to sales by a club to
its members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests or
to retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center,
or events center.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])



   4.   Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])



   5.   In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow
the mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or
any other beverage in or about the permittee's place of business.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])



(Subsections 3-5 - Ord. 1456 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



   6.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa
law, or knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])



   7.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the
premises covered by the license or permit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])



   8.   Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any
alcoholic liquor in any container except the original package purchased from
the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce and
except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate
consumption.  However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are mixed on the
premises and are not for immediate consumption may be consumed on the
licensed premises, subject to rules adopted by the Alcoholic Beverages
Division.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])



(Ord. 1370 – Dec. 12 Supp.)



   9.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or
receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or
adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents or remaining
contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly
possess any original package which has been reused or adulterated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])



   10.   Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee or
employees of the licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed
premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or other container which is
designed for the transporting of such beverages, except as allowed by State
law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])



   11.   Sell, give, possess or otherwise supply a machine which is
used to vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a
vaporized form.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])



120.06    AMUSEMENT DEVICES.



The following provisions pertain to electrical or mechanical amusement
devices possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the Code of
Iowa.  (Said devices are allowed only in premises with a liquor control
license or beer permit, as specifically authorized in said Chapter 99B.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)



   1.   As used in this section, "registered electrical or mechanical
amusement device" means an electrical or mechanical device required to be
registered with the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals, as provided in
Section 99B.53 of the Code of Iowa.



   2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
to participate in the operation of a registered electrical or mechanical
amusement device.



   3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a registered
electrical or mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning
or leasing a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, to
knowingly allow a person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation
of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.




   4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the
operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with a
person under the age of 21.





(Ord. 1415 - Oct. 15 Supp.)




120.07    MINORS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN PREMISES.



   1.   It is unlawful for the holder of a license or permit issued
pursuant to the Iowa Alcoholic Beverage Control Act for premises where more
than fifty percent (50%) of the business conducted is the sale or dispensing
of alcoholic beverages and for every person employed with respect to such
premises to knowingly permit or fail to take reasonable measures to prevent
the entry onto such premises of any and all persons who have not yet attained
the age for lawful purchase and possession of alcoholic beverages (who shall
be referred to as underage persons for purposes of this section).  This
section shall only apply to premises where alcoholic beverages are sold and
consumed.  Any holder of a license or permit issued pursuant to the Iowa
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act for premises where less than fifty percent
(50%) of the business conducted is the sale or dispensing of alcoholic
beverages shall have the burden of proving such qualification for exemption
of this section to the office of the Clerk under guidelines established by
the City.  In order to qualify for an exemption from this section, a license
or permit holder shall make application to the office of the Clerk upon
annual renewal of such license or permit by the City.



   2.   However, the provisions of subsection 1 do not apply when:



      A.   The underage person is an employee of the license holder,
or performing a contracted service with respect to the premises.



      B.   The underage person is accompanied by a parent, guardian
or spouse who is of legal age for the purchase of alcoholic beverages.



      C.   The underage person is on the premises during a time that
the licensee has, in accordance with a written notice and plan given in
advance to the Police Chief, suspended dispensing alcoholic beverages on the
licensed premises or on a clearly delineated part of the licensed premises
operated under a differentiating trade name.  It shall be the strict duty of
a licensee permitting such underage persons onto the licensed premises
pursuant to such a plan, and of all persons employed with respect to the
premises, to prevent underage persons from consuming or possessing alcoholic
beverages on the premises.  Police officers shall be admitted to the
premises at any time to monitor compliance with all applicable laws. 
Failure in that duty, whether knowingly or otherwise, shall be punishable as
a violation of this section.



   3.   It is unlawful for any person who has not yet attained the age
for lawful purchase and possession of alcoholic beverages to go onto such
premises as described in subsection 1 except as provided for by subsection 2.



   4.   Any holder of a license or permit issued pursuant to the Iowa
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act which is subject to the prohibitions of this
section shall post a notice on any public entrance which is not smaller than
eight and one-half (8½) inches by eleven (11) inches in bold letters not
less than three (3) inches in height that states such premises is subject to
the prohibition of minors on the premises.



CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS



 

121.01  Definitions
 
121.06  Refunds


121.02  Permit Required
 
121.07  Persons Under Legal Age


121.03  Application
 
121.08  Self-service Sales Prohibited


121.04  Fees
 
121.09  Permit Revocation


121.05  Issuance and Expiration
 



 



121.01    DEFINITIONS.




For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:





(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)





   1.   “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not
consisting of or containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the
body of nicotine, whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling,
snorting, or sniffing, or by any other means.  “Alternative nicotine
product” does not include cigarettes, tobacco products, or vapor products,
or a product that is regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food
and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act.




   2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in
part of tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape
and irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored,
adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper
or cover made of paper or any other material.  However, this definition is
not to be construed to include cigars.



   3.   "Place of business" means any place where cigarettes, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are sold, stored,
or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.



(Ord. 1442 - Dec. 17 Supp.)



   4.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or
offers for sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for
consumption, cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products,
irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages
in the business of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products to ultimate consumers.



   5.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product display,
placement, or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take
possession of the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the
retailer or employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a
restricted access location.



   6.   “Tobacco products” means the following:  cigars; little
cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready
rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco;
fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings,
cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco
prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or
otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.



   7.   “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may
or may not contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source,
electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means,
regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a
solution or other substance.  “Vapor product” includes an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or
similar product or device, and any cartridge or other container of a solution
or other substance, which may or may not contain nicotine, that is intended
to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device.  “Vapor
product” does not include a product regulated as a drug or device by the
United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.



(Ord. 1401 – Oct. 14 Supp.)



121.02    PERMIT REQUIRED. 



   1.   Retail Cigarette Permits.  It is unlawful for any person,
other than a holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative
nicotine products, or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall
distribute, sell, or solicit the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products within the City without a valid permit for each
place of business.  The permit shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at
the place of business so as to be easily seen by the public and the persons
authorized to inspect the place of business.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)




   2.   Retail Tobacco Permits.  It is unlawful for any person to
engage in the business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products at any place of business
without first having received a permit as a retailer for each place of
business owned or operated by the retailer.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)




A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain
a retail tobacco permit.  However, if a retailer only holds a retail
cigarette permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the
retailer shall not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products, during such time.



(Ord. 1401 – Oct. 14 Supp.)



121.03    APPLICATION.



A completed application on forms furnished by the State Department of
Revenue, or on forms made available or approved by the Department, and
accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk.  Renewal
applications shall be filed at least five (5) days prior to the last regular
meeting of the Council in June.  If a renewal application is not timely
filed, and a special Council meeting is called to act on the application, the
costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)



121.04    FEES.



The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows: 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)



 

FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:
 
FEE:


July, August or September
 
$ 75.00


October, November or December
 
$ 56.25


January, February or March
 
$ 37.50


April, May or June
 
$ 18.75



 



121.05    ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.



Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be
issued.  Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for
which it is issued and shall be nonassignable.  All permits expire on June
30 of each year.  The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for
a permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce
within 30 days of issuance of a permit.



(Ord. 1457 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



121.06    REFUNDS.



A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
City, except during April, May or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa. 



(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 & 453A.47A)



121.07    PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.



No person shall sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any
person under eighteen (18) years of age.  The provision of this section
includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing tobacco, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a vending
machine.  If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the provisions of
this section, the Council shall, after written notice and hearing, and in
addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation, assess the
following:




   1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil
penalty in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00).  Failure to pay
the civil penalty as ordered under this subsection shall result in automatic
suspension of the permit for a period of fourteen (14) days.




   2.   For a second violation within a period of two years, the
retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for
a period of thirty (30) days.  The retailer may select its preference in the
penalty to be applied under this subsection.



   3.   For a third violation within a period of three years, the
retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the
retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.



   4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the
retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the
retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of sixty (60) days.



   5.   For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the
retailer’s permit shall be revoked.



The Clerk shall give ten (10) days’ written notice to the retailer by
mailing a copy of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the
application for a permit.  The notice shall state the reason for the
contemplated action and the time and place at which the retailer may appear
and be heard.   




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])





(Ord. 1401 – Oct. 14 Supp.)




121.08    SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.



Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as
provided in Section 453A.36(6) of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell
or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display.




(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)





(Ord. 1401 – Oct. 14 Supp.)




121.09    PERMIT REVOCATION.



Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by
the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of
Iowa or any rule adopted thereunder.  If a permit is revoked, a new permit
shall not be issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any
other person for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until
one year has expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the
contrary is shown to the Council.  The Clerk shall report the revocation or
suspension of a retail permit to the Iowa Department of Public Health within
thirty (30) days of the revocation or suspension.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)



CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



 



122.01  Definitions
 
122.09  Standards for Issuance of Permit


122.02  Exemptions
 
122.10  Permit Fee


122.03  Religious and Charitable Organizations
 
122.11  Bond


122.04  Compliance with State Law
 
122.12  Agent for Service of Process


122.05  Permit Required
 
122.13  Transfers


122.06  Permit Requirements
 
122.14  Display


122.07  Issuance of Permit
 
122.15  Revocation


122.08  Multiple Vendors; Special Events
 
122.16  Enforcement




 



122.01    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Peddler” means any person carrying or transporting goods
or merchandise who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods
or merchandise from house to house or upon the public street. 



   2.   “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to
solicit from house to house or upon public streets, orders for commercial
goods, wares, subscriptions, publications, periodicals, merchandise or
services to be delivered or fulfilled at a future date.  For the purposes of
this chapter, “solicitor” does not include a person who contacts another
person at his or her residence without prior invitation to enlist support for
or against or to solicit funds for patriotic, philanthropic, charitable,
political or religious purposes, whether or not there is an incidental
purpose involving the sale of some goods or services. 



   3.   “Transient merchant” includes every merchant, whether an
individual person, a firm, corporation, partnership or association, and
whether owner, agent, bailee, consignee or employee, who brings or causes to
be brought within the City any goods, wares or merchandise of any kind,
nature or description, with the intention of temporarily or intermittently
selling or offering to sell at retail such goods, wares or merchandise.  A
merchant engaging in business shall be presumed to be temporarily or
intermittently in business unless it is the intention of such merchant to
remain continuously in business within the City as a merchant for a period of
more than sixty (60) days.



122.02    EXEMPTIONS.



Unless otherwise noted in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter do not
apply to persons engaged in the following described activities.



   1.   Persons selling at wholesale to merchants for the purpose of
resale.



   2.   Persons selling or distributing newspapers or similar tabloids.



   3.   Persons selling tangible personal property or services to
business enterprises.



   4.   Persons who sell at their permanent residence in the City works
of art or crafts made or created by such person or a member of such
person’s immediate family, who also resides at the permanent residence.



   5.   Persons who operate a business or sell a product from their
place of residence, even if the product is not produced at that location, so
long as the activity is not in conflict with the Grinnell Zoning Ordinance.



   6.   Persons licensed by the State of Iowa to sell real estate or
insurance or licensed as transient vendors of drugs.



   7.   Persons selling or delivering tangible personal property or
services through a permanent business located in the City, or sold to regular
customers on established routes (e.g., Schwans, Avon).



   8.   Farmers who offer for sale products of their own raising.



   9.   Persons selling their own work or production either by
themselves or their employees.



   10.   Candidates (or their duly authorized representatives) for
local, County, State, or national office soliciting donations and/or support.



   11.   Persons selling tangible property at a garage, basement or
yard sale held at one of the person’s residences, a shelter house, or
similar type location.



   12.   Persons conducting and selling admissions to or for
theatricals, shows, rides, sports and games, concerts, circuses, carnivals or
any other public amusement.



   13.   Members of local Cub Scouts, Girl Scouts, Camp Fire Girls,
Blue Birds, 4-H, Future Farmers of America, Students representing
Grinnell-Newburg Community School District, any other student who lives in
Grinnell, Iowa, and is soliciting on behalf of their school, and similar
organizations.



122.03    RELIGIOUS AND CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.



Authorized representatives of religious and charitable organizations desiring
to solicit money or to distribute literature shall be exempt from the
operation of Section 122.07.  In addition to the information required in
Section 122.06, all such organizations shall be required to submit in writing
to the Clerk the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are
sought, names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization, the period during which such activities are to be carried on,
and whether any commissions, fees or wages are to be charged by the
solicitors for their efforts and the amount thereof.  If the Clerk finds
that the organization is a bona fide charity or religious organization, the
Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the above information
to the applicant.



122.04    COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.



All peddlers shall acknowledge that they are familiar with Section 555A.2 of
the Code of Iowa, as amended.



122.05    PERMIT REQUIRED.



It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant, as herein
defined, to sell, dispose of, or offer for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise of any kind, nature or description, at any time or place on any
public or private property within the City, unless such peddler, solicitor,
or transient merchant shall have a valid permit as herein provided and shall
have complied with the regulations set forth herein.



122.06    PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



Any peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant as defined herein, desiring a
permit shall file with the Clerk the required application forms which shall
contain the following information:



   1.   Name, date of birth, and social security number of each person
who will be selling goods or merchandise within the City.



   2.   Permanent and local addresses and telephone numbers of each
person who will be selling goods or merchandise within the City.



   3.   A brief description of the products to be sold, the sales
method, and the dates, times and locations of the sales.  No sales will be
allowed before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.



   4.   Names, address, and phone number of the firm for or on whose
behalf the orders are solicited, or the supplier of the goods offered for
sale.



   5.   Length of time for which the permit is desired.



   6.   Make, model, year, color, and license plate information of each
vehicle, which will be used in the proposed solicitation.



   7.   Copy of the State sales tax permit and Federal tax
identification number.



   8.   Any peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant as defined
herein, desiring a permit shall also file with the Clerk a complete Iowa
criminal history record, furnished through the Iowa Division of Criminal
Investigation (D.C.I.), for the applicant.



(Ord. 1453 - Sep. 18 Supp.)



122.07    ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



Upon receiving an application for a peddler’s, solicitors, or transient
merchant’s permit, the Clerk shall forward the application to the Police
Chief, who shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, the reputation and
character of the applicant.  Up to a maximum of ten (10) days will be
allowed for the completion of this investigation.  The Police Chief shall
disapprove the application if the applicant has been convicted of a crime of
moral turpitude.  If, upon completion of such investigation the Police Chief
is satisfied that the statements and representations contained in the
application are true, and that the applicant is of good reputation and
character, and has met all of the permit requirements contained in this
chapter, the Police Chief shall so advise the Clerk in writing and the Clerk
shall issue to the applicant a permit as a peddler, solicitor, or transient
merchant upon payment of the fee as herein prescribed for the period of time
requested in said application and for use at the location and place where it
is stated in said application.  This permit shall be carried by each person
selling goods or merchandise for the applicant and shall be displayed upon
demand to any potential customer, or police officer.  Such permit shall be
valid only for the period of time and at the location and place described
therein.  The issuance of a permit shall not be construed as allowing the
permittee to sell directly from any public street or other publicly owned
property unless such sale is part of a special event which has the prior
approval of the Council and is covered under a special event permit as
provided for in this chapter.  The issuance of a permit does not in any way
authorize the sale of goods, merchandise, or services in a manner or from a
location which is in any way contrary to the requirements of the City’s
zoning ordinance or other provisions of this Code unless such activity has
the prior approval of the Council or is covered under a special event permit
as provided for in this chapter.



122.08    MULTIPLE VENDORS; SPECIAL EVENTS.



If a single group, organization, club, business, or agency is sponsoring an
event wherein multiple peddlers, solicitors, and/or transient
merchants/vendors will be selling goods, merchandise, or services at a single
location and/or under one roof, the sponsor may apply for a single, special
event permit.  The sponsor will be responsible for collecting the names,
addresses, and phone numbers of each of the peddlers, solicitors, and/or
transient merchants/vendors who will be selling at the special event.  This
information shall be furnished to the Clerk along with the application for
the special event so that any reference or background checks that are deemed
necessary can be conducted prior to approval of the permit.  This
information shall also be retained by the sponsor so that customers will have
access to contact persons at each company in the event of any questions,
comments, complaints, or concerns regarding any goods, merchandise, or
services purchased at the special event.  Each permit will be valid for a
maximum of seven (7) days.  The special event permit described in this
section will be in lieu of the permits normally required for individual
peddlers, solicitors and/or transient merchants. 



122.09    STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



In determining whether any permit under this chapter should be granted or
denied, the following standards shall be taken into consideration:



   1.   If the proposed activity is likely to cause undue congestion of
a public area.



   2.   If the proposed activity is likely to create a safety hazard.



   3.   If the applicant has had an unreasonable number of complaints
for misrepresentation, fraud, or selling defective merchandise.



   4.   If the applicant or any of its agents or representatives has
been convicted within the last five (5) years of any public offense relating
to fraud, misrepresentation, or moral turpitude.



   5.   If the proposed activity is likely to cause excessive or
unusual noise.



122.10    PERMIT FEE.



Prior to issuing the said peddler’s solicitor’s or transient merchant’s
permit, the Clerk shall collect for the City a permit fee in the sum of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each day the applicant, as shown by the
application, shall propose to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise within the City.  The fee for each special event permit shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00).



122.11    BOND.



Any person applying for a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant license
shall be required to file a cash bond or surety bond approved by the Clerk,
in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the conduct of the business of such peddler, solicitor, or
transient merchant and shall be for the benefit of any person deceived,
defrauded, or cheated by such peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant to
the extent of the damages sustained by such persons deceived, defrauded or
cheated.



122.12    AGENT FOR SERVICE OF PROCESS.



Before any permit is issued under this chapter, the applicant shall first
sign an appointment naming the City Clerk as agent of the permittee for
service of process in the event of claim or litigation against such
registrant arising out of or in connection with any actions, inactions,
peddling or solicitation by such peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant. 
This shall not apply to corporations which have a registered agent listed in
the Iowa Secretary of State’s office.



122.13    TRANSFERS.



Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application.



122.14    DISPLAY.



Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such permit in possession at all times
while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective
customers, exhibit the permit as evidence of compliance with all requirements
of this chapter.  Each transient merchant shall display publicly such
merchant’s permit in the merchant’s place of business.



122.15   REVOCATION.



   1.   The Police Chief may recommend that any permit issued under the
provisions of this chapter be revoked for any of the following causes:



      A.   For any violations of the provisions of this chapter.



      B.   For making false or misleading statements or
representations on the application form.



      C.   For making false or misleading statements or
representations regarding any article sold or offered for sale as to
condition, quality, original cost, or cost to such peddler, solicitor or
transient merchant.



   2.   After notice and hearing, the City Clerk may revoke, as
recommended by the Police Chief, any permit issued under this chapter.



   3.   The permit holder and the surety on the permittee’s bond
shall be served with written notice containing particulars of the complaints
against the permittee, the provisions of this chapter or state statutes
allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the matter.



   4.   The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the permittee
and the complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts
alleged in the complaint and notice.  Should the permittee, or the
permittee’s authorized representative, fail to appear without good cause
the Clerk may proceed to a determination of the complaint.



   5.   The Clerk shall make and record findings of fact and conclusion
of law, and shall revoke a permit only when upon review of the entire record
there is a clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this
chapter or state law.



   6.   Any permit revoked under the provisions of this section shall
bar the permittee from being eligible for any permit under this chapter for a
period of one (1) year from the date of the revocation.



122.16    ENFORCEMENT.



Police officers may issue citations to persons in violation of the provisions
of this chapter.  The City Attorney may seek an injunction from a court of
competent jurisdiction in order to prohibit sales by a peddler, solicitor, or
transient merchant who is in violation of this chapter, or may pursue the
matter as a municipal infraction.  Each sale made in violation of the
provisions hereof shall be considered a separate offense.



CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS



 

123.01  House Mover Defined
 
123.07  Permit Issued


123.02  Permit Required
 
123.08  Public Safety


123.03  Application
 
123.09  Time Limit


123.04  Bond Required
 
123.10  Removal by City


123.05  Insurance Required
 
123.11  Protect Pavement


123.06  Permit Fee
 
123.12  Overhead Wires



 



123.01    HOUSE MOVER DEFINED.



A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building or
similar structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the
building or structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids,
jacks, dollies or any other specialized moving equipment.



123.02    PERMIT REQUIRED.



It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as
herein defined without a valid building permit from the City for each house,
building or similar structure to be moved.  Buildings of less than one
hundred (100) square feet are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.



123.03    APPLICATION.



Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the
Building Department.  The application shall include:



   1.   Name and Address.  The applicant’s full name and address and
if a corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers.



   2.   Building Location.  An accurate description of the present
location and future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.



   3.   Routing Plan.  A routing plan approved by the Police Chief,
street superintendent, and public utility officials.  The route approved
shall be the shortest route compatible with the greatest public convenience
and safety.



123.04    BOND REQUIRED.



The applicant shall post a penal bond in the minimum sum of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized to issue such
bonds in the State.  The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for
any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs
incurred by the City in the course of moving the building or structure.



123.05    INSURANCE REQUIRED.



Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the
applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration
of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the
following minimum amounts:



   1.   Bodily Injury – $50,000 per person; $100,000 per accident.



   2.   Property Damage – $50,000 per accident.



123.06    PERMIT FEE.



A permit fee, as established by resolution of the Council, shall be payable
at the time of filing the application.  A separate permit shall be required
for each house, building or similar structure to be moved.



123.07    PERMIT ISSUED.



Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate,
and payment of the required fee, the permit shall be issued.



123.08    PUBLIC SAFETY.



At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any
street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain
flagmen at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to
the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure.  At all times when
the building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk or
public property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights
at the intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of
the building or structure.



123.09    TIME LIMIT.



No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to
remain upon any street or other public way for a period of more than twelve
(12) hours without having first secured the written approval of the City.



123.10    REMOVAL BY CITY.



In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation of
Section 123.09 the City is authorized to remove such building or structure
and assess the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the
permit holder’s bond.



123.11    PROTECT PAVEMENT.



It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement,
unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at
least one (1) inch in width for each one thousand (1,000) pounds of weight of
such building.  If there is any question as to the weight of a house or
building, the estimate of the City as to such weight shall be final.



123.12    OVERHEAD WIRES.



The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone,
cable television and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and
replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same.



CHAPTER 124
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX



 

124.01  Tax Imposed
 
124.03  Collection


124.02  Definitions
 
124.04  Expenditure of Revenues



 



124.01    TAX IMPOSED.



There is imposed a seven percent (7%) hotel and motel tax upon the sales
price from the renting of sleeping rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters in
a hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house, manufactured or
mobile home which is tangible personal property, or tourist court or in any
place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for
rent, whether with or without meals, except the sales price from the renting
of sleeping rooms in dormitories and memorial unions at all universities and
colleges located in the State. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.1)



124.02    DEFINITIONS.



“Renting” and “rent,” as used in this chapter, include any kind of
direct or indirect charge for the use of sleeping rooms, apartments or
sleeping quarters.  However, the tax imposed in this chapter does not apply
to the  sales price from the renting of a sleeping room, apartment or
sleeping quarters while rented by the same person for a period of more than
thirty-one (31) consecutive days.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.1)



124.03    COLLECTION.



The tax imposed in this chapter shall be remitted by the person or company
liable for same to the State Director of Revenue in the manner required by
State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.1)



124.04    EXPENDITURE OF REVENUES.



The revenue derived from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be expended in
accordance with the provision of Chapter 423A of the Code of Iowa.



(Ord. 1367 – Dec. 12 Supp.)



CHAPTER 125
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT



 

125.01  Definitions
 
125.02  Regulations



 



125.01    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Adult amusement or entertainment” means an amusement or
entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts
or material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section, including, but not
limited to, topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or
female impersonators or similar entertainment.



   2.   “Adult book store or gift shop” is an establishment having
as a substantial and significant portion of its stock in trade books,
magazines and other periodicals or goods and items held for sale which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined in this section.



   3.   “Adult hotel or motel” means a building with accommodations
used for the temporary occupancy of one or more individuals and is an
establishment wherein a substantial and significant portion of the materials
presented are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined in this section, for observation by the
individuals therein.



   4.   “Adult photo studio” is an establishment which, upon
payment of a fee, provides photographic equipment and/or models for the
purpose of photographing specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities, as defined herein.



   5.   “Adult theater” is a theater wherein a substantial and
significant portion of the materials presented are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on acts or material depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
defined in this section, for observation by the patrons therein.



   6.   “Adult uses” includes adult amusement or entertainment,
adult book store or gift shop, adult hotel or motel, adult photo studio,
adult theater and massage parlor.



   7.   “Massage parlor” is any building, room, place or
establishment, where manipulated massage or manipulated exercise is practiced
for pay upon the human body with an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, by anyone not a duly
licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor, registered nurse or practical
nurse operating under a physician’s direction, physical therapist,
podiatrist, registered speech pathologist and physical or occupational
therapist who treats only patients recommended by a licensed physician and
operates only under such physician’s direction, whether with or without the
use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices.  The term does not
include a regular licensed hospital, medical clinic or nursing home, duly
licensed beauty parlors or barber shops.



   8.   “Specified anatomical areas” means less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitalia, pubic region, buttocks; and a female breast
below a point above the top of the areola; and human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state –  even if completely and opaquely covered.



   9.   “Specified sexual activities” means patently offensive
acts, exhibitions, representations, depictions or descriptions of:



      A.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;



      B.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks or female breast;



      C.   Intrusion, however slight, actual or simulated, by an
object, of any part of an animal’s body or any part of a person’s body
into the genital or anal openings of any person’s body;



      D.   Cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus, masturbation,
bestiality, lewd exhibition of genitals or excretory function, actual or
simulated;



      E.   Flagellation, mutilation or torture, actual or simulated,
in a sexual context.



125.02    REGULATIONS.



   1.   Location.  An adult use shall not be located within 2,000 feet
of another adult use, nor shall the adult use be located within 2,000 feet of
any public or parochial school, regularly scheduled school bus stop, licensed
day care facility, church, public park, hotel/motel or any dwelling
(one-family, two-family or multiple dwelling) or within 2,000 feet of City
Hall.  The 2,000-foot restriction shall be computed by measurement from the
nearest property line of the land used for another adult use or in the case
of any regularly scheduled school bus stop, public or parochial school,
licensed day care facility, church, public park, hotel/motel, dwelling or
City Hall, by measurement to the nearest entrance of the building in which
adult uses are to occur, using a route of direct horizontal distance.



   2.   Concealment.  All building openings, entries, windows, etc.,
of an adult use shall be covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a
view into the interior from any public or semi-public area.  Advertisements,
displays or other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as
to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks, walkways or from other
public or semi-public areas.



   3.   Minors.  No minor shall be permitted in any establishment in
which adult uses are permitted.



   4.   Alcohol.  No alcohol shall be permitted in any establishment
in which adult uses are permitted, unless such is specifically allowed
pursuant to the Code of Iowa.  This prohibition applies equally to the
proprietor and the patrons of the establishment involved.



CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE



 

135.01  Removal of Warning Devices
 
135.07  Washing Vehicles


135.02  Obstructing or Defacing
 
135.08  Burning Prohibited


135.03  Placing Debris On
 
135.09  Excavations 


135.04  Playing In
 
135.10  Maintenance of Parking or Terrace


135.05  Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
 
135.11  Failure to Maintain Parking or Terrace


135.06  Use for Business Purposes
 
135.12  Snow and Ice 


 
135.13  Driveway Culverts



 



135.01    REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.



It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy or carry
away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article
or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon
for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said
street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1) 



135.02    OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.



It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface, or injure any street or
alley in any manner.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



135.03    PLACING DEBRIS ON.



It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any
glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish,
litter, offal, leaves, grass or any other debris likely to be washed into the
storm sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any
person, animal or vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)



135.04    PLAYING IN.



It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled or play games on streets or
alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])



135.05    TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.



It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street
or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed
thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer
or member of the fire department.



135.06    USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.



It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering
same for sale, without permission of the Council.



135.07    WASHING VEHICLES.



It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street or alley for
the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business.  This
does not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle
or equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.



135.08    BURNING PROHIBITED.



No person shall burn any trash, rubbish, leaves, yard waste or other
combustible material on any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced
street, alley or public sidewalk.



135.09    EXCAVATIONS.



No person shall dig, excavate or in any manner disturb any street, parking or
alley except in accordance with the following:



   1.   Permit Required.  No excavation shall be commenced without
first obtaining a permit therefor.  A written application for such permit
shall be filed with the City and shall contain the following:



      A.   An exact description of the property, by lot and street
number, in front of or along which it is desired to excavate;



      B.   A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the
excavation is to be made;



      C.   The person responsible for the refilling of said
excavation and restoration of the street, alley surface and grassed area
within the right-of- way; and



      D.   Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion
date.



   2.   Public Convenience.  Streets and alleys shall be opened in the
manner which will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the
uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.



   3.   Barricades, Fencing and Lighting.  Adequate barricades,
fencing and warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be
so placed as to protect the public from hazard.  Any costs incurred by the
City in providing or maintaining adequate barricades, fencing or warning
lights shall be paid to the City by the permit holder/property owner.



   4.   Bond Required.  The applicant shall post with the City a penal
bond in the minimum sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) issued by a
surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the State.  The bond shall
guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to the City or to
public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City in the course
of administration of this section.  In lieu of a surety bond, a cash deposit
of $10,000.00 may be filed with the City.



   5.   Insurance Required.  Each applicant shall also file a
certificate of insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public
liability insurance in effect for the duration of the permit covering the
applicant and all agents and employees for the following minimum amounts:



      A.   Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per
accident. 



      B.   Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.



   6.   Restoration of Public Property.  Streets, sidewalks, alleys
and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored to the condition of the property prior to the commencement of the
work, or in a manner satisfactory to the City, meeting all City
specifications, at the expense of the permit holder/property owner.



   7.   Inspection.  All work shall be subject to inspection by the
City.  Backfill shall not be deemed completed, nor resurfacing of any
improved street or alley surface begun, until such backfill is inspected and
approved by the City.  The permit holder/property owner shall provide the
City with notice at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time when
inspection of backfill is desired. 



   8.   Completion by the City.  Should any excavation in any street
or alley be discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of
twenty-four (24) hours after the approved completion date, or in the event
the work is improperly done, the City has the right to finish or correct the
excavation work and charge any expenses therefor to the permit
holder/property owner.



   9.   Responsibility for Costs.  All costs and expenses incident to
the excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner. 
The permit holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.



   10.   Notification.  At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the
commencement of the excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays, the person performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide
Notification Center and provide the center with the information required
under Section 480.4 of the Code of Iowa.



   11.   Permit Fee.  A permit fee, as established by resolution of
the Council, shall be payable at the time of filing the application with the
City.  A separate permit shall be required for each excavation. 



   12.   Permit Issued.  Upon approval of the application, filing of
bond and insurance certificate, and payment of any required fees, a permit
shall be issued.



   13.   Excavations by City.  The City Manager may reserve the right
to perform all or portions of an excavation, including backfilling and
resurfacing, as deemed necessary to fully protect the City from undue injury
or excessive repair to the street surface.



135.10    MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE.



It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain all
property outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines upon
the public streets, except that the abutting property owner shall not be
required to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly owned property
or right-of- way. Maintenance includes timely mowing, trimming trees and
shrubs and picking up litter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])



135.11    FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PARKING OR TERRACE.



If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the
above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required
action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in
the same manner as a property tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e]) 



135.12    SNOW AND ICE. 



   1.   Snow or ice deposits from driveways or parking lots shall not
be deposited in the traveled way of streets or alleys.



   2.   Snow from commercial or industrial property and any residential
property or from off-street parking areas serving such property shall not be
deposited on any right-of-way except that which adjoins the property from
which it was removed.



   3.   The City shall not be responsible for the removal of snow from
on-street parking areas which have been developed for use by adjoining
property owners unless such parking is located in the C-2 Zone or Central
Business District of the City.  This subsection does not apply to:



      A.   Fourth Avenue between West Street (Highway 146) and
Spring Street;



      B.   Where the property served is municipal property; or



      C.   Where special arrangements have been made by action of
the City Council to provide for such removal.



135.13    DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.



The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert
deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s
property, and before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained
from the City.  In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to
culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make such
repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the
right to make the repairs.  If the property owner fails to reimburse the
City for the cost of said repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County
Treasurer and specially assessed against the property as by law provided.



CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS



 



136.01  Purpose
 
136.10  Failure to Repair or Barricade


136.02  Definitions
 
136.11  Interference with Sidewalk Improvements


136.03  Removal of Snow and Ice
 
136.12  Encroaching Steps


136.04  Responsibility for Maintenance
 
136.13  Openings and Enclosures


136.05  City May Order Repairs
 
136.14  Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks


136.06  Sidewalk Construction Ordered
 
136.15  Debris on Sidewalks


136.07  Permit Required
 
136.16  Merchandise Display


136.08  Sidewalk Standards
 
136.17  Sales Stands


136.09  Barricades and Warning Lights
 
136.18  Construction to be Complete when Lot is Built Upon




 



136.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the City.



136.02    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by
sweeping the sidewalk when it is hardening. 



   2.    “Defective sidewalk” means any public sidewalk exhibiting
one or more of the following characteristics:



      A.   Vertical separations equal to one-half (½) inch or
more. 



      B.   Horizontal separations equal to three-fourths (¾) inch
or more.



      C.   Spalling over fifty percent (50%) of a single square of
the sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to one-half (½) inch or more.



      D.   A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner
causing more than three (3) pieces with one or more loose pieces.



      E.   A sidewalk that is sloped or tilted creating water
pockets.



      F.   A change from the design or construction grade equal to
or greater than two (2) inches in a ten (10) foot long area or less.



      G.   Holes and/or depressions greater than one-half (½) inch
deep and one and one-half (1½) inches or more in any horizontal dimension. 



      H.   Any other defects deemed unsafe. 



   3.   “Established grade” means that grade established by the
City for the particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.   



   4.   “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of
the concrete is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.



   5.   “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property
abutting any sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of
notification required herein.  For all other purposes, “owner” includes
the lessee, if any. 



   6.   “Portland cement” means any type of cement except
bituminous cement. 



   7.   “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business,
residential or suburban areas.



   8.   “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction,
reconstruction, repair, replacement or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or
the excavating, filling or depositing of material in the public right-of-way
in connection therewith. 



   9.   “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by
smoothing the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.



136.03    REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.



   1.   Central Business District.  In the Central Business District
the owner of property which abuts a public sidewalk shall:



      A.   Remove any accumulations of snow and ice from the public
sidewalk within five (5) daylight hours after a snowfall, ice storm, or other
weather event has ended.  Removal shall take place over the full width of
the public sidewalk.



      B.   Remove any accumulations of snow and ice which have been
deposited on the public sidewalk by City or other snow removal operations.



      C.   Remove any accumulations of snow and ice to create a
pathway through the ridge of material which has been deposited in the
crosswalk by City or other snow removal operations.  The pathway shall be
equal in width to the pedestrian ramp or crosswalk at that location.



   2.   Other Areas.  In all other areas of the City the owner of
property which abuts a public sidewalk shall remove snow, ice and
accumulations from the public sidewalk within thirty-six (36) hours after a
snowfall, ice storm or other weather event has ended.  Snow, ice and
accumulations shall be removed from at least a three (3) foot width of the
public sidewalk for wheelchair purposes.



In all areas of the City it is the continuing responsibility of the abutting
property owner to maintain the sidewalk in a condition safe for the passage
of pedestrians.  The sidewalk shall be free of any accumulations of snow and
ice which may have resulted from ordinary thawing, freezing, plowing of snow,
or drifting of snow.  The accumulations of snow and ice may or may not be
directly related to or resulting from a recent major storm or weather
event.  If a property owner does not remove snow, ice or accumulations
within the time specified in this section, the City may do so and assess the
costs against the property owner for collection in the same manner as a
property tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])



136.04    RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.



It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to repair, replace
or reconstruct, or cause to be repaired, replaced or reconstructed, all
broken or defective sidewalks and to maintain in a safe and hazard-free
condition any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb
lines or traveled portion of the public street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2c]) 



136.05    CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.



If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the
Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the
owner to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time
and if such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the
Council may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the
abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d & e])



136.06    SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.



The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street
or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such improvement to
abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 384 of
the Code of Iowa. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)



136.07    PERMIT REQUIRED.



No person shall remove, reconstruct or install a sidewalk unless such person
has obtained a permit from the City and has agreed in writing that said
removal, reconstruction or installation will comply with all ordinances and
requirements of the City for such work.  A written application for such
permit shall be filed with the City and shall be accompanied by a permit fee
as established by resolution of the Council.



136.08    SIDEWALK STANDARDS.



Sidewalks repaired, replaced or constructed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be constructed in accordance with the City’s specifications
for sidewalks as established by resolution of the Council.  An official copy
of the specifications is on file in the Clerk’s office.  All such work
shall be done under the direction and supervision of and subject to
inspection and approval of the City. 



136.09    BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.



Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue,
highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or
when any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all
persons having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner,
agent, or lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may
be deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous
places at each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material
deposited in the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or
flares, and to keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect
sufficient barricades both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. 
The party or parties using the street for any of the purposes specified in
this chapter shall be liable for all injuries or damage to persons or
property arising from any wrongful act or negligence of the party or parties,
or their agents or employees or for any misuse of the privileges conferred by
this chapter or of any failure to comply with provisions hereof.



136.10    FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.



It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the
owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of
failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or
erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.



136.11    INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.



No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or
upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall
remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or
shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy,
mar, remove or deface any notice provided by this chapter.



136.12    ENCROACHING STEPS.



It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any
building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of
the Council.



136.13    OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.



It is unlawful for a person to:



   1.   Stairs and Railings.  Construct or build a stairway or
passageway to any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk,
or to enclose any portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by
resolution of the Council. 



   2.   Openings.  Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any
vault on any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to
protect the public. 



   3.   Protect Openings.  Neglect to properly protect or barricade
all openings on or within six (6) feet of any sidewalk.



136.14    FIRES OR FUELS ON SIDEWALKS.



It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to
place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.



136.15    DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.



It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass,
nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal or vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2]) 



136.16    MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.



It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk any goods or
merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with the
free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk, and in no case
shall less than six (6) feet of the sidewalk be available for pedestrian
traffic.



136.17    SALES STANDS.



It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand for
the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any
sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.



136.18    CONSTRUCTION TO BE COMPLETE WHEN LOT IS BUILT UPON.



   1.   Any vacant lot which is located in a residential or commercial
area shall have a sidewalk constructed along the lot at the time a structure
is erected on the lot.  An occupancy permit for such a structure shall not
be issued until the sidewalk has been constructed or a bond has been posted
which will assure the construction of a sidewalk within one (1) year from the
date of the bond.



   2.   The Council may grant a variance from the requirements of the
section if it can be demonstrated that the construction of a sidewalk is
physically impractical or that there is no potential future value for having
a sidewalk in that location .



CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS



 

137.01  Power to Vacate
 
137.04  Findings Required


137.02  Planning and Zoning Commission
 
137.05  Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys


137.03  Notice of Vacation Hearing
 
137.06  Disposal by Gift Limited



 



137.01    POWER TO VACATE.



When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of the
City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds, the
Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])



137.02    PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds
shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council. 
The Commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the
Council within thirty (30) days after the date the proposed vacation is
referred to the Commission. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



137.03    NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.



The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the
time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.



137.04    FINDINGS REQUIRED.



No street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds shall be vacated
unless the Council finds that:



   1.   Public Use.  The street, alley, portion thereof or any public
ground proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and
therefore, its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified. 



   2.   Abutting Property.  The proposed vacation will not deny owners
of property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their
property.



137.05    DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.



When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the
City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public
ground, the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section
364.7, Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)



137.06    DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.



The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental
body for a public purpose or to a fair.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7[3])



(Ord. 1327 – Nov. 09 Supp.)



 




EDITOR’S NOTE



The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.



ORDINANCE NO.

 

ADOPTED

 

ORDINANCE NO.

 

ADOPTED



All vacation ordinances adopted prior to Ordinance No. 1023, adopted on June
1, 1992



1038

 

2-1-93

 


 





1054

 

3-7-94

 


 





1080

 

10-16-95

 


 





1081

 

11-6-95

 


 





1128

 

6-1-98

 


 





1129

 

6-1-98

 


 





1138

 

11-16-98

 


 





1145

 

4-5-99

 


 





1160

 

11-1-99

 


 





1217

 

2-17-03

 


 





1218

 

4-7-03

 


 





1219

 

6-2-03

 


 





1292

 

6-4-07

 


 





1293

 

10-1-07

 


 





1301

 

3-3-08

 


 





1308

 

9-2-08

 


 





1351

 

11-15-10

 


 





1365

 

7-2-12

 


 





1374

 

3-18-13

 


 





1429

 

12-19-16

 


 





1430

 

12-19-16

 


 





1431

 

12-19-16

 


 





1434

 

1-23-17

 


 





1438

 

8-21-17

 


 





1445

 

12-4-17

 


 





1446

 

12-4-17

 


 






 



CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES



 

138.01  Established Grades
 
138.02  Record Maintained



 



138.01    ESTABLISHED GRADES.



The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which have been heretofore
established by ordinance are hereby confirmed, ratified and established as
official grades.



138.02    RECORD MAINTAINED.



The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.



 




EDITOR’S NOTE



The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.



ORDINANCE NO.

 

ADOPTED

 

ORDINANCE NO.

 

ADOPTED



All grade ordinances adopted prior to Ordinance No. 1023, adopted on June 1,
1992



1099

 

8-5-96

 


 





1100

 

8-5-96

 


 





1176

 

12-6-00

 


 






 


 


 






 


 


 






 



CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS



 

139.01  Naming New Streets
 
139.03  Recording Street Names


139.02  Changing Name of Street
 
139.04  Street Name Maps



 



139.01    NAMING NEW STREETS.



New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:



   1.   Extension of Existing Street.  Streets added to the City that
are natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the
existing street.



   2.   Resolution.  All street names, except streets named as a part
of a subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.



   3.   Planning and Zoning Commission.  Proposed street names shall
be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and
recommendation.



139.02    CHANGING NAME OF STREET.



The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.



139.03    RECORDING STREET NAMES.



Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk
shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and County
Assessor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)



139.04    STREET NAME MAPS.



Streets within the City are named as shown on City maps.



CHAPTER 140
DRIVEWAYS AND CULVERTS



 

140.01  Scope
 
140.06  Driveway Approaches To Be Paved


140.02  Variances
 
140.07  Driveways Crossing Sidewalks


140.03  Permit
 
140.08  Curbing


140.04  Expenses
 
140.09  Drainage


140.05  Limitations on Number, Size and Location
 
140.10  Building Up Approach Prohibited



 



140.01    SCOPE.



This chapter shall be applicable to all driveways.



140.02    VARIANCES.



Whenever there is an advantage in acting contrary to this chapter as opposed
to prohibiting the project, the owner of any property involved may appeal to
the Council for a variance.  In such cases the Council is authorized to
modify application of this chapter to such an extent that the owner will be
allowed such reasonable use of existing property as will be consistent with
the safety of motorists and pedestrians and the use by the public of the
affected streets.



140.03    PERMIT.



No curb shall be cut or changed and no parkway or public property shall be
used for a driveway without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager. 
Before any permit is granted, the applicant therefor shall file with the
building inspector a plat and plan of the area to be improved, which plan
shall be drawn accurately to scale of not less than one- eighth inch to one
(1) foot, and with all principal dimensions shown.  The plan shall show the
location of all existing walks, curbs, and the relative elevation of the
gutters, the top of the curb, and the sidewalks, all existing trees, their
size and kind, fire hydrants, water shut-off boxes, storm sewer inlets,
street light poles, and conduits, and any other structures existing on or in
the street adjacent to the property, and shall also show the proposed
location of tanks, buildings, air hose, wash racks, oil pits, pump island,
and all other equipment which the applicant proposes to install on the
property, together with the distance from the equipment to the street line,
and all proposed improvements to be installed; however, no plat or plan shall
be required for a private driveway twelve (12) feet or less in width.



140.04    EXPENSES.



All expenses associated with construction of driveways, to include removal of
trees or other obstacles and all utilities, shall be paid by the applicant
for the required permit.



140.05    LIMITATIONS ON NUMBER, SIZE AND LOCATION.



   1.   There shall not be more than two driveways on any one street
frontage of 150 feet or less.  No driveway for any business or dwelling
shall be less than 12 feet or more than 25 feet in width, measured at the
property line.  Where there are two or three driveways on one street
frontage, there shall be a safety zone between such driveways of not less
than ten feet measured at the property line.  No driveway to a residence
shall be less than 12 feet or more than 25 feet in width when measured at the
property line.  No curb opening for a drive shall be wider than 35 feet.



   2.   In no event shall the curb from a driveway be cut except in
front of the property for which the driveway is to be used, and no driveway
shall be within five feet of any intersection, sidewalk or crosswalk at the
property line.



140.06    DRIVEWAY APPROACHES TO BE PAVED.



All driveway approaches in the City shall be paved from the back of curb to
the street right-of-way line.  Driveways located in areas of the City zoned
as industrial or commercial districts on the date of adoption of this section
are hereby required to comply with the provisions of this section within one
year of the date of its adoption.



140.07    DRIVEWAYS CROSSING SIDEWALKS.



That portion of a driveway which is also a sidewalk or which crosses that
portion of the right-of-way on which a sidewalk may be located shall be
constructed to meet all of the minimum requirements for sidewalks as
established by the Code.



140.08    CURBING.



   1.   Except for the driveway permitted in this section, wherever the
property adjoins a public sidewalk and may be used for driveway purposes or
parking of vehicles, there shall be installed upon the property, six inches
inside the property line, a reinforced concrete curbing at least six inches
wide, so as to prevent the driving or stopping of vehicles upon the
sidewalk.  In lieu of such curbing, a fence of a type approved by the City
Manager may be installed.  In case of parking lots, the curb or fence shall
be so located that no part of a parked vehicle will extend beyond the
property line.



   2.   Driveways shall end at the curb line with a curb having a
radius of at least five (5) feet, which shall be tangent to both the driveway
and street curb at the point of joining.  A flair may be substituted for the
radius in which the flair must be a minimum of five feet on the equal sides
of an equilateral triangle making up the flair.  The flair must connect the
tangent points of a five-foot radius.



   3.   Where there is a parking between the outside edge of the
sidewalk and the curb of sufficient width, the ramp of the driveway may be
the full width between the curb and the outside of the sidewalk.  Where such
parking is less than two feet, six inches between the outside edge of the
curb and the outside edge of the sidewalk, the maximum ramp permitted is two
feet, eight inches, with an eight-inch or less height of curb; however, if
curb is higher than eight inches, an increase of four inches in ramp is
permitted for each additional inch in height of curb.  The angle of the ramp
with the sidewalk shall be rounded six inches each way.



   4.   Sidewalk grades shall not be changed except as provided herein.



   5.   Driveways shall be bounded on each side by a curb with a face
varying in height from the established height of the curb to zero at the
inside limits of the ramp.



   6.   Whenever the curb cuts into the sidewalk, the same shall have a
vertical face.



   7.   The tangent curve of any driveway shall at no time make an
angle of less than forty-five (45) degrees, measured from the street curb.



140.09    DRAINAGE.



The drainage from all buildings and paved areas, wherever practicable, shall
be so arranged as not to flow across a public sidewalk.  Where storm sewer
connections are available, connections thereto shall be made, or whenever
storm sewer connections become available, then connection shall be made
within sixty (60) days after the storm sewers become available.



140.10    BUILDING UP APPROACH PROHIBITED.



It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property, in connection with
a driveway thereon, to use a wooden or metal approach extending from the
street to the top of the curb, regardless of whether the approach clamps over
the top of the curb.  It is unlawful for any person to place dirt, ashes, or
other material in the gutter next to the curb for the purpose of building up
an approach for a driveway.



CHAPTER 141
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES



 

141.01  Exercise of Police Power
 
141.04  Access Controls Imposed


141.02  Definition
 
141.05  Unlawful Use of Controlled Access Facility


141.03  Right of Access Limited
 
141.06  Permitted Access Points



 



141.01    EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER.



This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City
under Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and for the promotion of the general welfare.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1) 



141.02    DEFINITION.



The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or street
especially designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or
occupants of abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only
a controlled right or easement of access, light, air or view by reason of the
fact that their property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for
any other reason.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2) 



141.03    RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED.



No person has any right of ingress or egress to or from abutting lands onto
or across any controlled access facility, except at such designated points at
which access is permitted.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4) 



141.04    ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED.



There are hereby fixed and established controlled access facilities within
the City, described as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3) 



   1.   Project No. F-418(5).  On the Primary Road System extension
improvement, Project No. F-418(5) Primary Road No. 146, within the City,
described as follows:



   Beginning at the south corporation line, thence north on West Street to
U.S. Highway Number 6,



regulating access to and from abutting properties along said highway, to the
south corporation line to U.S. Highway No. 6, all in accordance with the
plans for such improvement identified as Project No. F-148(5) on file in the
office of the Clerk.



141.05    UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY.



It is unlawful for any person to:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3 and 321.366)



   1.   Cross Dividing Line.  Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any
curb, central dividing section, or other separation or dividing line on such
controlled access facilities.



   2.   Turns.  Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn except
through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section,
separation or line.



   3.   Use of Lanes.  Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane
provided for that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of the
central dividing curb, separation, section or line.



   4.   Enter Facility.  Drive any vehicle into the controlled access
facility from a local service road except through an opening provided for
that purpose in the dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line which
separates such service road from the controlled access facility property. 



141.06    PERMITTED ACCESS POINTS.



Points of access are hereby permitted as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)



   1.   Project No. F-418(5).  The compiled list furnished by the Iowa
Highway Commission of drives and entrances provided for access under the
improvement specified as Project No. F-418(5) is hereby recorded as follows:



 


STATION

 

SIDE OF STREET

 

WIDTH

 

USE OF DRIVE OR ENTRANCE






3117+05

 

Right

 

39

 

Commercial




3119+02

 

Left

 

32

 

Commercial




3122+37

 

Right

 

18

 

Residential




3122+66

 

Right

 

18

 

Residential




3123+69

 

Left

 

35

 

Commercial




3123+69

 

Right

 

17

 

Residential




3123+91

 

Right

 

17

 

Residential




3124+96

 

Left

 

16

 

Residential




3125+00

 

Right

 

18

 

Residential




3127+22

 

Left

 

18

 

Residential




3127+92

 

Right

 

16

 

Residential




3128+41

 

Right

 

18

 

Residential




3128+69

 

Left

 

16

 

Residential




3129+52

 

Left

 

35

 

Joint Residential




3130+54

 

Left

 

18

 

Residential




3130+77

 

Left

 

17

 

Residential




3132+95

 

Left

 

17

 

Residential




3133+21

 

Right

 

22

 

Residential




3133+70

 

Left

 

18

 

Residential




3134+01

 

Right

 

18

 

Residential




3134+81

 

Right

 

18

 

Residential




3134+90

 

Left

 

26

 

Joint Residential




3135+76

 

Left

 

18

 

Residential




3137+69

 

Right

 

20

 

Residential




3138+24

 

Right

 

34

 

Residential Commercial




3138+65

 

Right

 

18

 

Residential




3139+21

 

Left

 

20

 

Residential




3139+48

 

Right

 

18

 

Residential




3140+73

 

Left

 

18

 

Residential




3140+80

 

Right

 

18

 

Residential




3143+47

 

Left

 

18

 

Residential




3144+11

 

Right

 

18

 

Commercial




3145+08

 

Left

 

29

 

Church




3145+22

 

Right

 

18

 

Commercial




3145+70

 

Right

 

17

 

Residential




3146+31

 

Left

 

17

 

Residential




3148+73

 

Right

 

18

 

Residential




3149+02

 

Left

 

35

 

Commercial




3150+03

 

Left

 

18

 

Residential




3150+76

 

Right

 

17

 

Commercial




3152+04

 

Left

 

24

 

Commercial




3153+52

 

Left

 

23

 

Commercial




3154+65

 

Left

 

24

 

Road along north side of railroad




3154+82

 

Right

 

33

 

Commercial




3155+33

 

Left

 

26

 

Commercial




3155+51

 

Right

 

25

 

Commercial




3155+96

 

Right

 

18

 

Road through to alley along railroad




3156+37

 

Left

 

23

 

Commercial




3156+60

 

Right

 

20

 

Commercial




3156+84

 

Left

 

35

 

Commercial




3157+18

 

Right

 

31

 

Commercial




3159+00

 

Left

 

40

 

Commercial




3159+64

 

Left

 

29

 

Commercial




3160+03

 

Right

 

51

 

Commercial*




3160+79

 

Left

 

17

 

Residential




3161+62

 

Left

 

24

 

Joint Residential




3162+19

 

Right

 

22

 

Residential*




3164+56

 

Left

 

18

 

Residential




3165+07

 

Left

 

18

 

Residential




3165+51

 

Right

 

22

 

Joint Residential




3166+12

 

Left

 

28

 

Joint Residential




3166+22

 

Right

 

17

 

Residential




3166+66

 

Right

 

15

 

Residential




3166+70

 

Left

 

18

 

Residential




3167+03

 

Right

 

31

 

Commercial



*Note:  Curb drop continuous from Station 3158+65 to Station 3162+75 on
right side.  Drives listed are from parking area behind normal roadway.




 



CHAPTER 145
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES



 

145.01  Definitions
 
145.07  Parking


145.02  Conversion to Real Property
 
145.08  Skirting and Anchoring


145.03  Foundation Requirements
 
145.09  Utilities


145.04  Construction Requirements
 
145.10  Sanitary and Fire Hazard Requirements


145.05  Access
 
145.11  Lighting of Mobile Home Park


145.06  Lot Area, Lot Frontage and Yard Requirements
 
145.12  Variance



 



145.01    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)



   1.   “Alter” means the reconfiguration or design of fifty
percent (50%) or more of the existing mobile home lots, either in size,
number or layout of the lots.



   2.   “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure, built
under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403, which was constructed on or after
June 15, 1976, and is required by Federal law to display a seal from the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.



   3.   “Manufactured home community” means any site, lot, field or
tract of land under common ownership upon which ten or more occupied
manufactured homes are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and includes any building, structure or enclosure used or intended
for use as part of the equipment of the manufactured home community.



   4.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used
or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance
upon the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed or
reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human
habitation by one or more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with
motive power not registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa.  A mobile home means
any such vehicle built before June 15, 1976, which was not built to a
mandatory building code and which contains no State or Federal seals.



   5.   “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field or tract of
land upon which three (3) or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a
combination of any of these homes, are placed on developed spaces and
operated as a for-profit enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and
electrical services available. 



   6.   “Mobile home park development plan” means a mobile home
park development plan reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
approved by the Council.  The plan shall consist of drawings, maps and
engineering and surveying details to set forth the boundaries, topography and
overall park design, including streets, parking facilities, mobile home lot
locations, utilities, fire hydrants, landscaping and service facilities.



   7.   “Yard” means the area of the same lot with a mobile home
between the lot line and the front, rear or side of the mobile home.  For
purposes of this chapter, the “front” of a mobile home is considered as
that part of the mobile home facing toward the approved street or
right-of-way which provides access to the mobile home lot.



The term “manufactured home community” or “mobile home park” is not
to be construed to include manufactured or mobile homes, buildings, tents or
other structures temporarily maintained by any individual, educational
institution or company on their own premises and used exclusively to house
their own labor or students.  The manufactured home community or mobile home
park shall meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that are in effect.



145.02    CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY.



A mobile home or manufactured home which is located outside a manufactured
home community or mobile home park shall be converted to real estate by being
placed on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for real estate taxes
except in the following cases:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26 & Sec. 435.35)



   1.   Retailer’s Stock.  Mobile homes or manufactured homes on
private property as part of a retailer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not
used as a place for human habitation.



   2.   Existing Homes.  A taxable mobile home or manufactured home
which is located outside of a manufactured home community or mobile home park
as of January 1, 1995, shall be assessed and taxed as real estate, but is
exempt from the permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until the
home is relocated.



145.03    FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS.



A mobile home or manufactured home located outside of a manufactured home
community or mobile home park shall be placed on a permanent frost-free
foundation system which meets the support and anchorage requirements as
recommended by the manufacturer or required by the State Building Code.  The
foundation system must be visually compatible with permanent foundation
systems of surrounding residential structures.  Any such home shall be
installed in accordance with the requirements of the State Building Code.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10 & 414.28)



145.04    CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



No mobile home park shall be constructed or altered in any way until the
required mobile home park development plan is reviewed by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and approved by the Council and all State regulations, as
per Code of Iowa, are complied with.



145.05    ACCESS.



   1.   Access to all mobile home parks shall be from public streets. 
Each mobile home park which contains more than twenty (20) mobile homes shall
have at least two (2) access drives to a public street.  The number and
location of access drives to such streets shall be designed to provide
reasonable access to each lot and to provide for the ingress and egress of
emergency and service vehicles and to provide for traffic safety and
protection of surrounding properties, and shall be approved by the Council.



   2.   The access roads connecting the private mobile home park
streets to the public street shall have a minimum road pavement width of
thirty-one (31) feet measured back-to-back of curbs.  All access roads shall
be constructed with either hot mix asphaltic concrete or Portland cement
concrete with a minimum thickness of six (6) inches.



   3.   All interior streets shall not be less than twenty-five (25)
feet in width.  All streets shall be constructed with either hot mix
asphaltic concrete or Portland cement concrete, with a minimum thickness of
six (6) inches with an approved curb to provide for drainage.  All streets
shall be constructed to meet the specifications of the City.  Parking shall
be permitted on one side of all interior streets.



145.06    LOT AREA, LOT FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS.



   1.   The minimum area proposed for a mobile home park shall be five
(5) acres.



   2.   All mobile home park perimeter yard requirements shall not be
less than twenty-five (25) feet.  Therefore, no part of any mobile home
shall be closer to the property line of the mobile home park than the
twenty-five (25) feet required.  This area shall be landscaped as per City
of Grinnell landscape regulations.



   3.   Each lot shall contain not less than five thousand (5,000)
square feet in area, with a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet.  Each
lot shall be provided with permanent corner markers.  Each lot shall have a
front yard not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth measured from the edge of
the surfaced private street to the closest point of the lower face of the
mobile home.  Side and rear yards shall be provided and maintained so as to
provide a minimum separation at the nearest point between mobile homes, and
other buildings and structures on adjoining lots of at least twenty (20)
feet; however, side yards, as so described, shall not be less than six (6)
feet, and rear yards, as so described, shall not be less than ten (10) feet,
for any structure.



   4.   A recreational area shall be provided and easily accessible to
all park residents.  The required recreational area shall be as follows:  1
to 10 lots, no area is required; 11 to 25 lots, 5,000 square feet in area; 26
to 50 lots, 10,000 square feet in area; 51 or more lots, 15,000 square feet
in area.  This area shall be separate from the lot area required for the
mobile home.



145.07    PARKING.



A minimum of two (2) off-street vehicle spaces shall be installed for each
mobile home lot.  All parking areas shall be constructed with Portland
cement concrete or asphaltic cement concrete a minimum of six (6) inches in
thickness.



145.08    SKIRTING AND ANCHORING.



   1.   Skirting of a permanent type material and construction shall be
installed within sixty (60) days to enclose all areas between the lower edge
of the outside walls and the ground.  This skirting shall be maintained in
an attractive manner consistent with the exterior of the mobile home and to
preserve the appearance of the mobile home park.



   2.   Anchoring and supports shall be provided in accordance with
manufacturer’s recommendations and to meet Iowa State Building Code.



145.09    UTILITIES.



Proper provisions shall be made in each mobile home park for public water,
sewer, storm sewer, fire protection, and solid waste collection.  Utilities
shall be installed to meet all State and local codes.  No mobile home shall
be located more than two hundred fifty (250) feet from a fire hydrant,
measured along the street line.  The mobile home park water main, from the
public water main, shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches.  The fire
hydrants shall be six (6) inches.  This water main shall be installed to
meet the City’s Water Main Specifications.



145.10    SANITARY AND FIRE HAZARD REQUIREMENTS.



The premises of all mobile home parks and all facilities shall be kept free
of all nuisances that may create any unsanitary conditions or fire hazards.



145.11    LIGHTING OF MOBILE HOME PARK.



All parks shall be furnished with lighting units equipped with fixtures that
have cut-off visors.  The lights shall be spaced at such intervals and
placed at such mounting heights to provide adequate illumination for the safe
movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night.



145.12    VARIANCE.



Where in the case of an existing mobile home park, it can be shown that
strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter would result in
extraordinary hardship to the owner because of unusual topography or other
conditions that exist at the time of adoption of Ordinance No. 1093, the
Council may vary, modify or waive the requirements of this chapter so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured.  However,
the variance, modification or waiver will not have the effect of nullifying
the intent and purpose of this chapter.  In no case shall any variance or
modification be more than a minimum easing of the requirements and in no
instance shall it be in conflict with any zoning ordinance and such variances
and waivers may be granted only by the affirmative vote of three-fourths of
the members of the Council.



CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING



 

150.01  Definitions
 
150.03  Building Numbering Plan


150.02  Owner Requirements
 



 



150.01    DEFINITIONS.



For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Owner” means the owner of the principal building. 



   2.   “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or
subdivision thereof.



150.02    OWNER REQUIREMENTS.



Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:



   1.   Obtain Building Number.  The owner shall obtain the assigned
number to the principal building from the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])



   2.   Display Building Number.  The owner shall place or cause to be
installed and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a
conspicuous place to the street in figures not less than four (4) inches (102
mm) in height with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) and of a
contrasting color with their background.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])



(Ord. 1311 – Sep. 09 Supp.)



   3.   Failure to Comply.  If an owner refuses to number a building
as herein provided, or fails to do so for a period of thirty (30) days after
being notified in writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place
the assigned number on the principal building and assess the costs against
the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



150.03    BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN.



Building numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the building numbering
plan on file in the office of the Clerk.



CHAPTER 151
TREES



 

151.01  Purpose
 
151.04  Conditions and Planting Specifications


151.02  Authority
 
151.05  Trimming, Care and Maintenance of Trees


151.03  Tree Permits Required
 
151.06  License and Bond



 



151.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of these regulations is to establish and maintain a healthy urban
forest within the City.  Rules for planting or removal, care and maintenance
of trees are included to ensure proper treatment and to avoid interference
with infrastructure.



151.02    AUTHORITY.



The Director of Building and Planning will have the authority to issue
permits for planting or removal of trees and other plantings in the
right-of-way.  The supervisor of public services will have responsibility
for care and maintenance of trees and plantings on public property.



151.03    TREE PERMITS REQUIRED.



   1.   No person shall plant trees or shrubs in the right-of-way
without first obtaining a tree planting permit from the Director of Building
and Planning.  There is no charge for the permit. The applicant shall
demonstrate that all plantings will be done in accordance with all the rules
and regulations as set out in this chapter.



   2.   No person shall remove trees from rights-of-way or any other
public property without receiving a permit from the Director of Building and
Planning.  The Director of Building and Planning may waive the permit for
conditions such as storm damage.



(Ord. 1411 - Aug. 15 Supp.)



151.04    CONDITIONS AND PLANTING SPECIFICATIONS.



   1.   Any tree within street right-of-way shall have a single trunk
with a minimum of four (4) feet from grade to the first branch at the time of
planting.



   2.   No conifers of any sort shall be planted in the right-of-way. 
Trees that are not on the List of Recommended Trees for right-of-way planting
shall not be planted in the right-of-way.



   3.   Trees shall be planted a minimum of four and one-half (4½)
feet from the edge of a sidewalk, curb, or alley right-of-way to the center
of the tree.  Trees shall be planted a minimum of five (5) feet from water
service stop boxes or water valve boxes.  Trees shall be planted a minimum
of ten (10) feet from any hydrant, transformers, telephone junction boxes,
manholes and driveway approaches.  No tree shall be planted in a
right-of-way less than twelve (12) feet in width.



   4.   Plantings shall be in compliance with the general visibility
requirements of the zoning regulations.



   5.   The minimum spacing for a tree from a street light standard or
transmission pole shall be one-half (½) of the normal spread for that
species of tree, or thirty (30) feet, whichever is less.  No tree shall be
planted under transmission lines unless the tree at maturity will not be tall
enough to interfere with the lines.  (See list of recommended trees to be
planted under overhead utilities.)



   6.   Trees and other plantings shall not be planted directly over an
underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
Trees and other plantings shall be planted a minimum of two (2) feet from the
underground utility.  The applicant shall be responsible for contacting the
statewide “One Call” notification system prior to any type of
excavation.  If a living or healthy tree or any other planting is damaged,
or has to be removed to repair an underground utility, the City or any other
approved franchise holder shall not be held responsible for the tree or the
replacement of the tree or other planting.  The cost associated with the
removal may be passed on to the adjacent property owner.



   7.   Species of trees that are noted as undesirable on the List of
Recommended Trees, available from the Director of Building and Planning,
shall not be planted within the City limits.



   8.   In the Central Business District, plantings shall be done only
with prior approval of the Council, and where the sidewalk abuts the curb
four (4) square feet of ground with permeable surface shall be maintained for
each tree.



   9.   An applicant proposing the plantings in City parks must receive
approval by the Park Board prior to the issuance of a permit.



151.05    TRIMMING, CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF TREES.



   1.   The supervisor of public services shall have jurisdiction over
trees and other plantings on public property within the City in order to
protect the health of all trees from disease and to require trees and
plantings to be maintained so they are not dangerous to public safety. 
Maintenance of trees within street rights-of-way shall be the responsibility
of the City.



   2.   The supervisor of public services shall supervise all work by
City employees or contractors in the trimming, preservation, planting or
removal of trees or other plantings within the right-of-way and all other
City property.  The supervisor of public services shall have the authority
to order private persons to comply with duties placed upon them by this
section.



   3.   The duties of any person growing a tree or other plantings on
private property abutting on streets or public places are:



      A.   To trim trees or plantings so that they shall not cause a
hazard to the public or block public walks or ways or interfere with proper
lighting of public streets or places.  The minimum clearance of any
overhanging portion shall be eight (8) feet over walks and sixteen (16) feet
above the surface of the traveled portion of the street.



      B.   To treat in an accepted manner, or remove any tree or
plant so diseased or insect-ridden as to constitute a hazard to other trees
and especially those dangerous to trees or plants in public streets or places.



   4.   Utility companies may operate under an annual or semiannual
permit issued by the Director of Building and Planning with programmed
trimming under conditions agreed upon by the supervisor of public services. 
Exception:  If the utility company hires an outside contractor to perform
work on trees within the right-of-way, the provisions of Section 151.06 must
be met by the contractor.



   5.   No person shall willfully damage, cut, carve, or injure the
bark of any tree or plant on the streets or public places of the City.  Tree
trimming shall be done in accordance with good practices and regulations of
the City.  Topping of any tree on the right-of-way shall not be a normal
practice for any person, firm, or City department.  Topping is defined as
the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs within the tree’s crown to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.  Trees
severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical,
may be exempt from the requirements of this section at the determination of
the supervisor of public services.



151.06    LICENSE AND BOND.



Before engaging in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or
removing trees located in the right-of-way or parks within the City, any
person or firm must procure a license from the Director of Building and
Planning.  Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall provide
a ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) bond to the City to work within the
right-of-way and provide evidence of possession of liability insurance in the
minimum amounts of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury and
property damage indemnifying the City or any person injured or damaged
resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described.  A license
shall not be required of any City employee doing such work in the pursuit of
public service endeavors.



CHAPTER 152
LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS



 

152.01  Purpose
 
152.07  Recommended Species of Trees


152.02  General Applicability
 
152.08  Time of Installation


152.03  Tree Plantings Adjacent to and Within Street Rights-of-Way
 
152.09  Planting Sizes


152.04  Residential Property
 
152.10  Maintenance


152.05  Parking Areas
 
152.11  General Provisions


152.06  Screening
 
152.12  Site Plan


 
152.13  Planting Specifications



 



152.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for landscape planting
and preservation with development and redevelopment of property.  The intent
of the regulations is to reduce wind turbulence, heat and noise; to prevent
erosion and reduce storm water runoff; to preserve groundwater strata; to
reduce carbon dioxide and return pure oxygen to the atmosphere; and to
promote aesthetic quality and otherwise create a pleasant community
environment.



152.02    GENERAL APPLICABILITY.



   1.   Whenever a new use is established, or a property is converted
to a new land use type, landscape requirements shall be applicable to the
entire lot.  Whenever a building is constructed or structurally altered by
one or more additions, landscape requirements shall be applicable to the new
construction only.



   2.   New and expanded parking areas shall meet landscape
requirements.  Parking areas without permanent hard surfaces shall meet the
requirements if surfaced or altered in any way.



   3.   Whenever storage of materials or equipment is commenced on a
site that has not previously been used for that purpose, screening shall be
provided according to the landscape regulations.



   4.   Exemptions and exceptions are as follows:



      A.   Property in the C-2 zone is exempt.



      B.   Special consideration will be given to site design,
topography, unique relationship to adjacent properties and existing utilities
in enforcing screening requirements.  If the applicant can demonstrate that
the public interest is better served through alternative landscape design,
the Director of Building and Planning can permit variation from these
regulations.



152.03    TREE PLANTINGS ADJACENT TO AND WITHIN STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   1.   In any yard adjacent to street rights-of-way, trees shall be
planted at a minimum ratio of one (1) large tree for every forty (40) feet of
lot frontage, or for small trees, every thirty (30) feet of lot frontage. 
In the case of a corner lot only one (1) tree for every sixty (60) feet of
lot frontage shall be required.



   2.   Trees shall be planted within the right-of-way only in those
cases in which trees cannot be planted in the yard adjacent to the street
right-of-way.  A permit from the Director of Building and Planning is
required for plantings in the street right-of- way.



   3.   Trees which cannot be planted in conformity with the provision
of subsection 2 may be planted elsewhere on the lot.



   4.   If the required number of trees exists within the right-of-way,
trees need not be planted adjacent to the right-of-way.  Additional trees
required shall be planted adjacent to the right-of-way except as provided in
subsection 3 above.



   5.   Trees planted in or adjacent to the street right-of-way shall
conform to the requirements of Chapter 151 of this Code of Ordinances.



152.04    RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.



In addition to the requirements of Section 152.03, residential developments
must meet the following minimum standards:



   1.   For any residential development, twenty percent (20%) of the
lot area must be devoted to landscaping, and be free from any impervious
surface.



   2.   On any residential lot, one (1) tree must be planted for every
three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot area.  Trees used for this
requirement may be planted in any yard.  Trees planted to fulfill frontage
or parking area requirements may be used to fulfill the requirements of this
section.



152.05    PARKING AREAS.



The following provisions shall regulate the landscaping of parking areas. 
Screening of any parking area shall be provided as required in Section 152.06
and may be used to satisfy the requirements of this section.



   1.   Landscaping shall be provided along the perimeter of and within
parking areas and meet the following conditions:



      A.   A minimum five-foot-wide planted strip shall border the
entire parking area.  A ten-foot-wide planting area, landscaped with trees
and shrubs, is required to separate parking lots from adjoining street
rights-of-way.



      B.   Every parking space or portion thereof shall be within
forty (40) feet from a small size tree or sixty (60) feet from a large size
tree.



   2.   Applicability:



      A.   New parking areas shall comply with the requirements of
this section.



      B.   For expansion of existing parking areas, the requirements
of this section shall apply to the parking area added.



      C.   If an existing parking area does not have a permanent
hard surface and is required to be surfaced or altered in any way, the
provisions of this section shall apply as if the parking area had not
previously existed.



      D.   Parking ramps, covered parking areas, and parking areas
that are an integral part of a building shall be exempt from the requirements
of this section.



152.06    SCREENING.



The following provisions shall regulate the screening of land uses and
off-street parking.



   1.   Requirements. 



      A.   Where a commercial or industrial use abuts or is across
an alley or railroad right-of-way from a residential use, school, a park or
playground, screening shall be preserved, planted or constructed and
maintained by the owner of the commercial or industrial use in a manner
sufficient to obscure the commercial or industrial use from view within the
lot lines of the residence, school or park.



      B.   Where a lot occupied by a mobile home park abuts or is
across any right-of-way of less than one hundred (100) feet in width from a
residential use, screening shall be provided by the owner of the mobile home
park in a manner sufficient to effectively obscure the mobile home park from
view within the lot lines of the residential use.



      C.   Where a parking area is provided on a lot which abuts or
is across an alley or railroad right-of-way from a single-family home or a
duplex, the parking area shall be screened in a manner sufficient to obscure
the parking area from view within the lot lines of the single-family or
duplex use.



      D.   Any outdoor storage of materials or equipment on a
commercial or industrial property shall be screened in a manner sufficient to
obscure the materials or equipment from the view within lots lines of the
residential use, school, park or playground located across any street
right-of-way.



   2.   Screening Materials. 



      A.   For screening land uses and outdoor storage of materials
or equipment, a densely planted screen of deciduous and coniferous trees and
shrubs, approved by the Director of Building and Planning, may be used.  A
screen of pyramidal arbor vitae or other suitable evergreens may be
substituted.  The plantings shall form a six-foot-high screen within five
(5) years.  The planting bed shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet.



      B.   For off-street parking areas, screening shall consist of
trees or shrubs which provide maximum obscurity to a height of six (6) feet
within six (6) years.



      C.   Where a planting screen cannot be expected to thrive
because of intense shade, soil and other conditions, a solid fence or wall of
materials compatible with the principal building and of durable construction,
or an earthen berm covered with grass and low shrubs and/or other acceptable
materials which provide maximum visual obscurity to a height of six (6) feet
within five (5) years may be used if approved by the Director of Building and
Planning.



   3.   Time of Installation.  If a lot proposed for a commercial,
industrial or manufactured housing use is not located adjacent to or opposite
an existing residential use or subdivision in an R zone or a school or a
recreational area, screening need not be provided until within six (6) months
after a building permit is issued for a residential use in an R zone or a
school, a final plat of a residential subdivision is approved, or a
recreational area is available for use on adjacent or opposite land. 



   4.   Maintenance.  The owner shall keep plant materials pruned in
such a manner as to provide effective visual obscurity. 



152.07    RECOMMENDED SPECIES OF TREES.



The varieties of trees permitted by this chapter for the uses indicated are
specified in the List of Recommended Trees for Grinnell as updated and
amended from time to time and available as a supplement to the landscape
regulations.  The List of Recommended Trees for Grinnell may be used to
fulfill the requirements of Chapter 151 and this chapter upon approval of the
Director of Building and Planning. 



152.08    TIME OF INSTALLATION.



All plantings required by this chapter shall be installed prior to occupancy
or commencement of a use.  If the plantings cannot be installed prior to
occupancy or commencement of a use, the Director of Building and Planning may
issue a temporary certificate of occupancy, accompanied by a letter of
violation and grant a delay of installation until the seasonal calendar dates
of June 1 or November 1, whichever occurs first.  The property owner shall
place in an escrow account, established with the City, an amount which shall
cover the anticipated costs of plantings.



152.09    PLANTING SIZES.



The following specifications shall be met at the time of planting:



   1.   Deciduous Trees.  This type of tree shall have a minimum trunk
diameter of one and a half (1½) inches, or in the case of plantings for
single-family residences, one (1) inch, at six (6) inches above ground level,
and demonstrate the growth capabilities, branch formation, and crown balance
that is indigenous to the particular variety.  The tree shall be straight of
trunk with the main leader intact. 



   2.   Coniferous Trees.  This type of tree shall have a minimum
height of three (3) feet or in the case of plantings for single-family
residences, two (2) feet, measured from the planted level to the top of the
tree.  The needle color and branching habits shall be normal for the species
and the over-all appearance shall be indicative of previous care in pruning
and development. 



152.10    MAINTENANCE.



It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a lot to maintain and replace,
if necessary, landscape materials required by this chapter.  It shall also
be the responsibility of the owner to keep the required planting areas free
from weeds and litter.  Any trees on private property which overhang the
public right-of-way shall be maintained in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 151 of this Code of Ordinances.  Maintenance of trees within street
rights-of-way shall be the responsibility of the City.



152.11    GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   1.   The distances required herein for the location of a tree shall
mean the distance to the center of the tree.



   2.   Where fractional numbers of trees result, the number of trees
required shall be rounded to the closest whole number.



   3.   Trees required for screening purposes in accordance with the
provision of Section 152.06 may be used to satisfy the tree planting
requirements for street rights- of-way and parking lots provided they are
allowed to grow to their mature height.



   4.   References to “large” or “small” trees in these
regulations refer to the mature height as scheduled in the List of
Recommended Trees for Grinnell.  Generally large trees have a mature height
of over thirty (30) feet. 



   5.   Existing trees may be used to comply with the requirements of
the tree regulations, if they meet minimum size requirements.



152.12    SITE PLAN.



When provisions of the tree requirements are applicable, a site (“plot”)
plan shall be submitted with the request for a building permit and shall, in
addition to the information normally required, include:



   1.   The size and location of required planting areas; and



   2.   The mature height (small or large), location and type of
existing and proposed tree plantings.



152.13    PLANTING SPECIFICATIONS.



Planting areas must meet the following criteria for location to insure public
safety, the protection of infrastructure, and the health and longevity of
required plantings.  Criteria for size and construction of planting areas
and the locations for tree planting are provided in the Planting
Specifications, available at the City offices. 



   1.   Trees shall be planted not closer than four and a half (4½)
feet to a public sidewalk or the anticipated location of a future public
sidewalk where one does not now exist, or to a curb, or to an alley
right-of-way.



   2.   Trees shall be placed to avoid interference with the
construction, maintenance and operation of public and private utilities and
services above or below ground as determined by the utility companies and the
Director of Building and Planning.



   3.   Landscaping shall not be located in conflict with the general
visibility requirements set out in the zoning regulations.



CHAPTER 153
ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS – IOWA HIGHWAY 146 AND U.S. HIGHWAY 6 CORRIDORS



 

153.01  Purpose
 
153.03  Architectural Standards


153.02  Scope
 



 



153.01    PURPOSE.



This chapter is adopted in the interest of promoting the general welfare of
the State Highway 146 and Federal Highway 6 corridors, to protect the value
of buildings and property, for the prevention of the physical deterioration
of buildings and the promotion of the image of the community and the general
welfare of its citizens.  It is recognized that this corridor should be
visually attractive, as well as financially prosperous and the manner in
which a use is accomplished is as important as the use.  The quality of
architecture, building construction, and landscaping of the area is important
to the preservation and enhancement of building and property values. 
Architectural design and use of materials for the construction of any
building shall be subject to the approval of the Council.



153.02    SCOPE.



The requirements, guidelines and standards set forth in this chapter shall
apply to any development, including new construction, within 300 feet of the
State Highway 146 right-of-way and Federal Highway 6 right-of-way and within
the City of Grinnell.  If any redevelopment, remodeling, additions,
alterations, etc. are done to structures that were in place at the time of
the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and the valuation for
these improvements is thirty percent (30%) or more of the assessed value,
then all local and State codes, at the time of the alteration, shall be
applicable to this site.



153.03    ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS.



   1.   Architectural plans shall be submitted at the same time as site
plans are submitted.  Documentation to be submitted shall include building
elevations showing the building’s design and exterior materials and any
other information as deemed necessary to make a determination on the building
and site.



   2.   A commercial building shall recognize the importance of
material strength and permanency through the selection of building materials,
and the principal structure strength and permanency shall dominate the
structural and exterior materials and components.  The primary exterior
material of any wall of a building that abuts a public street, or within 300
feet of the public street, shall consist of a combination of brick,
architectural concrete panels, textured concrete block, stone, E.I.F.S.
(Exterior Insulation and Finish System), of no less than fifty percent (50%)
of the wall area, excluding glass.  Metal panels or sheet metal will not be
considered an acceptable exterior building material on any public street
frontage.  These may be used on non- public faces of the building.



   3.   The remaining exterior color scheme shall utilize primarily
muted, neutral, or earth tone type colors.  The primary use of bright,
intense or extreme colors not consistent with the adjoining developments
shall not be permitted.  This regulation is not intended to prohibit the use
of these colors for specifically approved architectural detailing.



   4.   An industrial building shall recognize the importance of
material strength and permanency through the selection of building materials,
and the principal structure strength and permanency shall dominate the
structural and exterior materials and components.  The primary exterior
material of any wall of a building that abuts a public street, or within 300
feet of the public street, shall consist of a combination of brick,
architectural concrete panels, textured concrete block, stone, E.I.F.S.
(Exterior Insulation and Finish System), or architectural steel, of no less
than fifty percent (50%) of the wall area, excluding glass.



   5.   Adequate treatment or screening shall be required for loading
docks, loading areas, outside storage areas, garbage dumpsters, HVAC
mechanical units, etc.



The Council, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning
Commission, may approve additional primary materials on a case by case basis,
provided that such materials exhibit the structural strength and permanency
desired, contain sufficient architectural relief, and do not detract from the
desired aesthetic character of the building and the surrounding area.



CHAPTER 154
RENTAL INSPECTIONS



 

154.01  Adoption and Establishment of a Rental Inspection Program
 
154.08 Inspection


154.02  Amendments
 
154.09  Fees


154.03  Severability
 
154.10  Contact Information


154.04  Chapter Not Affective
 
154.11  Violations


154.05  Published and Recorded
 
154.12  Appeals


154.06  Effective Date
 
154.13  Occupancy


154.07 Registration Requirement
 
 



 



154.01    ADOPTION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF A RENTAL INSPECTION PROGRAM.



That two (2) copies of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code of
which are on file in the office of the Director of Building and Planning of
the City of Grinnell and one (1) copy on file at the Drake Community Library
being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code,
2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted as the Rental Code of the City of Grinnell, in the State of Iowa for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all dwellings used
for habitation and are not owner-occupied. Any dwelling or dwelling unit(s)
located as part of a building that is routinely inspected by a representative
of the State Fire Marshal's office which includes college dorm rooms and
nursing homes; hotels, motels, and other uses which receive an inspection
only based upon a complaint are not exempt from this code. This code, with
amendments, shall provide the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that rental
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use,
and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
International Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City of
Grinnell are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in Section 154.02 of this chapter.



154.02    AMENDMENTS. 



All amendments identified in Chapter 160 of the City of Grinnell Code of
Ordinances shall apply to the Rental Inspection Program.



154.03    SEVERABILITY. 



That if any section subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
legislation is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
The City of Grinnell hereby declares that it would have passed this law, and
each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact
that any one or more section, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be
declared unconstitutional.



154.04    CHAPTER NOT AFFECTIVE. 



That nothing in this legislation or in the 2015 International Property
Maintenance Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability
incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any
act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section 3 of this law; nor shall
any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this legislation.



154.05    PUBLISHED AND RECORDED.



That the City Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this legislation
to be published and recorded, and the community shall therefore be notified
of such new regulations.



154.06    EFFECTIVE DATE. 



That this law and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders
and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full
force and effect from and after the date of its final passage and adoption.



154.07    REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT. 



All rental properties and rental units within the corporate limits of the
City of Grinnell shall be registered with the City annually by the owner or
the owner's representative. The owner or owner's representative shall file a
completed registration form (as provided by the City) with the Building and
Planning Department on or before May 1 of each year.  By registering rental
properties and/or rental units, the property owner consents to the City of
Grinnell Code Official or a designated agent, entering and conducting an
inspection. The registration process shall be conducted in accordance with
the City of Grinnell's Rental Code Administrative Policy.



154.08    INSPECTION.



Each rental property and rental unit shall be inspected by the designated
inspector at a frequency stated in the City of Grinnell's Rental Code
Administrative Policy. The inspections will be conducted to confirm
compliance with regulations set forth by said Code. Inspections will be
conducted in accordance with the City of Grinnell's Rental Code
Administrative Policy and in accordance with all state and federal laws
pertaining to tenant rights and notification requirements. When there is more
than one dwelling unit at a rental property, the Code Official, or a
designated agent, shall make the determination on whether all of the dwelling
units must be inspected, or a percentage of the units may be inspected as a
substitution, solely at the discretion of the Code Inspector.



154.09    FEES.



All fees associated with the Rental Code program shall be established by
resolution of the City Council.



154.10    CONTACT INFORMATION.



All rental properties shall have the name and contact information of the
property owner and/or the property owner's representative clearly and visibly
posted for tenants. This information must be on file with the City and
contained in the registration application. Incorrect info may be subject to a
major violation fine as outlined in the fee schedule which is available and
on file in the office of the City of Grinnell City Clerk.



154.11    VIOLATIONS.



Rental properties and/or rental units that fail to comply with this chapter
shall be referred to the Code Official and attorney for prosecution as a
municipal infraction. Failure to comply with this chapter, including but not
limited to failure to register a property, may result in the revocation of a
certificate of occupancy and/or a requirement to vacate the property.



154.12    APPEALS.



Any person whose permit to operate a rental dwelling unit has been suspended
or who has received notice from the housing inspector that a permit is to be
suspended unless existing conditions or practices are corrected, may request,
and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the Building Code Board
of Appeals, provided that if no petition for such hearing is filed within ten
(10) days following the day on which such permit was suspended, such permit
shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked.



154.13    OCCUPANCY.



All dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than what is
defined by Table 404.5 of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code
(adopted by city of Grinnell - Chapter 160). Bedrooms and living rooms must
also comply with SECTION 404.4.



(Ch. 154 - Ord. 1469 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



CHAPTER 155
STATE BUILDING CODE



 

155.01  Building Code Adopted
 
155.05  Abandoned or Unsafe Buildings


155.02  Permits
 
155.06  Expiration of Permits


155.03  Permit Exemption
 
155.07 Building Code Board of Appeals


155.04  Director of Building and Planning
 
 



 



155.01    BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



The document entitled the Iowa State Building Code, established pursuant to
Chapter 103A of the Code of Iowa, is adopted by reference as the building
code of the City, and is made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
chapter.  An official copy of the Iowa State Building Code, including
official copies of the codes adopted therein, is on file in the office of the
City Clerk.



155.02    PERMITS.



Building permits shall be obtained from the office of the Director of
Building and Planning before performing any work which is regulated by the
provisions of the codes adopted by this chapter.  The fees to be charged for
building permits shall be as established by resolution of the Council.  If
any person initiates construction or alteration of any building or structure
without a permit first having been obtained for the same as required by this
chapter, no permit shall be subsequently issued for work until double the
amount of fees otherwise provided by resolution are paid for such permit. 
The payment of the double fee, however, will not relieve said person from any
other penalty for violation of this chapter or other chapters of this Code of
Ordinances.



155.03    PERMIT EXEMPTION.



Permits shall not be required for the following work: 



   1.   Nonstructural alterations not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00);



   2.   Paneling.



   3.   Cabinet replacements.



   4.   Door and window replacements; if replaced with an equal size.



   5.   Storm window replacement.



   6.   Screen replacement.



   7.   Railing replacement.



   8.   Repairs of porches.



   9.   Ordinary maintenance work.



   10.   Painting and floor coverings.



   11.   Maintenance and/or repairs on structures used for farming (see
zoning ordinance definition) purposes only.  New construction of a permanent
structure used for farming purposes shall require a permit.



155.04    DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND PLANNING.



There is hereby created the office of Director of Building and Planning. 
The Director of Building and Planning shall be appointed by the City
Manager.  The duties of this office shall include those of building
inspector.  It shall be the duty of the Director of Building and Planning to
enforce the building codes adopted by this chapter, and to perform such other
duties as may be prescribed by the Building Code, other ordinances of the
City, or by the City Manager.



155.05    ABANDONED OR UNSAFE BUILDINGS.



Buildings deemed unsafe or abandoned by the Director of Building and
Planning, in accordance with the State Code, shall be abated in accordance
with the State Code.



155.06    EXPIRATION OF PERMITS.



All permits issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be
valid for 18 months from date of issue and shall then expire.  Extensions
may be granted by a vote of City Council.  An extension fee shall be applied.



(Ord. 1392 – Oct. 14 Supp.)



155.07    BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS.



    1.   The provisions specified in Appendix B of the 2015
International Building Code shall establish a Building Code Board of Appeals.



   2.   The Building Code Board of Appeals shall exist to modify or
reverse the decision of the building official by a concurring vote of
two-thirds of its members but does not have the authority to waive any code
requirements.



   3.   Amendment(s):



      B101.2.2: Qualifications: If the chief appointing authority is
not able to find an individual from each of the following professions or
disciplines, an additional member from one of the listed disciplines may act
as a substitute.



(Ord. 1468 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



CHAPTER 156
FIRE CODE



 

156.01  Adoption of Fire Code
 
156.03  Geographic Limits


156.02  Amendments
 



 



156.01    ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE.



That a certain document, a copy of which is on file with the City Clerk at
the Grinnell City Office, being marked and designated as the International
Fire Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendix Chapters B, C and D, as published
by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code
of the City of Grinnell, in the State of Iowa regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising
from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and
devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy
of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefore; and each of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the
office of the City of Grinnell are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in this chapter



(Ord. 1443 - Dec. 17 Supp.)



156.02    AMENDMENTS.



The following sections of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, are
hereby revised:



   Section 101  Insert:  City of Grinnell



   Section 108  Delete



   Section 109.4  Amend to read as follows:



   Violation penalties.  Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code shall be in violation of
the Grinnell Code of Ordinances.  Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense



   Section 111.4  Delete



   Section 307.1.1  Prohibited open burning.  Amend to read as follows:



   All open burning is prohibited.



   Add Section 307.1.2



   307.1.2  Exceptions:



      a)   Disaster Rubbish.  The open burning of rubbish,
including landscape waste, for the duration of a community disaster period in
cases where an officially declared emergency condition exists and open
burning has been determined to be necessary by the Mayor.



      b)   Diseased Trees.  The open burning of diseased trees
shall be allowed.  However, when the burning of the diseased trees causes a
nuisance appropriate action may be taken to require relocation of the burning
operation.  Rubber tires shall not be used to ignite the diseased trees. 
Written permission from the Grinnell Fire Chief shall be required to burn
diseased trees.



      c)   Flare Stacks.  The open burning or flaring of waste
gases, provided such open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with
the applicable rules of the State Department of Natural Resources.



      d)   Prairie Maintenance.  Persons engaging in bona fide
prairie maintenance may get permission from the Grinnell Fire Chief to
conduct prescribed burns.  Use of this provision shall not be used to burn
non-maintained areas and overgrown brush and nuisance vegetation.



      e)   Training Fires.  Fires set for the purpose of the bona
fide training of public or industrial employees in firefighting methods
provided that the State Department of Natural Resources Executive Director
receives notice in writing at least one week before such action commences.



      f)   Recreational Fires.  Open fires for cooking, heating,
recreation and ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission
of visible air contaminants established by the State Department of Natural
Resources.  The use of charcoal, gas, or electric grills, barbecues, smokers
or hibachis, and similar outdoor cooking fire receptacles may take place at
any time.  The burning of landscape waste generated on the premises shall
not be considered a recreation fire.



      g)   Variance.  Any persons wishing to conduct open burning
of materials not exempted herein may make application for a variance to the
State Department of Natural Resources Executive Director.



   Section 307.2  Permit required.  A permit shall be obtained from the
fire code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling an
outside fire, with the exception of recreational fires.  Application for
such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of
the land upon which the fire is to be kindled.



   Section 308.14 Amend Open Flame Cooking Devices. Charcoal burners and
ash- or coal-producing devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies
or within 10 feet of combustible construction.



   Exceptions:



   1.  One- and two-family dwellings.



   2.  LP-gas burners connected to one (1) 20-pound LP-gas container.



   3.  Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an automatic
sprinkler system.



   Section 351.3.3 Amend Equipment Rooms. Combustible material shall not
be stored in boiler rooms, mechanical rooms, or electrical equipment rooms or
in fire command centers as specified in Section 508.1.5.



   Exception: In sprinklered equipment rooms that have sufficient space to
allow a minimum of 10 feet between all combustible storage and the heating,
mechanical or electrical equipment in the room.



   Section 405.2 Amend Frequency. Required emergency evacuation drills
shall be held at the intervals specified in Table 405.2 or more frequently
where necessary to familiarize all occupants with the drill procedure.




TABLE 405.2
FIRE AND EVACUATION DRILL FREQUENCY AND PARTICIPATION




 



GROUP OR OCCUPANCY
 
FREQUENCY
 
PARTICIPATION


Group A
 
Quarterly
 
Employees


Group B(c)
 
Annually
 
Employees


Group E
 
See (a) below
 
All occupants


Group I
 
Quarterly on each shift
 
Employees


Group I-1(b) and Group R-4
 
Quarterly
 
All occupants


Group R-1
 
Quarterly on each shift
 
Employees


Group R-2(d)
 
Four annually
 
All occupants


High-rise
 
Annually
 
Employees









            Footnotes:



            (a) Fire and severe weather drills shall be conducted
in accordance with Iowa Code chapter 100. In severe climates, the fire code
official shall have the authority to modify the emergency evacuation drill
frequency.



            (b) Fire and evacuation drills in assisted living
facilities shall include complete evacuation of the premises in accordance
with Section 403.10.3.6. Drills shall be conducted not less than six times
per year on a bimonthly basis, with not less than two drills conducted during
the night when residents could reasonably be expected to be sleeping. The
drills shall be permitted to be announced in advance to the residents. Where
occupants receive habilitation or rehabilitation training, fire prevention
and fire safety practices shall be included as part of the training program.



            (c) Group B buildings that have an occupant load of
500 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level
of exit discharge.



            (d) Applicable to Group R-2 college and university
buildings in accordance with Section 408.3.



   Section 807.5.2.1 Amend Storage in corridors and lobbies. Clothing and
personal effects shall not be stored in corridors and lobbies.



   Exceptions:



   1.  Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system
installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.



   2.  Storage in metal lockers, provided the minimum required egress
width is maintained.



   Section 907.2.3 Amend Group E. In the absence of a complete automatic
sprinkler system, a complete automatic detection system utilizing an
emergency voice/alarm communication system shall be installed throughout the
entire Group E occupancy.  A Group E occupancy with a complete automatic
sprinkler system shall be provided with a fire alarm system utilizing an
emergency voice/alarm communication system in compliance with Section
907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6. As a minimum, smoke
detection shall be provided in corridors at a maximum spacing of 30 feet on
center, and heat or smoke detection shall be provided in any hazardous or
non-occupied areas in all new or existing Group E occupancies.



   Exceptions:



   1.  Group E occupancies with an occupant load of less than 50.



   2.  Manual fire alarm boxes are not required in Group E occupancies
where all of the following apply:



      2.1. Interior corridors are protected by smoke detectors with
alarm verification.



      2.2. Auditoriums, cafeterias, gymnasiums and the like are
protected by heat detectors or other approved detection devices.



      2.3. Shops and laboratories involving dusts or vapors are
protected by heat detectors or other approved detection devices.



      2.4. Off-premises monitoring is provided.



      2.5. The capability to activate the evacuation signal from a
central point is provided.



      2.6. In buildings where normally occupied spaces are provided
with a two-way communication system between such spaces and a constantly
attended receiving station from which a general evacuation alarm can be
sounded, except in locations specifically designated by the fire code
official.



   3.  Manual fire alarm boxes shall not be required in Group E
occupancies where the building is equipped throughout with an approved
automatic sprinkler system, the notification appliances will activate on
sprinkler water flow, and manual activation is provided from a normally
occupied location.



   4.  Emergency voice/alarm communication systems meeting the
requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section
907.6 shall not be required in Group E occupancies with occupant loads of 100
or less, provided that activation of the fire alarm system initiates an
approved occupant notification signal in accordance with Section 907.5.



   Add Section 1003.8



   Section 1003.8 Frost protection. Exterior landings at doors shall be
provided with frost protection.



   Add Section 1028.6



   Section 1028.6 Exit discharge pathways. Exit discharge pathways shall
be paved from all required exits of a building to a public way or parking lot.



   Section 1103.7.1 Amend Group E. Existing Group E occupancies shall be
provided with a fire alarm system utilizing an emergency voice/alarm
communication system in compliance with Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in
accordance with Section 907.6. As a minimum, smoke detection shall be
provided in corridors at a maximum spacing of 30 feet on center, and heat or
smoke detection shall be provided in any hazardous or non-occupied areas.



   Exceptions:



   1.  A building with a maximum area of 1,000 square feet that contains
a single classroom and is located no closer than 50 feet from another
building.



   2.  Group E occupancy with an occupant load of less than 50.



   3.  Emergency voice/alarm communication systems meeting the
requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section
907.6 shall not be required in Group E occupancies with occupant loads of 100
or less, provided that the activation of the fire alarm system initiates an
approved occupant notification signal in accordance with Section 907.5.



   Section 1103.8 Amend Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms. Single-
and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in existing Group I-1
and R occupancies in accordance with Sections 1103.8.1 through 1103.8.4.



   Add Section 1103.8.4



   Section 1103.8.4 Smoke alarm service life. Single-station
battery-operated smoke alarms shall be replaced in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.



   Amend any reference to any section within chapter 23 to read as a
reference to "Chapter 23."



   Delete chapter 23 and insert in lieu thereof the following new chapter:




CHAPTER 23
MOTOR FUEL-DISPENSING FACILITIES AND REPAIR GARAGES
SECTION 2301




   GENERAL



   2301.1 Motor fuel-dispensing facilities and repair garages shall comply
with the applicable provisions of 661-Chapter 221.



   Amend any reference to any section within chapter 57 to read as a
reference to "Chapter 57."



   Delete chapter 57 and insert in lieu thereof the following new chapter:




CHAPTER 57
FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS
SECTION 5701




   GENERAL



   5701.1 Transportation, storage, handling, and use of flammable and
combustible liquids shall comply with the applicable provisions of
661-Chapter 221.



   Amend any reference to any section within chapter 61 to read as a
reference to "Chapter 61."



   Delete chapter 61 and insert in lieu thereof the following new chapter:




CHAPTER 61
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES
SECTION 6101




   GENERAL



   6101.1 Transportation, storage, handling, and use of liquefied
petroleum gases shall comply with the applicable provisions of 661-Chapter
226.



(Ord. 1443 - Dec. 17 Supp.)



156.03    GEOGRAPHIC LIMITS.



The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the International
Fire Code, 2006 Edition, are hereby established as follows:



   Section 3204.3.1.1  within Grinnell City limits



   Section  3404.2.9.5.1  within Grinnell City limits



   Section 3406.2.4.4  within Grinnell City limits



   Section 3804.2  within Grinnell City limits



CHAPTER 157
SIGNS



 



157.01  Purpose
 
157.08  R-1 and R-2; Single-Family and One- and Two-Family Residential
Districts


157.02  Definitions
 
157.09  R-3 Multifamily District


157.03  Permit
 
157.10  C-1 General Commercial District


157.04  Location of Signs
 
157.11  C-2 Central Business District


157.05  Portable Signs and Pennants
 
157.12  M-1 Light Industrial District


157.06  Prohibited Signs
 
157.13  M-2 Heavy Industrial District


157.07  Highway 146 South Corridor/I-80 Interstate Interchanges
 


 




 



157.01    PURPOSE.



The purposes of this chapter include but are not limited to:  permitting and
regulating signs which allow businesses to communicate, advertise, and be
identified; assuring compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses;
preventing a proliferation of signage which may reduce the effectiveness of
individual signs; preventing visual clutter and promote the aesthetic
appearance of the community; and preventing the size, location, construction,
or manner of display of signs from endangering the public safety of
individuals; which are confusing, misleading or obstructing of vision
necessary for traffic safety; or otherwise endangering the public health,
safety, morals, and general welfare.  This chapter pertains only to signs
that are not enclosed within a building, unless otherwise noted.



157.02    DEFINITIONS.



As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them:



   1.   “Abandoned sign” means a sign, including face and sign
structure, which refers to a discontinued business, profession, commodity,
service, or other activity or use formerly occupying the site.



   2.   “Banners” and “pennants” are temporary signs hung with
or without frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or
ornamentation applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind.



   3.   “Billboard” includes all structures, regardless of the
material used in the construction of same, that are erected, maintained, or
used for public display of posters, painted signs, wall signs, whether the
structure is placed on the wall or painted on the wall itself, pictures or
other pictorial reading matter which advertise a business or attraction which
is not carried on or manufactured in or upon the premises upon which the sign
or billboard is located.



   4.   “Changeable copy sign” means a sign that is designed so
that characters, letters, or illustrations can be changed or rearranged,
manually, with detachable letters and numerals, without altering the face or
surface of the sign.



   5.   “Digital sign” means an on-premise sign that is capable of
displaying multiple static images, (NUMBERS OR TEXT) controlled by a computer
or digital software.



   6.   “Directional/informational sign” means a freestanding sign
giving directions, instructions, or facility information and which may
contain the name or logo of an establishment but no advertising copy, and are
primarily parking or exit and entrance signs.



   7.   “Electronic message centers” means an on-premise sign
containing a computer or digital software generated message or other
automated or remote method of changing copy.  In the code these types of
signs shall be referred to as an “EMC”.



   8.   “Flashing sign” means a sign which contains an intermittent
or flashing light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or
flashing light by means of animation or an externally mounted intermittent
light source. Automatic changing signs conveying public service messages such
as time and temperature are not classified as flashing signs.



   9.   “Ground sign” means a sign which is supported by one or
more uprights, poles or braces in or upon the ground other than a pole sign.



   10.   “Monument sign” means an on-premise freestanding sign with
the appearance of a solid base sign. The width of the base shall be at least
seventy-five (75) percent of the width of the sign.



   11.   “Nonconforming sign” means a sign that was legally erected
prior to the adoption of this chapter but which violates the regulations of
this chapter.



   12.   “Off-premises sign” means a sign that advertises a
product, service or facility, or directs persons to a different location than
the one where the sign is installed.



   13.   “On-premises sign” means any sign identifying or
advertising a business, persons, activity, product or service located on the
premises where the sign is installed and maintained.



   14.   “Pole sign” means an on-premise sign built on a
freestanding frame, mast, or pole(s).



   15.   “Portable sign” means any sign not permanently attached to
the ground or to a building and capable of being moved from place to place,
including trailers and portable temporary attraction sign boards.



   16.   “Sign” means any medium, including its structure and
component parts, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention to
the subject matter for advertising purposes other than paint on the surface
of a building.



   17.   “Sign on-site” means an exterior sign displayed upon or
against the wall of an enclosed building.



   18.   “Sign on-site - monument sign” means a permanent
freestanding sign where the sign is supported directly on the foundation or
base.



   19.   “Sign on-site - post sign” means a portable sign or a sign
which is supported by one or more columns, ropes or lines, uprights, poles or
braces extended from the ground or from an object on the ground, or a sign
which is erected on the ground having no part of the sign attached to any
building, structure, or other sign.



   20.   “Temporary sign” means any sign, banner, pennant, valance
or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard,
wall-board or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be
displayed for a limited period of time only.



   21.   “Window sign” A sign painted on or installed inside a
window for the purpose of viewing from the outside of the premises.



157.03    PERMIT.



Permits shall be obtained for the installation of all signs, with the
following exceptions:



   1.   Real estate signs that identify a property that is for sale. 
Real estate signs shall not be placed in the public right-of-way.  They
shall be placed on the property that is being identified for sale or lease.



   2.   Construction and development signs which identify projects and
contractors.



   3.   Political signs announcing candidates seeking public political
office in a forthcoming election or signs announcing political issues for or
against, to be considered in a forthcoming election and be placed to meet all
election laws.  Shall not be placed in the public right-of-way.



   4.   A name plate not exceeding two (2) square feet in area.



   5.   Signs affixed to vehicles and trailers only where the sign is
incidental and accessory to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer and the
primary purpose of such vehicle or trailer is not the display of signs and
the vehicle or trailer is in operating condition, currently registered and
licensed to operate on public streets when applicable, and actively used or
available for use in the daily function of the business to which signs relate.



   6.   Any other signs as may be identified in this chapter which may
not require a permit.



The permit fee for signs is the same fee as for building permits.



157.04    LOCATION OF SIGNS.



All signs within the City limits shall be on-premises signs with the
following exceptions:



   1.   Church or service club signs are limited to a maximum of four
(4) square feet of display area.  The message content is restricted to the
name of the church or club, its location, hours of service or meeting, and an
appropriate emblem.  Any message in the nature of commercial advertising is
prohibited.  These signs may only be located at the edge of the City limits
where designated areas have been provided.



   2.   Portable signs, pennants, etc. in accordance with Section
157.05 of this chapter.



      A.   All signs shall be placed wholly upon private property
and shall not overhang any public right-of-way.



      B.   Signs shall not obstruct or hinder the vision of
pedestrians or motorists.



   3.   Welcome signs owned and maintained by the City.  Such signs
are not restricted in height, size, design, or materials.  They may be
placed along streets, which serve as entrances to the City.  They may be
lighted in a manner approved by this chapter, for any other sign controlled
by this chapter.



   4.   Governmental signs for the control of traffic and other
regulatory purposes, street signs, warning signs, railroad crossing signs,
signs of public service companies indicating danger and aids to service or
safety which are erected by, or at the order of a public officer of employee
in the performance of the officer’s or employee’s duties.



   5.   Signs which are fully located within the interior of a sports
complex or arena intended solely to be viewed by occupants or patrons of the
site and not intended to be viewed from any public right-of-way or adjacent
property. All signs that use any type of energy shall be turned off when an
event is not taking place.



   6.   Plaques identifying property on the National Register of
Historic Places or recognized as a local landmark, landmark site or historic
district.



157.05    PORTABLE SIGNS AND PENNANTS.



   1.   Portable signs, not exceeding fifty (50) square feet in sign
area, banners, ribbons, pennants, twirling signs, balloons, or other similar
devices shall be permitted in a commercial or industrial district for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days, when used in conjunction with the
opening of a business, or special celebration or event.  The Council, upon a
written request, may approve the time a community benefits banner, such as a
centennial celebration banner, or a banner which identifies a City-wide
event, may be put up for a period up to six (6) months.  A permit shall be
issued for portable signs, signs on-site - post signs and off-premises
signs.  Such portable signs, banners, and/or pennants shall be removed
immediately upon expiration of the thirty (30) days.  No portable signs,
banners, and/or pennants shall be permitted on the same property within the
ensuing six-month period after the expiration of the thirty- day open house
or celebration period.  This section is not intended to prohibit the banners
located on City-owned poles, as approved by the Council.



   2.   A nonprofit organization may be granted a permit for placing
temporary off- premise signs to be used to advertise an event, provided:



      A.   The event is of a nature which can be considered to be of
general public interest.



      B.   The signs are not set in place more than thirty (30) days
before the event and shall be removed by the sponsor no later than the day
immediately following the event.



      C.   The signs are placed on private property with the written
consent of the owner.



      D.   The sign is not placed on or does not overhang any public
right-of-way and is not placed on any public property other than the public
property on which the event may be taking place.



      E.   The signs do not obstruct visibility near corners or
driveways as provided for in other sections of this Code of Ordinances.



      F.   There are no more than ten (10) signs to be placed under
a permit for a single event. This includes directional signs.



      G.   The application for permit identifies the locations and
number of signs to be installed.  There is no charge for the permit.



      H.   The sign size is limited to sixteen (16) square feet of
area per side.



      I.   The sign is not lighted.



157.06    PROHIBITED SIGNS.



The following signs are expressly prohibited in all zoning districts, except
as otherwise provided in this Code:



   1.   Electronic Message Centers (EMC) and/or any sign that is of
similar nature are prohibited in all zoning districts.



   2.   Any sign that uses neon. ( See Chapter 159).



   3.   Off-premise signs.



   4.   Temporary signs, except for those expressly permitted by this
chapter.



   5.   Signs or sign structures which resemble or conflict with
traffic control signs or devices, which may mislead or confuse persons
traveling on public streets, or which create a traffic hazard.  Any official
directional or warning sign erected or maintained by the State, County,
Municipal or other governmental subdivision shall be exempt from these rules.



   6.   Signs or sign structures which create a safety hazard by
obstructing the clear view of pedestrians, vehicles, railroads, or which may
obscure official signs or signals.



   7.   Signs that will obstruct doors, windows, or public right-of-way.



   8.   Any sign that makes use of searchlights, beacon lights,
flashing, blinking, or traveling light, with reflectors, or reflecting
materials used to increase the intensity of the sign illumination.  See
Section 157.10(D) for Electronic Message Centers.



   9.   No streamers, inflatable, or suspended signs (including
tethered balloons) except for grand opening and/or special events subject to
the limitations of Section 157.05.



   10.   Any sign, or portion thereof, that moves or assumes any motion
constituting a non-stationary condition.  This requirement is not intended
to prohibit any form of signage attached to a motor vehicle.



   11.   Swinging signs.



   12.   Signs painted directly upon a building or fence.



   13.   Signs painted on or attached to parked vehicles, trailers or
other stationary conveyances where the sign is the primary use of the
conveyance.



   14.   Any sign, which contains statements, words or pictures of an
obscene, pornographic or immoral character.



   15.   Abandoned signs – If a business ceases operation for a
period of time in excess of ninety (90) days, the sign owner, lessee, or the
property owner, shall remove all posts, columns, or supports of a
freestanding sign and all supporting structures of projecting, roof or wall
signs. This is not intended for businesses that are seasonal.



   16.   Nonconforming signs are established signs that are in
existence on the effective date of this chapter. These signs do not meet the
requirements of this chapter.  These nonconforming signs shall be allowed to
continue as such for as long as the sign exists.  A nonconforming sign shall
not be altered, reconstructed, enlarged, extended or relocated except to be
incompliance with this chapter. A nonconforming sign can be maintained,
repaired, change the sign face panels, as long as it is not altered or
enlarged to increase its nonconformity. If a nonconforming sign is not used
for a business for a period of six (6) months, the nonconforming sign shall
be removed.



   17.   Signs that are damaged shall be repaired or removed.



157.07    HIGHWAY 146 SOUTH CORRIDOR/I-80 INTERSTATE INTERCHANGES.



This section applies to signs erected on the Highway 146 South Corridor south
of Stage Coach Road to Interstate I-80.  Any sign erected will be measured
from the elevation 1,009 feet above sea level.  The sign may not exceed a
height of 1,044 feet above sea level.  All applicants must still meet all
Federal Aviation Administration requirements.



157.08    R-1 AND R-2; SINGLE-FAMILY AND ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS. 



   1.   Electronic Message Centers (EMC) are prohibited in all
residential zoning districts.



   2.   All signs within residential zoning districts shall be
on-premise signs.



   3.   The following signs are permitted in R-1 and R-2 single-family
and one- and two-family residential districts:



      A.   A nameplate shall not exceed two (2) square feet on each
side.  Only one (1) sign per dwelling is allowed.



      B.   A permitted home occupation sign shall be an unlighted
sign of not more than two (2) square feet attached flat against the main
building.



      C.   Temporary signs advertising the sale, lease, or rent of
the premises are not to exceed six (6) square feet in area. There shall be a
maximum of one (1) real estate sign for each parcel except where a parcel
abuts two (2) or more streets, additional signs, one (1) oriented to each
abutting street. These signs shall be located on the parcel that is for sale
or lease; the sign shall not be placed in the right-of-way. All real estate
signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the sale or lease of the
premises upon which the sign is located or refers to.



      D.   Illumination of signs shall not exceed sixty (60) watts
and shall be lighted only with direct, non-intermittent lighting.



      E.   A nonresidential, permitted use may erect one sign. 
This sign shall be no more than fifteen (15) square feet in area unless it
conforms to building setback requirements, in which case it shall not exceed
thirty (30) square feet in area.



      F.   Colleges, schools, parks and similar large-scale
institutional developments, having a street frontage of more than three
hundred (300) feet may erect signs.



      G.   A placard or sign, not exceeding one (1) square foot in
surface area, indicating the construction date of the building.



      H.   Construction signs identifying the parties involved in
the construction to occur or occurring on the premises on which the sign is
placed. These signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. These signs
shall be removed within seven (7) days of the completion of the construction
project.



157.09    R-3 MULTIFAMILY DISTRICT.



The following applies to the R-3 Multifamily Residential District:



   1.   Electronic Message Centers (EMC) are prohibited in all
residential zoning districts.



   2.   All signs within residential zoning districts shall be
on-premise signs.



   3.   Nameplate:



      A.   One- or two-family residential dwellings may erect a sign
of not more than two (2) square feet per dwelling.



      B.   An apartment building or complex containing three (3) to
eleven (11) units may erect a sign that shall not exceed nine (9) square feet
and be located to meet the building setback requirements.



      C.   An apartment building or complex containing twelve (12)
or more units may erect one (1) sign.  This sign shall be no more than
fifteen (15) square feet in area unless it conforms to building setback
requirements, in which case it shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet in
area.



   4.   Home Occupation.  A permitted home occupation sign shall be an
unlighted sign of not more than two (2) square feet attached flat against the
main building.



   5.   Temporary Signs.  Temporary signs advertising the sale, lease,
or rent of the premises are not to exceed six (6) square feet in area. There
shall be a maximum of one (1) real estate sign for each parcel except where a
parcel abuts two (2) or more streets, additional signs, one (1) oriented to
each abutting street. These signs shall be located on the parcel that is for
sale or lease; the sign shall not be placed in the right- of-way. All real
estate signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the sale or lease of
the premises upon which the sign is located or refers to.



   6.   Illumination.  Illumination of signs shall not exceed sixty
(60) watts and shall be lighted only with direct, non-intermittent lighting.



   7.   Non Residential Permitted Sign.  A nonresidential permitted
use may erect one sign.  This sign shall be no more than fifteen (15) square
feet in area unless it conforms to building setback requirements, in which
case it shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area.



   8.   Colleges, Hospitals, Nursing Homes, Retirement Homes, Parks,
Schools or Similar Uses.  Colleges, hospitals, nursing homes, retirement
homes, parks, schools or similar uses, having a street frontage of more than
three hundred (300) feet, may erect a sign that shall not exceed fifty (50)
square feet in area on two (2) sides.  This sign shall not project over the
right-of-way line or be placed to obstruct or hinder the vision of
pedestrians or motorists.



   9.   Construction Signs.  Construction signs identifying the
parties involved in the construction to occur or occurring on the premises on
which the sign is placed. These signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in
area. These signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the completion of
the construction project.



157.10    C-1 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



The following applies to the C-1 General Commercial Districts:



   1.   All signs within this zoning district shall be on-premises
signs.



   2.   Illumination of signs shall be diffused or indirect and no rays
of light shall go onto adjacent property or the street, thereby creating a
nuisance or safety hazard.



   3.   Signs enclosed within a structure, facing a residential use
district, visible from the outside, and located within one hundred (100) feet
of a residential use, shall operate only during normal business hours. 
Signs, in a static state, that say closed are permitted.



   4.   Digital signs, numbers or text only, shall remain in a static
state.



   5.   Any changeable copy sign installed after July 1, 2000, shall be
turned on only during hours of business.



   6.   Sign On-Site:



      A.   No sign shall project more than six (6) feet beyond the
building line, but in no case shall the sign project over the right-of-way
line.



      B.   In no case shall any sign project above the roof line or
parapet wall.



      C.   The total area of all signs shall not exceed two (2)
square feet for every lineal foot of exterior building wall displaying such
sign. The exterior wall shall be adjacent to a street frontage, alley
frontage, or private or public parking lot. This section shall not be
interpreted to allow the addition of areas to create a sign of greater area
than the 2 square feet per lineal foot of said wall.  Where the lot adjoins
a residential district, the exterior sign shall be attached flat against the
building and shall not face the side of the adjacent lot located in the
residential district; however, this does not apply to the side of the
building which is opposite that side adjoining the residential district. 
Properties which are separated by a right-of- way or railroad are not
considered to be adjoining properties.



   7.   On-Site - Post and Monument Signs:



      A.   One (1) post sign or monument sign may be placed on each
street upon which the property abuts.  If frontage exceeds four hundred
(400) feet, one sign shall be allowed for each additional 400 feet of
frontage, or portion thereof.  In the case of car dealerships which are
required by the automotive companies they represent to have more than one
post sign, a grouping of signs may be substituted for a single sign.  The
grouping shall occupy a space no larger than 40 feet in diameter, and the
design and landscape plan shall meet the approval of the building
inspector.  The sign grouping shall conform to the same square footage
allowance as specified in paragraph B of this subsection for a single sign. 
Additional signs may be added in the interior of the property if not closer
than one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way line and if the total of
all pole and monument signs does not exceed the maximum square footage
allowed in paragraph B.



      B.   Signage shall not exceed one (1) square foot of sign area
for each lineal foot of street frontage abutting the portion of the parcel or
premises.  The maximum sign area shall not exceed three hundred (300) square
feet.  Only two (2) sides of a sign may be used for advertising purposes. 
This regulation shall not be interpreted to allow a business which has street
frontage on more than one street to combine street frontage to create a sign
of greater sign area.



      C.   If the sign is within twenty-five (25) feet of an
intersection, it shall not extend below ten (10) feet above grade.  A post
sign shall not extend over street right-of-way lines nor shall they extend
less than ten (10) feet nor more than twenty-five (25) feet above the grade
line or any way be erected to obstruct or impair the safety of pedestrians or
motorists.



      D.   Where the lot adjoins an R district, post signs shall not
be placed within twenty-five (25) feet of the R district.



      E.   When a changeable copy sign is installed adjacent to a
residential use, this type of sign shall be turned on only during hours of
business.



   8.   Temporary signs advertising the sale, lease, or rent of the
premises are not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. There shall
be a maximum of one (1) real estate sign for each parcel except where a
parcel abuts two (2) or more streets, additional signs, one (1) oriented to
each abutting street. All real estate signs shall be removed within seven (7)
days of the sale or lease of the premises upon which the sign is located or
refers to.



157.11    C-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



This district is described as the area from the alley west of West Street
east to the Union Pacific Railroad and from the north property line of the
properties located adjacent to, on the north side of, Sixth (6) Avenue south
to the Iowa Interstate Railroad. The following applies to the C-2 Central
Business District.



   1.   All signs within this zoning district shall be on-premises
signs.



   2.   Any changeable copy sign installed after July 1, 2000, shall be
on only during hours of business.



   3.   Electronic Message Centers are prohibited within the C-2
Central Business District.



   4.   Digital signs shall remain in a static state. Animation, frame
effects and flashing are prohibited.



   5.   Signs that are enclosed within a structure, face a residential
use, are visible from the outside, and are located within one hundred (100)
feet of a residential use, shall operate only during normal business hours.
Signs, in a static state, that say closed are permitted.



   6.   Sign On-Site.



      A.   No sign shall extend more than six (6) feet beyond the
building line.



      B.   When the wall of a building and the street right-of-way
line are on the same plane, a sign may be attached flat against the wall. 
The sign and all mounting hardware shall not project more than twelve (12)
inches from the wall supporting the sign.



      C.   In no case shall any sign project above the roof line or
parapet wall.



      D.   The total of all exterior sign on-site signs attached
flat to the wall of the building shall not exceed two (2) square feet for
every lineal foot of building frontage displaying such sign.



      E.   Signs or symbols within approved canopies, awnings or
marquees, in the vertical area, shall not exceed thirteen (13) inches for
every lineal foot of said awning, canopy or marquee.  Lettering or symbols
must be incorporated within the material of the awning, canopy or marquee.



      F.   Special considerations shall be given to historic
downtown movie theaters, due to the unique signage needs required by this
type of facility.



         (1)   When the wall of a movie theater and the street
right-of-way line are on the same plane, a sign may be attached to the
wall.  The sign and all mounting hardware shall not project more than
forty-two (42) inches from the wall supporting the sign, and shall be at
least ten (10) feet and no more than twenty-five (25) feet above the grade
line.



         (2)   Signs or symbols within or on a movie theater
marquee, in the vertical area, shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches for
every lineal foot of said awning, canopy or marquee.  Lettering or symbols
must be incorporated within or on the material of the awning, canopy or
marquee.



         (3)   The use of neon shall be permitted on a movie
theater marquee.  When neon is used, it shall be non-intermittent and shall
be turned off between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   7.   Sign On-Site - Post Signs.



      A.   One (1) post sign pertaining to the business conducted in
a building may be placed on each street upon which a building abuts.



      B.   A sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot of sign area
for each lineal foot of street frontage abutting the portion of said parcel
or premises.  The maximum sign area shall not exceed one hundred (100)
square feet.  Only two (2) sides may be used for advertising purposes. 
This regulation shall not be interpreted to allow a business which has street
frontage on more than one street to combine street frontage to create a sign
of greater sign area.



      C.   A post sign shall not extend over street right-of-way
lines nor shall they extend less than ten (10) feet nor more than twenty-five
(25) feet above the grade line or any way be erected to obstruct or impair
the safety of pedestrians or motorists.



      D.   Where the lots adjoin an R district a post sign shall not
be placed within twenty-five (25) feet of the R district.



   8.   Temporary Signs.  Temporary signs advertising the sale, lease,
or rent of the premises are not to exceed six (6) square feet in area. There
shall be a maximum of one (1) real estate sign for each parcel except where a
parcel abuts two (2) or more streets, additional signs, one (1) oriented to
each abutting street. These signs shall be located on the parcel that is for
sale or lease; the sign shall not be placed in the right- of-way. All real
estate signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the sale or lease of
the premises upon which the sign is located or refers to.



157.12    M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



The provisions contained in Section 157.10 apply to the M-1 Light Industrial
Districts.



157.13    M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



The provisions contained in Section 157.10 apply to the M-2 Heavy Industrial
Districts.



(Ch. 157 - Ord. 1363 – Dec. 12 Supp.)



CHAPTER 158
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS



 



158.01  Purpose
 
158.09  License Fees


158.02  Definitions
 
158.10  Hold Harmless; Insurance; Bond


158.03  License Required
 
158.11  Failure to Secure, Renew or Comply With License


158.04  Application For License
 
158.12  Transfers and Assignments


158.05  Granting of License
 
158.13  Notice; Appeal


158.06  Amendment to License
 
158.14  Cables, Wires, Conduits and Poles


158.07  Regulations
 
158.15  Construction of Chapter


158.08  Relocation or Removal When Required by Public Needs
 
158.16  Police Regulations


 




 



158.01    PURPOSE.



The purpose of this chapter is to provide a method for permitting persons to
use public right-of-way to construct communications systems which are not
required to be approved by a City franchise agreement.



158.02    DEFINITIONS.



Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a
different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this
chapter have the meanings in this section:



   1.   “Communications systems” means any telephone or telegraph
system or any other system of cables, wires or conduits, and any related
equipment, facilities, manholes or overhead poles, operated and maintained
for communications purposes.



   2.   “Customer” means any person who purchases any services
provided by a communications system.



   3.   “Licensee” means the person who is issued a license in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   4.   “Local exchange area” means an area, as established under
regulations of the State of Iowa, in which intra-area communications service
is provided by a carrier subject to regulation by the State of Iowa.



   5.   “Local exchange carrier” means the operator of a long
distance system.



   6.   “Local exchange system” means a communications system
furnishing communications service between stations all located within a local
exchange area.



   7.   “Long distance system” means a communications system
furnishing communications services between stations located in different
local exchange areas. 



   8.   “Public right-of-way” means any public street, highway,
avenue, alley, bridge or sidewalk within the City.



158.03    LICENSE REQUIRED.



No person shall install, construct, reconstruct, repair or operate a
communications system upon, under, over or within any public right-of-way in
the City unless and until a written license is obtained from the City Manager
pursuant to this chapter.  All such licenses shall be nonexclusive.



158.04    APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



An application for a license shall be filed with the City Manager upon a form
provided by the City Manager for that purpose, shall be in conformance with
any adopted City utility accommodation policy, and shall include at a minimum
the following information:



   1.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.



   2.   The name, address and telephone number of a responsible person
whom the City may notify or contact at any time concerning the communications
system.



   3.   An engineering site plan showing the proposed location of the
communications system, including any manholes or overhead poles, the size,
type and proposed depth of any conduit or other enclosures, and the
relationship of the communications system to all existing streets, sidewalks,
poles, utilities and other improvements within the public right-of-way.



   4.   Any additional information which the City Manager in his or her
discretion may reasonably require.



158.05    GRANTING OF LICENSE.



All licenses required by this chapter shall be granted by the City Manager. 
The City Manager shall review each application and shall grant each license
which he or she determines to be in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and any other applicable legal requirements.  In granting a license,
the City Manager may change the proposed location of the communications
system where necessary to avoid interference with other cables, wires,
conduits, pipes, sewers or other facilities placed within the public
right-of-way.



158.06    AMENDMENT TO LICENSE.



In the event that a licensee with a current license proposes to expand,
reduce, relocate or modify any portion of its communications system within
the public right-of-way, the licensee shall file an application for an
amendment to its current license with the City Manager.  An application for
an amendment to a current license shall include relevant new information of
the type required in connection with the initial application for a license,
and it shall be considered and granted by the City Manager in the same manner
as the original license application.  However, if the amendment involves
only one or more new hook-on connections to the main licensed communications
system, and if the new connections will be made entirely through existing
underground utility conduit or ducts so as not to require any excavation in
the public right-of-way, or by means of overhead wires or cables between
existing utility poles, then the licensee shall not be required to pay an
additional administrative fee as part of the application for amendment.



158.07    REGULATIONS.



   1.   No license required under this chapter, or amendment to such
license, shall be granted for any communications system until the required
fees have been paid, and until a complete application has been filed with and
approved by the City Manager.



   2.   The system shall be installed or constructed in accordance with
the terms of the license granted by the City Manager.



   3.   Once the system is in place, the licensee shall file with the
City Manager an as-built survey specifying the actual location of the system,
including any manholes or overhead poles, and the licensee shall provide such
signs or other economically feasible means of locating the system as may be
reasonably required by the City Manager, including in the case of underground
systems, a requirement that the licensee contract with a one-call locating
service or similar locating service for inclusion of the system by the
service.



   4.   If it becomes necessary to dig into, excavate in or in any
manner break up any public right-of-way in connection with the installation,
construction, reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection or removal of
the system, the licensee shall first obtain a permit from the City to do so
in accordance with Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.



   5.   All technical standards governing installation, construction,
reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection and removal of a
communications system licensed hereunder shall be in accordance with all
applicable Federal Communications Commission and other Federal, state and
City laws and regulations.



   6.   The licensee shall maintain all parts of the system in good
condition, order and repair.



   7.   The licensee shall be responsible for repairing or reimbursing
other licensed or franchised utilities or communications systems for any
damage to their property caused by negligence of the licensee, or its agents,
employees or contractors, in connection with the installation, construction,
reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection or removal of the
licensee’s communications system.



   8.   Any license required under this chapter need not be granted to
authorize placement of a communications system in any space which the City
Manager reasonably believes will be required for public use.



   9.   Failure by the licensee to comply with any of the requirements
of the license or this chapter shall constitute grounds for termination of
the license by the City.



158.08    RELOCATION OR REMOVAL WHEN REQUIRED BY PUBLIC NEEDS.



The licensee shall, upon sixty (60) days’ notice from the City and at no
cost to the City, protect, support, or temporarily or permanently disconnect,
relocate within the same or other public right-of-way, or remove any or all
of its communications system when required to do so by the City because of
street or other public excavation, construction, repair, grading or
regrading; traffic conditions; installation of sewers, drains, water pipes,
or City-owned power or signal lines; vacation or relocation of public
right-of-way; installation or construction of any other type of structure by
the City or any other public agency; or any other type of structure by the
City or any other public agency; or any other type of improvement which
promotes the public health, safety or welfare. In case of an emergency, the
City shall have the ability to direct the licensee to temporarily protect,
support or disconnect or relocate their communications system until the
emergency condition subsides so that the public health, safety or welfare is
no longer under threat of the emergency.



158.09    LICENSE FEES.



   1.   It shall be a term and condition of any license issued pursuant
to this chapter that, as part of the consideration supporting the issuance of
such license and the City’s permission thereby to occupy and use the public
right-of-way of the City, the licensee shall pay to the City fees computed as
follows:



      A.   An administrative fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be
due and payable to the City Manager at the time of filing of the initial
license application and at the time of filing of each proposed amendment to
the license.



      B.   If the licensed communications system serves no customers
other than the licensee itself, then, in addition to the above mentioned
administrative fee, the licensee shall pay a fee to the Director of Building
and Planning at the time of filing of the initial license application.  The
amount of the use fee shall be the greater of the following two amounts: 
(i) $100.00; or (ii) $1.00 per lineal foot of route traversed by the
communication line within any public right-of-way in a C-2 zone and $.50 per
lineal foot in any other part of the City.  At the time of filing of each
proposed amendment to the license involving an increase in the length of
route traversed by the communication line within public right-of-way, the
licensee shall pay to the City Manager an additional fee computed at the rate
of $1.00 per lineal foot of additional route traversed within any public
right-of-way.



      C.   If the licensed communications system serves customers
other than the licensee itself, then, in addition to the above mentioned
administrative fee, the licensee shall pay an annual use fee to the City
Manager.  The annual use fee shall be based on a license year ending on
March 31 of each year, and the use fee for each license year shall be due and
payable at the end of such year on March 31, or if the license has terminated
during such year, on the date of termination.  The amount of the annual use
fee shall be the greater of the following two amounts:  (i) $100.00; or (ii)
three percent of the gross revenues derived by the licensee from the sale or
exchange of communications services in connection with the operation of the
licensee’s communications system within the public right-of-way during the
license year.  Each annual use fee payment shall be accompanied by a report
from the licensee in a form approved by the City Manager and the City legal
department showing the basis for the computation of the fee and such other
relevant data as may be required by the City Manager and the City legal
department.  Each such report shall contain a notarized verification by the
chief financial officer of the licensee, and upon request by the City, such
reports shall be verified by a certified public accountant at the expense of
the licensee.



   2.   The following communications systems shall be exempt from the
use fee requirements:



      A.   Local exchange systems either operated pursuant to
authority granted by the State of Iowa or operated in competition with
another local exchange system provided the other system is operated pursuant
to authority granted by the State of Iowa.  For the purpose of this
subsection, the term “competition” shall have the meaning ascribed to the
term in the Code of Iowa.



      B.   Long distance systems.



      C.   Communications systems franchised by the City or used for
a purpose accessory and subordinate to the conduct of a utility franchised by
the City.



   3.   Upon receipt of payment of any of the fees required under this
chapter, and recording of same in his or her files, the City Manager shall
deliver same to the City Treasurer.



   4.   The acceptance of any use fee payment by the City shall not be
construed as an acknowledgement that the amount paid is the correct amount
due, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any
claim which the City may have for additional sums due and payable.  All use
fee payments shall be subject to audit by the City Manager and assessment or
refund if the payment is found to be in error.  In the event that such audit
results in an assessment by and an additional payment to the City, such
additional payment shall be due and payable immediately, together with
interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per year calculated from the due
date for the use fee in question.



   5.   The licensee shall pay interest at the rate of 8% per year on
any overdue use fee calculated from the due date for the use fee.



   6.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the
Council from exercising the right of the City to change the amount of any of
the fees required by this section.



158.10    HOLD HARMLESS; INSURANCE; BOND.



It shall be a term and condition of any license issued pursuant to this
chapter that, as a part of the consideration supporting the issuance of such
license and the City’s permission thereby to occupy and use the public
right-of-way of the City, the licensee shall assume the following obligations:



   1.   The licensee shall indemnify, protect, save and hold harmless
and defend the City from and against any and all liability, losses and
damages to property, or bodily injury or death to any person, including
payments made under worker’s compensation laws, arising out of or in any
way connected with the installation, construction, reconstruction, repair,
operation, disconnection or removal of the licensee’s licensed
communications system.  The licensee shall pay all reasonable expenses
incurred by the City in defending itself with regard to any of the
aforementioned claims, including all out-of-pocket expenses such as
attorney’s fees and the value of any services rendered by the City legal
department or any other officers or employees of the City.  If any
litigation on account of any such claims shall be commenced against the City
and upon receipt by the licensee of written notice of such litigation from
the City, the licensee shall defend the same at its own cost and expense. 
The record of any judgment rendered against the City on account of such
claims shall be conclusive as against the licensee and shall entitle the City
to recover the full amount thereof with interest and costs and attorney’s
fees incurred by the City.  The right of action therefor shall accrue to the
City as soon as judgment shall have been rendered.  The City shall fully
cooperate with the licensee’s defense of any such claim or action.



   2.   Immediately upon issuance of the required license, the licensee
shall purchase such general liability insurance as is required by the City
Manager in conformity with such written standards relative to the amount of
insurance coverage and deductible, the type of insurance policy and the
qualifications of the insurer as shall be promulgated, and as may be amended
from time to time, by the City Manager with the approval of the City legal
department.  The licensee shall maintain such insurance coverage for as long
as the licensed communications system remains in place within the public
right-of-way.  The City shall be named as an additional insured on the
insurance policy, and the policy shall provide on its face that it may not be
cancelled except after at least thirty days’ written notice to the City. 
Immediately upon issuance of the required license, the licensee shall file
with the City Manager a certificate of insurance which clearly discloses on
its face coverage in conformity with all of the foregoing requirements, and
if requested by the City Manager, the licensee shall additionally submit a
certified copy of the policy.



   3.   Immediately upon issuance of the required license, the licensee
shall file with the City Manager such bond as is required by the City Manager
in conformity with such written standards relative to the amount of the bond
and the qualifications of the surety as shall be promulgated, and as may be
amended from time to time, by the City Manager with the approval of the City
legal department.  The purpose for such bond shall be to protect the City
from any and all damages and costs suffered or incurred by the City from any
failure by licensee to restore all public right-of-way and other public
property affected by the installation, construction, reconstruction, repair,
operation or removal of the licensed communications system to its proper
condition in accordance with City standards.  The bond provided hereunder
shall be in lieu of the deposit required for a street excavation permit under
Section 135.09.



158.11    FAILURE TO SECURE, RENEW OR COMPLY WITH LICENSE.



Any person who fails to secure the license required under this chapter or any
licensee who fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter or with
any other applicable legal requirements shall, upon notification of such
violation by the City Manager, immediately act either to abate the violation
or to cause the licensee’s communications system either to be removed or to
be disconnected and rendered inoperative.  The City reserves the right
either to remove or to disconnect and render inoperative any communications
system used or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter.



158.12    TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS.



The licensee shall not transfer or assign all or any portion of its interest
in any license granted pursuant to this chapter without prior written
authorization of the City Manager, which authorization shall not be
unreasonably withheld, conditioned, delayed or denied.  For purposes of this
section, a merger or corporate reorganization shall not be deemed a transfer
or assignment.



158.13    NOTICE; APPEAL.



   1.   The City Manager shall promptly send by certified mail with
return receipt requested a written notice advising each prospective licensee
or licensee of action by the City Manager in granting or denying an
application for a license.



   2.   Within three (3) business days after receipt of any such notice
from the City Manager, an aggrieved prospective licensee or licensee shall
have the right to a hearing before the Council by filing a written appeal
with the City Manager specifying the reasons therefor.  At least ten (10)
days prior to the date of the Council hearing, the City Manager shall send
written notice of same to the appellant by certified mail with return receipt
requested.  At the Council hearing, the appellant may be represented by
legal counsel, may call witnesses and present evidence on his or her behalf,
and may cross-examine witnesses.



158.14    CABLES, WIRES, CONDUITS AND POLES.



   1.   All cables, wires and conduits in connection with any
communications system shall be placed underground, except where above ground
connection to buildings or other locations above ground is reasonably
necessary.  Such above ground connection shall be by means of poles located,
as far as reasonably practicable, within alleys.



   2.   Cables, wires and conduits in connection with any
communications system may be placed either underground or on poles above
ground.  No such poles shall be installed or erected, and no license or
permit for same shall be issued, until the building inspector has approved
the proposed location, construction and pole heights.



   3.   Communications systems shall be constructed underground
anywhere in the City where by ordinance or other arrangements, other
communication systems are required to be placed underground.  They shall
also be placed underground in any area of the City where arrangements cannot
be made to place the communications system contemplated by this chapter on
existing utility poles.



158.15    CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER.



Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an acquiescence in, or
ratification of, the occupation of any of the public right-of-way or public
places of the City by any person now occupying the same without legal right,
nor shall this chapter be construed as conferring the right to occupy any of
the public right-of-way or public places of the City upon any such person now
illegally or without authority occupying the same.



158.16    POLICE REGULATIONS.



The provisions of this chapter are subject to such reasonable regulations and
ordinances of a police nature as the Council may from time to time deem
necessary to adopt, not destructive of the rights which may accrue to any
person under this chapter.



CHAPTER 159
OUTDOOR LIGHTING CODE



 

159.01  Title and Purpose
 
159.08  Parking Lots


159.02  Definitions
 
159.09  Prohibitions


159.03  Regulations
 
159.10  Grandfathering of Nonconforming Luminaires


159.04  Control of Glare; Luminaire Design Factors
 
159.11  Development Permits


159.05  Exceptions to Control of Glare
 
159.12  Light Trespass


159.06  Outdoor Advertising Signs
 
159.13  Violations; Penalties


159.07  Recreational Facilities
 



 



159.01    TITLE AND PURPOSE.



This chapter may be referred to as the Outdoor Lighting Code.  These
regulations are intended to reduce the problems created by improperly
designed and installed outdoor lighting.  It is intended to eliminate
problems of glare, minimize light trespass, and help reduce the energy and
financial cost of outdoor lighting by establishing regulations which limit
the area that certain kinds of outdoor lighting fixtures can illuminate and
by limiting the total allowable illumination of lots located in the City of
Grinnell, Iowa.  All business, residential, and community driveway, sidewalk
and property luminaires should be installed with the idea of being a “good
neighbor,” with attempts to keep unnecessary direct light from shining into
abutting properties or streets.  A purpose of the Outdoor Lighting Code is
to set standards for outdoor lighting so that its use does not interfere with
the reasonable use and enjoyment of property within the City.  It is the
intent of the Outdoor Lighting Code to encourage lighting practices that will
reduce light pollution by reducing up-light, glare, and over lighting. 
Although the goal of this chapter is to address outdoor rather than indoor
illumination, any light source that is located within a building but
illuminates the area outside that building is also subject to the provisions
of this chapter.  In this context the term “outdoor” includes any light
that affects the outdoor environment.



159.02    DEFINITIONS.



For the purposes of this chapter, terms used shall be defined as follows:



   1.   “Direct light” means light emitted directly from the lamp,
off of the reflector or reflector diffuser or through the refractor or
diffuser lens, of a luminaire.



   2.   “Fixture” means the assembly that houses the lamp or lamps
and can include all or some of the following parts:  a housing, a mounting
bracket of pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror
and/or a refractor of lens.



   3.   “Flood” or “spot light” means any light fixture or lamp
that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light output
into a directed beam in a particular direction.



   4.   “Foot candle” means a unit of luminance on a surface one
foot from a uniform point source of one candela as measured by a light meter.



   5.   “Full cutoff (fully-shielded lights)” means light fixtures
shielded or constructed so that no light rays are emitted by the installed
fixture at angles above the horizontal plane as certified by a photometric
test report.



   6.   “Glare” means direct light emitted from a luminaire with
intensity great enough to cause visual discomfort, eye fatigue, a reduction
in a viewer’s ability to see, or in extreme cases momentary blindness.



   7.   “Grandfathered luminaires” means luminaires not conforming
to this Outdoor Lighting Code that were in place at the time this Outdoor
Lighting Code went into effect.



   8.   “Lamp” means the component of a luminaire that produces the
actual light.



   9.   “Light trespass” means the shining of light produced by a
luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located.



   10.   “Lumen” means a unit of luminous flux.  One foot candle
is one lumen per square foot.  For the purposes of these regulations, the
lumen-output values shall be the initial lumen output ratings of a lamp.



   11.   “Luminaire” means a complete lighting system, and includes
a lamp or lamps and a fixture.



   12.   “Temporary lighting” means lighting that is intended to be
used for a special event.  The City Council may allow such uses for
celebratory purposes.



   13.   “Outdoor lighting” means the night-time illumination of an
outside area or object by any man-made device that produces light by any
means.



159.03    REGULATIONS.



All public and private outdoor lighting installed in the City shall be in
conformance with the requirements established by the Outdoor Lighting Code.



159.04    CONTROL OF GLARE; LUMINAIRE DESIGN FACTORS.



   1.   Any luminaire with a lamp rated at more that 1800 lumens shall
not emit, in its installed position, any direct light above a horizontal
plane through the lowest direct light emitting part of the luminaire.



   2.   Any luminaire with a lamp rated at more than 1800 lumens shall
not emit, in its installed position, any light out of the fixture above the
90° horizontal plane.  Floodlights are to be equipped with shields and
aimed so as to direct the light onto the area to be lighted.



   3.   A compact group of luminaires that have approximately the same
effect as a single luminaire are to be considered a single luminaire for the
purposes of this chapter.  An individual luminaire is a member of such a
group if it is within four feet of other luminaires.



   4.   Sensor activated lighting may be unshielded provided it is
located in such a manner as to prevent direct glare and lighting into
properties of others or into a public right-of-way, and provided the light is
set only go on when activated and to go off within five (5) minutes after
activation has ceased, and the light shall not be triggered by activity off
the property.



   5.   All non-essential exterior commercial and residential lighting
is encouraged to be turned off after business hours and/or when not in use. 
Lights on a timer are encouraged.  Sensor activated lights are encouraged to
replace existing lighting that is desired for security purposes. 



159.05    EXCEPTIONS TO CONTROL OF GLARE.



   1.   Any lighting source producing 1800 lumens or less are exempt
from the Outdoor Lighting Code.



   2.   All temporary emergency lighting needed by the Police or Fire
Departments or other emergency services, as well as all vehicular luminaires,
are exempt from the requirements of the Outdoor Lighting Code.



   3.   All hazard warning luminaires required by Federal regulatory
agencies are exempt from the requirements of the Outdoor Lighting Code.



   4.   A building or structure that has been designated for historic
preservation by the City, State, or the National Park Service, is exempt from
the “fully shielded” requirements, if an historic restoration cannot be
achieved by other means.



159.06    OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS.



   1.   Lighting fixtures used to illuminate an outdoor advertising
sign shall be mounted on the top of the sign structure.  All such fixtures
shall comply with the shielding requirements of Section 159.04.  An
exception to this requirement may be allowed for ground-mounted monument
signs.  Ground-mounted monument signs may be illuminated with a
ground-mounted or a bottom-mounted lighting fixture, provided that the light
output shall be directed totally to the monument sign surface to prevent
up-lighting and glare.



   2.   Outdoor advertising signs of the type constructed of
translucent materials and wholly illuminated from within do not require
shielding if the total light output does not exceed 1800 lumens.  Dark
backgrounds with light lettering or symbols are preferred, to minimize
detrimental effects.



   3.   Electrical illumination of outdoor advertising off-site signs
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall only be done by means of
lights directed downward.



159.07    RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.



Lighting of outdoor recreational facilities (public or private), such as (but
not limited to) football fields, soccer fields, baseball fields, softball
fields, tennis courts, special event or show areas, shall meet the following
conditions:



   1.   All fixtures used for such lighting shall be fully shielded as
defined in Section 159.04, or be designed or provided with sharp cut-off
capability, so as to minimize up-light, spill-light, and glare.



   2.   Illumination of the playing field, court, track, or event site
after 11:00 p.m. is prohibited except to conclude an event that was scheduled
to be completed before 11:00 p.m. that circumstances prevented concluding
before 11:00 p.m.



159.08    PARKING LOTS.



In order to direct light downward and minimize the amount of light spilled
into the dark night sky, all lighting fixtures serving open-air parking lots
should be full cut-off (FCO) fixtures as defined by the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA).



159.09    PROHIBITIONS.



   1.   Laser Source Light.  The user of laser source light or any
similar high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment, when
projected above the horizontal, is prohibited.



   2.   Neon Lights.  Neon lights are not permitted except as provided
in Section 157.11(1)(F)(3) of this Code of Ordinances.



   3.   Towers.  Lighting on towers is prohibited except as required
by regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration.



   4.   Flag Poles.  Upward flagpole lighting is permitted for
government flags only, and provided the maximum lumen output is 1300
lumens.  Flags are encouraged to be taken down at sunset to avoid the need
for lighting.



   5.   Searchlights.  The operation of searchlights for advertising,
entertainment, or celebratory purposes is prohibited.



   6.   Temporary Lights.  Temporary lights may be permitted by the
Council after considering the following:



      A.   The purpose for the temporary lighting.



      B.   How any annoyance or safety problems are to be handled,
that may result from the temporary lighting.



      C.   The duration of the temporary lighting.



159.10    GRANDFATHERING OF NONCONFORMING LUMINAIRES.



Luminaires lawfully in place prior to the effective date of this Outdoor
Lighting Code shall be grandfathered.  Such grandfathered luminaires may be
replaced with a like kind of luminaire unless more than 50 percent of the
like kind of luminaires on the same premises is being replaced.  In such
case all the replacement luminaires on the premises shall meet the standards
of this Outdoor Lighting Code.



159.11    DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.



   1.   Submission Contents.  The applicant for any permit or site
plan approval required by any provision of this Code of Ordinances involving
outdoor lighting fixtures shall submit (as part of the application for site
plan approval or a permit) evidence that the proposed work or activity will
comply with the Outdoor Lighting Code.  Specifically, the application
submission shall include:



      A.   Plans indicating the location on the premises, and the
type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and
other devices.



      B.   A detailed description of the illuminating devices,
fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices.  The description
shall include manufacturer’s catalog cuts and drawings, including sections
when requested.



      C.   Photometric data, such as that furnished by
manufacturers, showing the angle of cut off or light emissions.



   2.   Additional Submission.  The above required plans, descriptions
and data shall be sufficiently complete to enable the plans examiner to
readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of the Outdoor
Lighting Code will be secured.  If such plans, descriptions and data, by
reason of the nature of configuration of the devices, fixtures or lamps
proposed, cannot enable this ready determination, the applicant shall
additionally submit as evidence of compliance-certified reports of tests
provided that these tests shall have been performed and certified by a
recognized testing laboratory.



   3.   Lamp or Fixture Substitution.  Should any outdoor light
fixture or the type of light source therein be changed after the permit has
been issued, a change request must be submitted to the Building Official for
approval, together with adequate information to assure compliance with this
chapter, which must be received prior to substitution.



   4.   Construction Activity.  The provisions of this section apply
to the construction process as well as to the completed project.



159.12    LIGHT TRESPASS.



All nonexempt outdoor lighting fixtures shall be designed, installed, and
maintained to prevent light trespass.  Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be
installed and thereafter maintained so as not to cause direct light from the
luminaire to be directed toward residential buildings or other
light-sensitive facilities on adjacent or nearby property or nearby land. 
If such conditions should occur, the luminaire shall be redirected or its
light output shall be controlled as necessary to eliminate such condition.
The horizontal luminance on the ground shall not exceed 0.4 foot-candles five
feet beyond the adjacent property line.



159.13    VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.



   1.   If, after investigation, the City finds that any provision of
the Outdoor Lighting Code is being violated, the City shall give written
notice by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, of
such violation to the owner and/or to the occupant of such premises,
demanding that the violation be abated within sixty (60) days of the date of
the written notice.  If the violation is not abated within the 60-day
period, the City shall institute actions and proceedings to enjoin, restrain
or abate any violations of the Outdoor Lighting Code and to collect the
penalties for such violations.



   2.   The installation of a non-compliant luminaire is a violation
even if the lamp is turned off and such luminaires must be removed within the
60-day period, but penalties will not accrue between the date on which the
lamp is turned off and the end of the 60-day period.



CHAPTER 160
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



 

160.01  Adoption of Property Maintenance Code
 
160.02  Amended As Follows



 



160.01    ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Building and Planning Director of the City of Grinnell, being marked and
designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Grinnell, in the State of Iowa for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities
and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure
that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use,
and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the Building and Planning
Director are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this chapter, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in Section 160.02 of this chapter.



160.02    AMENDED AS FOLLOWS.



Chapter 1:



   Section 103.2: Revise to: The Code Official shall be appointed by the
City Manager, and shall follow the guidelines identified in Section 155.04 of
the City of Grinnell Code of Ordinances.



   Section 103.5: Revise to: Fees shall be set by resolution passed by the
City Council of the City of Grinnell, and the fee schedule shall be posted on
the City website and available on file in the office of the City Clerk.



   Section 111.2, 111.2.2, 111.2.4: Delete:  Amendment from 2010.



   Section 112.4:  Revise to: …"shall be liable to a fine of not less
than $100 for the first offense, $250 for the second, and $500 for each
repeat offense."



Chapter 2: Add the Following Terms and Definitions:



   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular shall
include the plural, and the plural the singular; and the word "shall" is
mandatory, the word "may" is permissive:



   Abate: To end a nuisance, emergency, or nonconformance.



   Animal: A living organism other than a human being.



   Attic: Any story situated, wholly or partly, within the roof and so
designed, arranged, or built to be used for business, storage, or habitation.



   Appurtenance: That which is directly or indirectly connected or
accessory to a structure.



   Revise Basement to: A portion or story of a building next to or below
the first or main floor, which may or may not be considered habitable
space.  The portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade.



   Crawlspace: An underfloor space that is not a basement and is not
habitable space.



   Central heating system: A system supplying heat to one or more dwelling
unit(s) or more than one rooming unit.



   Communal: Used or shared by or intended to be used or shared by the
occupants of two or more rooming units or two or more dwelling units.



   Condominium: A dwelling unit in compliance or conformance with the
requirements of the code of Iowa chap. 499B.



   Cooperative: A dwelling unit that is in compliance or conformance with
the requirements of chap. 499A



   Court: An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot
with a building and which is bordered on two or more sides by the building.



   Dormitory: Any dwelling where group sleeping accommodations are
provided for persons not members of the same family groups in which several
large rooms or a series of closely associated rooms under joint occupancy and
single management of a College or other higher education institution.



   Dwelling: Any building or structure which is wholly or partly used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants and includes
any appurtenances attached thereto.



   Exit: A continuous and unobstructed means of egress to a public way and
shall include intervening doors, doorways, corridors, exterior balconies,
ramps, stairways, horizontal exits, exit passageways, exit courts, walkways,
sidewalks and yards.



   Extermination: The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods.



   Letter of Compliance: A document issued by a inspector, stating the
premises have been inspected and found to be in compliance with this chapter
of the date of inspection.



   Multiple Dwelling: Any structure containing more than two (2) dwelling
units.



   Permit: A certificate certifying that the unit for which it is issued
is in compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.



   Sanitary: Relating to the conditions that affect hygiene and health,
especially the supply of sewage facilities and clean drinking water.



   Supplied: Paid for, furnished by, provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.



   Temporary Permit: A certificate certifying that the unit for which it
is issued is not in compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter
and which certifies that the unit for which it is issued may be occupied for
a time specified in said certificate pending the completion of the necessary
improvements needed to bring it into compliance.



Chapter 3



   SECTION 302.4. Modify to: No grass, weed, or volunteer tree or bush
shall exceed 8 inches.



   SECTION 303.2: Modify to:  48 inches in height above the finished
ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. 
Insert:  Five (5) feet in height and at least four (4) feet from each side
of the pool.  Such fence shall be constructed sufficiently strong and of
such structural design as to make the pool inaccessible to small children.



Chapter 5



   SECTION 504.1: Add: All plumbing fixtures and devices shall be
installed per the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code.



Chapter 6



   SECTION 602.3: Add: tenants shall be given control of such heating
facilities unless an agreement between the tenant(s) and owner(s) is in place.



   Section 605.5:  Temporary or portable power producing apparatus',
including generators, are    prohibited from being used to provide the
main source of electricity of any structure(s) except when being used as a
back-up source of electricity during severe weather events or other similar
emergencies and situations.



Chapter 7: Create Section 705: Carbon Monoxide Alarms



   SECTION 705.1 General: Carbon monoxide alarms shall comply with
section705.



      705.1.1: Carbon monoxide alarms shall be listed in accordance
with UL 2034. Combination carbon monoxide and smoke alarms shall be listed in
accordance with UL 2034 and UL 217.



   SECTION 705.2 Where Required: carbon monoxide alarms shall be supplied
in all rental units that contain either or both of the following:



      1. The dwelling unit contains a fuel-fired appliance, or can, in
any way, be effected by a fuel-fire appliance in the building.



      2. The dwelling unit has an attached garage.



   SECTION 705.3 Location: Carbon monoxide alarms in dwelling units shall
be installed outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity
of the bedrooms. Where a fuel-burning appliance is located within a bedroom
or its attached bathroom, a carbon monoxide alarm shall be installed within
the bedroom.



   SECTION 705.4 Combination alarms: Combination alarms shall be permitted.



   SECTION 705.5 Carbon monoxide detection systems: Carbon monoxide
detection systems shall be permitted and shall comply with NFPA 720. The
location of detectors shall be the same as required in Section 705.3.



(Ch. 160 - Ord. 1467 - Nov. 19 Supp.)



CHAPTER 161
WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS



 

161.01  Purpose and General Policy
 
161.06  Noise


161.02  Definitions
 
161.07  Fall Zone Required


161.03  Permit Requirements
 
161.08  Lighting


161.04  Utility Notification
 
161.09  Climbing Apparatus


161.05  Bulk Regulations
 
161.10  Appearance



 



161.01    PURPOSE AND GENERAL POLICY.



The City of Grinnell finds that regulations are needed in order to establish
uniform rules and policies to ensure that wind energy systems are
appropriately designed, sited, and installed to protect the public health,
safety and welfare of the community.



161.02    DEFINITIONS.



For the purpose of this chapter, all words defined herein are in addition to
all other words defined in other chapters of the City of Grinnell, Municipal
Code.



   1.   Approved Wind Turbine:  Wind turbines used in a wind energy
system must be approved under a certification program recognized by the
American Wind Energy Association.



   2.   Commercial Wind Energy System:  A wind energy system which is
intended to produce electricity for sale to a rate regulated or non-regulated
utility or for use off site. NO COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM SHALL BE
INSTALLED WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF GRINNELL, IA.



   3.   Height:  The height above grade of the wind energy system,
including the tower, generating unit, and the highest vertical extension of
any blades or rotors.  Height shall be measured from the adjacent grade of
the tower to the tip of the turbine (blade) at it highest point.



   4.   Wind Energy System:



      A.   Dispersed wind energy system:  A system that is located
on property zoned C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2 and has a rated capacity of one hundred
(100) kilowatts or more which is incidental and subordinate to a permitted
use on the same parcel and which is intended to produce electricity primarily
for use on site.



      B.   Residential wind energy system:  A system that is
located on a property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3 and has a rated capacity of up to
one hundred (100) kilowatts and which is incidental and subordinate to a
permitted use on the same parcel.



161.03    PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



A wind energy system shall only be allowed as an accessory use to a permitted
principal use and shall require a Special Use Permit.  Approval of the Board
of Adjustment shall be made prior to construction, installation, alteration,
or location of such structure.  The owner/operator of the wind energy system
shall obtain all other permits required by federal, state, and local agencies
prior to construction of the system.



161.04    UTILITY NOTIFICATION.



No wind energy system shall be installed until the local utility company has
been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected
customer-owned generator. Off grid systems do not have to notify the utility
company.



161.05    BULK REGULATIONS. 



   1.   Location.  Wind energy systems shall adhere to the following
location requirements:



      A.   A wind energy system shall be located entirely in the
rear yard.



      B.   No part of a wind energy system shall be located within
or over drainage, utility or other established easements.



      C.   A wind energy system shall be located to be in compliance
with the guidelines of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations,
and shall be in compliance with the City of Grinnell Airport Zoning
Regulations.



   2.   Maximum Height.



      A.   All wind energy systems located in any R zoning district
shall have a maximum height of eighty (80) feet.



      B.   All other wind energy systems located in zoning districts
other than R districts shall have a maximum height of one hundred and twenty
(120) feet.



   3.   Setback.  All parts of the wind energy structure, including
guy wire anchors, shall be at least ten (10) feet from the property line.



   4.   Clearance of Blade Aboveground.  No portion of the wind energy
system blade shall extend within twenty (20) feet of the ground.  No blades
may extend over parking areas, driveways or sidewalks.



161.06    NOISE.



Wind energy systems shall not exceed 60 dBA, as measured at the closest
neighboring inhabited dwelling. The level, however, may be exceeded during
short term events such as utility outages and/or severe wind storms.  It
shall be the responsibility of the owner to verify the noise level.



161.07    FALL ZONE REQUIRED.



An accessory wind turbine shall meet the following fall zone requirements:



   1.   Fall Zone - Free Standing and Attached Towers.  Free standing
towers, or towers attached to a building shall be located on the lot so that
the distance from the base of the tower to any adjoining property line is a
minimum of one hundred percent (100%) of the proposed tower height.



   2.   Fall Zone - Guyed Towers.  Guy wire supported towers shall be
located so that the distance from the base of the tower to any adjoining
property line is a minimum of seventy percent (70%) of the effective height
from its base.



161.08    LIGHTING.



No lights shall be installed on the tower, unless required to meet FAA
regulations.



161.09    CLIMBING APPARATUS.



All climbing apparatus shall be located a minimum of twelve (12) feet above
the ground and the tower must be designed to prevent climbing within the
first twelve (12) feet.



161.10    APPEARANCE.



The property owner of any wind energy system shall maintain such system in a
safe and attractive manner, including replacement of defective parts,
painting, cleaning, and other acts that may be required for the maintenance
and upkeep of the function and appearance of such a system.  The owner shall
also maintain the ground upon which the system is located in an orderly
manner, such that is free from debris, tall grass and weeds, and any
structures remain in good appearance.



(Ch. 161 - Ord. 1316 – Sep. 09 Supp.)



CHAPTER 165
ZONING REGULATIONS



 



165.01  Title
 
165.16  “R-3” Multifamily Residential District


165.02  Interpretation
 
165.17  “C-1” General Commercial District


165.03  Jurisdiction
 
165.18  “C-2” Central Business District


165.04  Definitions
 
165.19  “M-1” Light Industrial District


165.05  Establishment of Districts
 
165.20  “M-2” Heavy Industrial District


165.06  Official Zoning Map
 
165.21  Exceptions, Modifications, and Interpretations


165.07  Rules of the Interpretation of District Boundaries
 
165.22  Planned Unit Development


165.08  Classification of Newly Annexed Territory
 
165.23  Off-Street Parking Areas Required


165.09  General Application of District Regulations
 
165.24  Off-Street Loading Spaces Required


165.10  Transition Zoning.
 
165.25  Building Permits and Certificates of Compliance


165.11  Nonconforming Lots; Nonconforming Uses of Land; Nonconforming
Structures; and Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Premises
 
165.26  Board of Adjustment


165.12  Home Occupations
 
165.27  Duties on Matters of Appeal


165.13  General Regulations
 
165.28  Schedule of Fees


165.14  “R-1” Single-Family Residential District
 
165.29  Amendments


165.15  “R-2” One- and Two-Family Residential District
 
165.30  Complaints Regarding Violations


 
165.31  Enforcement; Violations




 



165.01    TITLE.



This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the zoning
ordinance of the City of Grinnell, Iowa.



165.02    INTERPRETATION.



In their interpretation and application, provisions of this chapter shall be
held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, and welfare.  To protect the public, among other purposes,
such provisions are intended to provide for adequate light; pure air; safety
from fire and other danger; undue concentration of population; and ample
parking facilities.  Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than
is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules or
regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall control.



165.03    JURISDICTION.



Pursuant to Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa, the jurisdiction of this chapter
shall be all land within the City of Grinnell corporate limits.



165.04    DEFINITIONS.



For the purpose of this chapter, the words “used or occupied” include the
words “intended, designated, or arranged to be used or occupied,” and the
following definitions apply for the purpose of interpreting this chapter:



   1.   “Accessory use or structure” means a use or structure
subordinate to the principal use of a building or to the principal use of
land and which is located on the same lot serving a purpose customarily
incidental to the use of the principal building or land use.  Accessory uses
or structures shall be located on the same lot as the principal use or
structure, except as otherwise specified.



   2.   “Alley” means a public way, other than a street, twenty-six
(26) feet or less in width, affording secondary means of access to abutting
property.



   3.   “Alteration, structural” means any change in the load
bearing members of a building, such as bearing walls, partitions, columns,
beams or girders.  The enlargement of the size or height of a building shall
be construed to be a structural alteration.



   4.   “Basement” means a story partly underground but having at
least one-half (½) of the height of one or more walls above the highest
level of the adjoining ground.  A basement shall be counted as a story under
the provisions of this chapter.



   5.   “Billboard” includes all structures, regardless of the
material used in the construction of same, that are erected, maintained, or
used for public display of posters, painted signs, wall signs, whether the
structure be placed on the wall or painted on the wall itself, pictures or
other pictorial reading matter which advertise a business or attraction which
is not carried on or manufactured in or upon the premises upon which said
signs or billboards are located.



   6.   “Board” means the Board of Adjustment of the City.



   7.   “Boardinghouse” means a building other than a hotel, where
for compensation, meals and/or lodging are provided for four (4) or more
persons, but not exceeding ten (10) persons.



   8.   “Building” means any structure designed or intended for the
support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or
property.



   9.   “Building, height of” means the vertical dimension measured
from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the
building to the highest point.



   10.   “Building line” means a line parallel to the street
right-of-way line at any story level of a building and representing the
distance which all or any part of the building is set back from said
right-of-way.



   11.   “Carport” means a roofed structure providing space for the
parking of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than two sides.  For the
purposes of this chapter a carport attached to a principal building shall be
considered as part of the principal building and subject to all yard
requirements.  Such carport shall have a portland cement concrete floor.



   12.   “Cellar” means a story having more than one-half (½) of
the height of all walls below the highest level of the adjoining ground.  A
cellar shall not be considered as a story for the purpose of this chapter.



   13.   “Clinic, dental or medical” means a building in which a
group of physicians, dentists, or physicians and dentists and allied
professional assistants are associated for the purpose of carrying on their
profession.  The clinic may include a dental or medical laboratory.  It
does not include inpatient care or operating rooms for major surgery.



   14.   “Commission” means the City Planning and Zoning Commission.



   15.   “District” means a section or sections of the City within
which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the
height and area of buildings and premises are uniform.



   16.   “Dormitory” means a dwelling where lodging with or without
meals is provided for compensation to more than ten (10) persons and which is
not composed of apartment units and is located only on a campus of a school
or college.



   17.   “Dwelling” means a building or portion thereof designed or
used exclusively for residential occupancy, but not including house trailers,
mobile homes, hotels, motels, boarding and lodging houses, tents, tourist
courts or tourist homes.



   18.   “Dwelling, single-family” means a building designed for or
occupied exclusively for residence purposes by one family.



   19.   “Dwelling, two-family (duplex)” means a building designed
for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families with separate housekeeping
and cooking facilities for each.



   20.   “Dwelling, multiple” means a building or portion thereof
designed for or occupied by more than two (2) families with separate
housekeeping and cooking facilities for each, but not including auto courts
or motels.



   21.   “Family” means a single individual, doing his own cooking,
and living upon the premises as a separate housekeeping unit, or a collective
body of persons doing their own cooking and living together upon the premises
as a separate housekeeping unit in a domestic relationship based upon birth,
marriage, or other domestic bond as distinguished from a group occupying a
boardinghouse, lodging house, club, fraternity or hotel.



   22.   “Farm” means an area which is used for the growing of the
usual farm products and their storage, as well as for the raising thereon of
the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses, cattle, sheep and
swine.  The term “farming” includes the operating of such an area for
one or more of the above uses, including dairy farms with the necessary
accessory uses for treating or storing the produce; provided, however, the
operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal
farming activities.



   23.   “Frontage” means land abutting a street or alley.  Where
a specified amount of frontage is required, such shall be measured between
and perpendicular to parallel lines intersecting the street or alley and
extending into the lot or group housing project.



   24.   “Garage, private commercial” means a building or a portion
of a building that is used for refueling, servicing, repairing, hiring,
selling, or storing vehicles or equipment which are owned by the owner of the
building.



   25.   “Garage, private residential” means an accessory building,
or an accessory portion of the main building, designed and/or used for the
shelter or storage of vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main
building except that a one- or two-car capacity garage may be rented for the
private vehicles of persons not residents on the premises.  Any private
residential garage shall have a portland cement concrete floor.



   26.   “Garage, public” means any building, other than a private
garage, used for equipping, refueling, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling
or storing motor-driven vehicles.  Such public garage shall have a portland
cement concrete floor.



   27.   “Grade” means the average elevation of the finished ground
at the exterior walls of the main building.



   28.   “Home occupation” is defined in Section 165.12 of this
chapter.



   29.   “Hospital” means an institution providing health services,
primarily for inpatients, and medical and surgical care of the sick and
injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related
facilities as laboratories, central service facilities, and staff offices.



   30.   “Junkyard” means any area where waste, discarded, or
salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled or packed, disassembled
or handled, including house- wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and places or
yards for storage of salvaged house- wrecking and structural steel materials
and equipment; but not including areas where such uses are conducted entirely
within a completely enclosed building, and not including the processing of
used, discarded, or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing operations.



   31.   “Living unit” means the room or rooms occupied by a family
provided that a living unit must include a kitchen, bath and closet.



   32.   “Loading space” means an off-street space or berth on the
same lot with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the
temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley, or other
appropriate means of access.



   33.   “Lodging house” means a building where lodging only is
provided for compensation for four (4) or more persons.



   34.   “Lot” means, for zoning purposes, as covered by this
chapter, a parcel of land at least sufficient in size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other
open spaces as are herein required.  Such lot shall have frontage on a
dedicated street, and may consist of:



      A.   A single lot of record;



      B.   A portion of a lot of record;



      C.   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete
lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of
record;



      D.   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds;



provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or
parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.



   35.   “Lot line, front” means, in the case of an interior lot
abutting on only one street, the street line of such street.  In the case of
any other lot, it may be such street line as is elected by the owner to be
the front line for the purpose of this chapter.



   36.   “Lot line, rear” means that boundary line which is
opposite and most distant from the front line.



   37.   “Lot line, side” means any boundary line not a front lot
line or a rear lot line.



   38.   “Lot measurements” are:



      A.   Depth – the mean horizontal distance between the front
and rear lot lines.



      B.   Width – the distance between straight lines connecting
front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of
the required front yard.



   39.   “Lot of record” means a lot which is part of a
subdivision, the deed of which is recorded in the office of the County
Recorder of Poweshiek County, or a lot or parcel described by metes and
bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.



   40.   “Lot types” are:



      A.   Corner lot – a lot located at the intersection of two
(2) or more streets.



      B.   Interior lot – a lot other than a corner lot with only
one frontage on a street other than an alley.



      C.   Through lot – a lot other than a corner lot with
frontage on more than one street other than an alley.  Through lots with
frontage on two streets may be referred to as “double frontage lots.”



      D.   Reversed frontage lot – a corner lot, the side street
line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the
first lot to its rear.



   41.   “Mobile home” means any structure used for living,
sleeping, business, or storage purposes, having no foundation other than
wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, or skirting, and which is, has been, or
reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the
structure from place to place, whether by motive power or other means.  The
term “mobile home” includes camp car and house car, or house trailer. 
The placing of such vehicles on a foundation shall not alter the definition
of such structure.



   42.   “Mobile home park” means any lot or portion of a lot upon
which two or more trailers or mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping
purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such
accommodation.



   43.   “Motel, auto court” means a building or group of attached
or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units for
overnight auto tourists, with garage attached or parking facilities
conveniently located to each such unit.



   44.   “Nonconforming use” means use of building or of land that
does not conform to the regulations as to use for the district in which it is
situated.



   45.   “Office” means a place where business or service for
others is transacted and not a place where chattels or goods, wares or
merchandise are commonly created, exchanged or sold.



   46.   “Parking lot” means an area of land, a yard, or other open
space on a lot used for or designed for use by standing motor vehicles,
together with a driveway connecting the parking lot with a public place.



   47.   “Parking space” means a surfaced area, enclosed or
unenclosed, on a lot sufficient in size to store one standard automobile,
together with a driveway connecting the parking space with a public place.



   48.   “Preschool nursery” means the facilities of any dwelling,
institution, or organization which, for profit or nonprofit, are used in the
temporary care of five (5) or more children at any one time.



   49.   “Principal building” means a non-accessory building in
which the principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted.



   50.   “Private drive” means a right-of-way set aside for the use
of visitors to and residents of the large scale residential development.



   51.   “Public notice” means the publication of time and place of
any public hearing, in accordance with prescribed time limits, prior to the
date of said hearing in one newspaper of general circulation within the City.



   52.   “Separate tract” means a parcel of land or a group of
contiguous parcels of land under one ownership.



   53.   “Story” means that portion of a building included between
the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above,
except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included
between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof
above.  If the finished floor level directly above a basement or cellar is
more than six (6) feet above grade, such basement or cellar shall be
considered a story.



   54.   “Story, half” means a space under a sloping roof which has
the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than four (4)
feet above the top level.  A half-story containing independent apartments or
living quarters shall be counted as a full story.



   55.   “Street” means a paved public thoroughfare with curb and
gutter which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.



   56.   “Street line” means a dividing line between a lot, tract,
or parcel of land and a contiguous street.



   57.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected with a
fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed
location on the ground.  Among other things, structures include buildings,
walls, fences, billboards, and poster panels.



   58.   “Swimming pool” means any constructed or prefabricated
pool used for swimming or bathing, twenty-four (24) inches or more in depth.



   59.   “Swimming pools, private” means all constructed or
prefabricated pools which are used as swimming pools in connection with
single-family residences, and available only to the families of the
householders and private guests.



   60.   “Swimming pools, public” means any constructed or
prefabricated pools other than private swimming pools.



   61.   “Variance” means a modification or variation of the
provisions of this chapter as applied to a specific piece of property, as
distinguished from rezoning.



   62.   “Wall height” means the vertical dimension measured from
the average elevation of the side yard adjacent to the adjoining property to
the top plate.



   63.   “Yard” means an open space on the same lot with a
building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the
ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein.  In measuring a yard for
the purpose of determining the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear
yard, the least distance between the lot line and the main building shall be
used.  Fences and walls are permitted in any yard, subject to height
limitations as indicated herein.



   64.   “Yard, front” means a yard extending across the full width
of the lot and measured between the front lot line and the building or any
projection thereof, other than the projection of the usual steps or
unenclosed porches; the narrow frontage on a corner lot.



   65.   “Yard, rear” means a yard extending across the full width
of the lot and measured between the rear lot line and the building or any
projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. 
On corner lots, the rear yard shall be considered as adjoining the street
upon which the lot has its greater dimension.  On both corner lots and
interior lots, the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.



   66.   “Yard, side” means a yard extending from the front yard to
the rear yard and measured between the side lot lines and the building.



165.05    ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



For the purpose and intent of this chapter, the City hereby establishes the
following zoning district classifications:



   “R-1” Single-Family Residential District



   “R-2” One- and Two-Family Residential District



   “R-3” Multifamily Residential District



   “C-1” General Commercial District



   “C-2” Central Business District



   “M-1” Light Industrial District



   “M-2” Heavy Industrial District



165.06    OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   1.   The official zoning map of the City is hereby established and
is made a part of this chapter by reference hereto.



   2.   The map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
attested by the City Clerk under the following words: “This is to certify
that this is the official zoning map referred to by ordinance number 774 of
the City of Grinnell, Iowa,” together with the date of adoption of the
ordinance.



   3.   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official
map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map
as certified above, together with amending ordinances, shall be final
authority.  The official map shall be on file in the office of the Clerk.



   4.   In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of use, the Council may by
ordinance adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior
official zoning map.  The new official zoning map may correct drafting or
other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such
correction shall have the effect of amending the original zoning ordinance or
any subsequent amendment thereof.  The new official map shall be identified
by the signature of the Mayor attested by the City Clerk, under the following
words:  “This is to certify that this official zoning map supersedes and
replaces the official zoning map adopted May 16, 1977, as part of ordinance
number 774 of the City of Grinnell, Iowa.”



165.07    RULES OF THE INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



In cases where the exact location of a district boundary is unclear as shown
on the official zoning map, the following rules shall be used in determining
the location of said district boundary:



   1.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines
of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.



   2.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.



   3.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits
shall be construed as following City limits.



   4.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be
construed to be midway between the main tracks.



   5.   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be
construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore
line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries
indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers,
canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.



   6.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in subsections 1 through 5 shall be so construed.  Distances not
specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the
scale of the map.



   7.   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other
circumstances not covered by subsections 1 through 5 above, the Board of
Adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries.



   8.   Wherever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated in
the manner authorized by law, the zoning district adjoining each side of such
street, alley, or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of
such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and
thenceforth be subject to all regulations to the extended districts.



165.08    CLASSIFICATION OF NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORY.



All territory which may be hereafter annexed to the City shall be
automatically classified in the R-1 District until such time the territory is
subsequently changed to another district by an amendment to this zoning
ordinance.



165.09    GENERAL APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.



The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum and
shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and
particularly, except as hereinafter provided:



   1.   No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or
occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
erected, constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered unless in
conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located.



   2.   No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or
altered:



      A.   To exceed the height;



      B.   To accommodate a house of a greater number of families;



      C.   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area;



      D.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side
yards or other open spaces than herein required; or in any other manner
contrary to the provisions of this chapter.



   3.   No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking
or loading space required in connection with any building for the purpose of
complying with this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open space,
or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other
building.



   4.   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the zoning
ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum
requirements set forth herein.  Yards or lots created after the effective
date of such ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirement
established by the zoning ordinance.



   5.   No building in the rear of any principal building on the same
interior lot shall be used for residential purposes, except as may be
otherwise specifically provided in this chapter.



   6.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration of any
wall or other portion of a building declared unsafe by an authorized public
official.



165.10    TRANSITION ZONING.



   1.   Lots in Two Districts.  Where a district boundary line is
established by this chapter or as shown on the zoning map divides a lot which
is in single ownership and on record at the time of the adoption of the
zoning ordinance, the use thereon and other district requirements applying to
the least restricted portion of such lot under this chapter shall be
considered as extending to the entire lot, provided the more restricted
portion of such lot is entirely within one hundred (100) feet of said
dividing line. The use so extended shall be deemed to be conforming.



   2.   Lots in Commercial or Industrial Districts Adjacent to
Residential Districts.  Where a lot in a commercial or industrial district
abuts a lot in a residential district, there shall be provided along such
abutting lines a minimum yard of twenty-five (25) feet.



   3.   Front Yard Transition.  Where the frontage on one side of a
street between two (2) intersecting streets is zoned partly as residential
and partly as commercial or industrial, the front yard depth in the
commercial or industrial district shall be equal to the required front yard
depth of the residential district.



   4.   Garage Entrances.  No public or private garage for more than
five (5) motor vehicles shall have an entrance or exit for motor vehicles
within twenty (20) feet of an “R-1” or “R-2” district.



   5.   Parking Lots and Driveways Abutting Residential Districts. 
Whenever a parking lot or a driveway to a parking lot is established in other
than a residential district so as to abut the side or rear line of a
residential district, planted screenings, a solid masonry wall, or a
substantial sightly fence not less than four (4) feet high and not more than
eight (8) feet high shall be planted or constructed and maintained along said
side or rear lot line up to, but not beyond, the setback building line of the
district in which it is located.  In addition, in all districts, the
lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, on any parking lot or
driveway shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed
or reflected toward residential districts.



   6.   Reversed Corner Lot Abutting Residential Districts.  In the
case of a reversed corner lot where the rear of a lot in a “C” district
abuts upon the side of a lot in any residential district, there shall be a
rear yard of not less than fifty percent (50%) of the rear yard requirement
of the abutting residential district, provided further that where a public
alley separates the rear of the lot in the “C” district and the side of
the lot in any residential district, no rear yard shall be required. 



165.11    NONCONFORMING LOTS; NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND; NONCONFORMING
STRUCTURES; AND NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES.



   1.   Statement of Intent.  Within the districts established by this
chapter or amendments that may later be adopted there exist lots, structures,
and uses of land and structures which were lawful before the zoning ordinance
was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or
restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments.  It is the
intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they
are removed, but not to encourage their survival.  It is further the intent
of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or
extended, or be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses
prohibited elsewhere in the same district.  To avoid undue hardship, nothing
in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction
was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of
the zoning ordinance and upon which actual building had been diligently
carried on.  Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of
construction materials in permanent position and fastening in a permanent
manner; except where demolition or removal of an existing building has been
substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal
shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that such work shall be
diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.



   2.   Nonconforming Lots of Record.  In any district in which
single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by
other provisions of this chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary
accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of the zoning ordinance.  This
provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for
area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district. 
However, such construction shall conform to the required yard setbacks except
as otherwise provided in this chapter.  Whenever two (2) or more adjacent
lots of record have individually less area and/or frontage than required
under the provisions of this chapter, but are under the same ownership, they
may be sold as individual lots, so long as each lot has at least ninety
percent (90%) of the required width and 90% of the required area for the
minimum required for a full-sized lot within the district in which the lots
are located.



   3.   Nonconforming Uses of Land.  The lawful use of land upon which
no building or structure is erected or constructed, which is a vested
nonconforming use under this and prior zoning ordinances as adopted or
amended, or which becomes nonconforming under ordinances as adopted or
amended, may be continued so long as such use remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions: 



      A.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged, increased,
or extended to occupy a greater area of land.



      B.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in
part to any other portion of the lot or parcel.



      C.   No structure or building shall be constructed on or moved
onto the land, unless the use is changed to a use permitted in that district.



      D.   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any
reason for a period of more than six (6) months, any subsequent use of such
land shall conform to the district regulations for the district in which such
land is located.



   4.   Nonconforming Uses of the Structures.  If a lawful use or
vested nonconforming use of a structure, or of a structure and land in
combination, exists at the effective day of adoption or amendment of the
zoning ordinance that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of
this chapter, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions: 



      A.   No existing structure devoted entirely or in part to a
use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located
shall be enlarged, extended, moved, or structurally altered, unless the use
is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such use is located.



      B.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part
of a building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the
time it became nonconforming.  No such use shall be extended to any land
outside such building.



      C.   If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming
use of a structure may be changed to another nonconforming use of a similar
nature or a more restricted use.  Whenever a nonconforming use has been
changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not
thereafter be changed to a less restrictive use.



      D.   In the event that a nonconforming use of a structure, or
of a structure and land in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for a
period of one year, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the uses
permitted in the district in which it is located.  Where nonconforming use
status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction
of the structure by the owner or the owner’s designated representative
shall terminate the authorization for the nonconforming use of the land.



   5.   Nonconforming Structures.  Where a structure is nonconforming
by reason of restriction on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other
characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure
may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions: 



      A.   Such structure is not enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity.



   6.   Repairs and Maintenance.  On any building devoted in whole or
in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on
repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing,
provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of
passage or amendment of the zoning ordinance shall not be increased. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order
of such official.



   7.   Uses Under “Exception to Prohibited Uses,” Not
Nonconforming Uses.  Any use for which a special use permit is obtained as
provided in this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall
without further action be deemed a conforming use. 



   8.   Abandonment.  A nonconforming use of a building or premises
which has been abandoned shall not thereafter be returned to any use not
permitted in the district within which such is located.  A nonconforming use
shall be considered abandoned: 



      A.   When the intent of the owner to discontinue use is
apparent; or



      B.   When the characteristic equipment and the furnishings of
the nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and have not been
replaced by similar equipment within six (6) months, unless other facts show
intention to resume the nonconforming use; or



      C.   Where it has been replaced by a conforming use; or



      D.   When it has been changed to another use under a special
use permit from the Board of Adjustment.



   9.   District Changes.  Whenever the boundaries of a district shall
be changed so as to transfer an area from one district to another district of
a different classification, the foregoing provision shall also apply to any
nonconforming use existing therein.



165.12    HOME OCCUPATIONS.



Within the various zoning districts as described, certain use groups are
permitted as they are mutually compatible.  It is the intent of this chapter
to restrict incompatible uses; however, it is not the intent to eliminate
certain home occupations which may be compatible with residential areas. 
Home occupations are hereby permitted and defined as a business, occupation,
or profession carried on within a residential dwelling by a resident or
residents thereof, and shall have the following characteristics:



   1.   There shall be no external evidence of the occupation with the
exception of one unlighted nameplate of not more than one square foot in area
attached flat against the dwelling.  Advertising signs or displays through a
window are not permitted.



   2.   There shall be no emission of smoke, dust, odor, fumes, glare,
noise, vibration, electrical or electronic disturbance detectable at the lot
line.



   3.   The activity shall employ only members of the immediate family
of the residents of the dwelling.



   4.   There shall be no general stock of goods on the premises nor
shall there be any display of samples.



   5.   There shall be no continual visits by the general public and
there shall not be any activity so as to cause parking and/or traffic
problems annoying to the public.



   6.   The above listed characteristics shall not be construed to
restrict the sale of garden produce on the premises, provided this exception
shall not extend to allow the operation of a commercial greenhouse or
nursery, or the existence of stands or booths for the display of produce
grown on the premises.



   7.   Any business, occupation, or profession the operation of which
does not meet the aforesaid characteristics, shall not be interpreted to be a
home occupation.



165.13    GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   1.   Visibility at Intersections.  On a corner lot in any district
(except for C-2), nothing shall obstruct view between two and ten feet above
the centerline grade of the street in a triangular area bounded by the
centerlines of both streets, and a line defined by points on the curb lines
seventy-five (75) feet from the intersection of the curb lines.  Where any
alley (or drive) intersects a street, nothing shall obstruct vision between
two and ten feet above the centerline grade of the street in a triangular
area bounded by centerlines of the street and alley (or drive), and a line
defined by a point on the street right-of-way line and a point on the alley
right-of-way line (or the edge of the drive) that is ten feet from the
intersection of the right-of-way line and the edge of the drive.







To view a full-size PFD version of the image above, click here.



   2.   Fences, Walls and Hedges in Residential Districts.  In any
residential zone, fences, walls, and hedges within the limits of the required
front yard may be up to four feet in height, and up to six feet in height may
be allowed if the design is determined by the Director of Building and
Planning to be in character with the surrounding neighborhood.  Fences,
walls and hedges in the side yard may be up to six feet in height. 
Retaining walls may exceed six feet.  Properly spaced trees are not
considered to be hedges.  Fences along a park or playground in any
residential zone may be constructed on the right-of-way line and may be
constructed up to six feet in height, provided that it allows for visibility
at intersections as set out in subsection 1 of this section.  All fences and
plantings except joint fences shall be so placed that they shall be wholly
upon the property of the person setting same and so as to permit maintenance
of the fence without trespassing on the adjacent property.  The person
setting any fence shall erect said fence so that it will be of the best
possible appearance toward the outside as toward the interior of the lot in
question.  Where the rear yard for one lot is the side yard for an abutting
lot, the rear yard shall govern to within ten feet of the street right-of-way.



   3.   Street Frontage Required.  No lot shall contain any building
used in whole or in part for residence purposes unless such lot abuts a
public street.  No lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part
for commercial or manufacturing purposes unless such lot abuts a public
street or an adequate access easement to the lot, providing sufficient
ingress, egress and parking, as set out in Section 165.23.  Each access
easement must be approved by the Council.



   4.   Accessory Buildings.  Accessory buildings may be erected as a
part of the principal building or may be connected thereto by a breezeway or
similar structure, provided all yard requirements for a principal building
are met.  A detached garage wholly or partially within the limits of a side
yard shall be considered part of the principal building.  An addition to the
principal building shall not be denied simply because it results in a
detached garage (previously considered to be in the rear yard) being located
in a side yard, even if the detached garage no longer meets all setback
requirements.  A minimum separation of six feet must be maintained between
the addition and an existing detached garage.  Accessory buildings which are
not a part of the principal building shall be located only in the rear yard
and generally shall occupy no more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear
yard.  Accessory buildings shall be a distance of at least two feet from
alley lines.  The distance of the accessory building from lot lines of
adjoining lots shall be three feet for buildings with wall heights of eight
feet or less.  For every additional one foot of wall height, the distance
from lot lines of adjoining lots shall be increased by one foot, to a maximum
distance of ten feet.  On a corner lot, the accessory building shall conform
to the setback regulations on the side street.  Height of an accessory
building shall be no greater than the height of the principal building, and
in no case shall be greater than twenty-five (25) feet.  Accessory buildings
shall be similar or complementary in materials, style and proportion to the
principal buildings in the immediate neighborhood.  No accessory building
shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the principal
building has been commenced, and no accessory building shall be used unless
the principal building on the lot is also being used.  Satellite dishes
shall be classified under this chapter as an accessory building, with the
same requirements for location.  Measurements shall be determined from the
outer edge of the dish.



   5.   Corner Lots.  For corner lots platted after the effective date
of the zoning ordinance, the street side yard shall be equal in width to the
setback regulation of the lots to the rear having frontage on the
intersecting street.  On corner lots platted and of record at the time of
the effective date of the zoning ordinance, the side yard regulation shall
apply to the longer street side of the lot except in the case of reverse
frontage where the corner lot faces an intersecting street.  In this case
there shall be a side yard on the longer street side of the corner lot of not
less than fifty percent (50%) of the setback required on the lots to the rear
of such corner lot, and no accessory building on said corner lot shall
project beyond the setback line of the lots in the rear; provided further
that this regulation shall not be interpreted as to reduce the buildable
width of the corner lot facing an intersecting street and of record or as
shown by existing contract of purchase at the time of the effective date of
the zoning ordinance, to less than twenty-eight (28) feet or to prohibit the
erection of an accessory building.  Where a dwelling or other building is to
be placed facing the long side of a corner lot, the short side of the lot
shall be deemed as side yard but shall not be reduced to less than
twenty-five (25) feet, or the front yard reduced to less than twenty-five
(25) feet, but the rear yard may be reduced by not more than thirty percent
(30%) to permit use of the lot.



   6.   Building Lines on Approved Plats.  Wherever the plat of a land
subdivision approved by the Commission and on record in the office of the
County Recorder shows a building line along any frontage for the purpose of
creating a front yard or side street yard line, the building line thus shown
shall apply along such frontage in place of any other yard line required in
this chapter unless specific yard requirements in this chapter require a
greater setback.



   7.   Lots Not Served by Sewer and Water: 



      A.   Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings.  Where neither
public sewer nor public water is available, a minimum of 20,000 square feet
lot area and a minimum of 100 feet lot width are required; where public water
only is available, a minimum of 10,000 square feet lot area and a minimum of
80 feet lot width are required.



      B.   Multifamily Dwellings.  Where public sewer is not
available, special consideration shall be given to determine lot area and
width requirements on the basis of soil percolation tests as required and
administered by the county sanitarian.



165.14    “R-1” SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



This district is intended to provide for low-density residential areas of the
City now developed primarily with single- family dwellings and areas where
similar residential development is likely to occur.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      A.   Single-family dwellings.



      B.   Railroad right-of-way and trackage.



      C.   Utility substation.



      D.   Farming, truck gardening.



      E.   Plant nursery.



      F.   Golf course, except miniature golf courses and driving
ranges operated for commercial purpose.



      G.   Country clubs.



      H.   Off-street parking lots in conjunction with a permitted
use.



      I.   Places of worship and accessory buildings.



      J.   Museums, libraries, parks, playgrounds, community centers.



      K.   Public and private schools and colleges for academic
instruction.  Included within said use are all the customary or proper
incidental uses attendant thereto.  These incidental uses include (but are
not limited to) the operation of food services, restaurants, clubs, alcoholic
bars, dormitories, physical plant services, convention services.



      L.   Cemetery by special use or extension of existing cemetery.



      M.   Public buildings and utilities operated by the City.



      N.   Private swimming pools provided that they comply with the
following:



         (1)   All swimming pools capable of holding twenty-four
inches, in depth, or more of water, shall require a building permit. The
permit fee shall be established by resolution. Plans and specifications
concerning the swimming pool shall be submitted to the Department of Building
and Planning and such pool shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with generally accepted standards and practices for swimming pools.



         (2)   Every person in possession of land upon which the
pool is situated shall, at all times, maintain a fence that completely
surrounds such pool.  A fence not less than five (5) feet in height with no
openings therein, other than doors or gates, and at least four (4) feet from
the edge of the pool shall be installed prior to filling the pool with water.
Pools must be located in side or rear yards. No pool will be allowed in a
front yard.



         (3)   All doors or gates opening through such fence
enclosure shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices
designed to keep, and capable of keeping, such door or gate securely closed
and latched at all times when not in actual use. Such self-latching device
shall be located not less than four (4) feet above the underlying ground
surface or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small children.



(Ord. 1315 – Sep. 09 Supp.)



See also Sections 165.21 and 165.22 for special uses.



   2.   Accessory Uses.  The following accessory uses are permitted:



      A.   Accessory buildings, provided such buildings including
garages shall be erected and maintained only as accessories to the dwelling
situated on the same lot or grounds and shall not involve the conduct of a
business or manufacturing or be used as storage buildings of construction
equipment.



      B.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction
work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of
the construction work.



      C.   Home occupations.



      D.   The taking of boarders or the leasing of rooms by a
resident family, provided that the total number of boarders and roomers does
not exceed two.



      E.   Temporary use of a dwelling structure within a new
subdivision for use as a job office and real estate office for the subject
subdivision, which use shall terminate upon completion or abandonment of the
project.



   3.   Interior Living Space.  The minimum ground floor area shall be
not less than 700 square feet in one and one and a half story dwellings, and
shall be the area included within the outside lines of the exterior walls of
the main structure at the ground floor level, not including garages,
breezeways, or enclosed or unclosed porches.  The minimum square feet of
ground floor area of a two- or three-story dwelling shall be 550 square feet.



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following minimum requirements shall be
observed: 



      A.   Lot Area:  single-family dwellings - 9,000 square
feet.  Exception: if the lot is located within the boundaries of the 2013
Central Grinnell Urban Revitalization area then the lot area can be decreased
by 10 percent from the minimum requirements, all other bulk regulations shall
be met.



(Ord. 1384 - Dec. 13 Supp.)



      B.   Lot Width:  single-family dwellings, at street line
–35 feet; single- family dwellings, at building line – 80 feet.  Except
the lot width at the building line may be reduced by 25% for a lot where the
extensions of the side lot lines intersect with an interior angle of 20
degrees or more and the lot does have a width of 80 feet at some point
between the minimum front yard line and the minimum rear yard line
established by the zoning ordinance.



      C.   Front Yard:  25 feet. 



      D.   Side Yard:  8 feet for one story; 10 feet for two
stories; 12 feet for three stories.



      E.   Rear Yard:  35 feet. 



      F.   Maximum Height:  three stories or 35 feet. 



      G.   Minimum Building Width:  Any building containing
dwelling units must be a minimum of 24 feet in building width. 



165.15    “R-2” ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



This district is intended to provide for low-density residential areas of the
City now developed with one- family and two-family dwellings, and areas where
similar residential development is likely to occur.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:  any use permitted in the “R-1” district;
two-family dwellings; and two-unit row dwellings. 



   2.   Accessory Uses.  Any accessory use permitted in the “R-1”
district is permitted.  When fences are erected or constructed for row
dwellings, said fence shall be centered on the lot line and shall be erected
or constructed of the same material so that the appearance of the fence is
the same on either side.  Said fence shall not exceed six feet in height and
shall be erected in the rear yard only.



   3.   Interior Living Space.  The minimum ground floor area of a
single-family dwelling or row dwelling shall be not less than 700 square feet
in 1-story and 1½- story dwellings, and shall be the area included within
the outside lines of the exterior walls of the main structure at the ground
floor level.  The minimum square feet of ground floor area of a 2-story
single-family or row dwelling shall be 550 square feet.  The minimum square
feet of floor area within each dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling shall
be not less than 400 square feet.  Except one unit of a two-family dwelling
may be an efficiency dwelling unit as provided for in the Building Code as
adopted by the City.  The minimum width of a row dwelling shall be not less
than 20 feet.  Row dwellings are defined as a row of two attached dwellings
located on a single lot or on a common frontage of a number of adjoining
lots, which comprise a continuous structure divided into separate dwellings
by one unpierced party or lot-line wall extending from the ground upward to,
or through, the roof deck.  The entire structure shall be considered as a
single building with respect to side yard requirements.  If a parcel of land
containing, or proposed to contain, row dwellings is divided into lots in
such a manner to provide separate lots for separate row dwellings, the party
walls shall be centered on the appropriate lot line.



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following minimum requirements shall be
observed: 



      A.   Lot Area:  Single-family dwellings - 7,000 square feet;
two-family dwellings -9,000 square feet.  Exception: if the lot is located
within the boundaries of the 2013 Central Grinnell Urban Revitalization area
then the lot area can be decreased by 10 percent from the minimum
requirements, all other bulk regulations shall be met.



(Ord. 1384 - Dec. 13 Supp.)



      B.   Lot Width:  At street line –35 feet; at building line
–70 feet.  Except the lot width at the building line may be reduced by 25%
for a lot where the extensions of the side lot lines intersect with an
interior angle of 20 degrees or more and the lot does have a width of 70 feet
at some point between the minimum front yard line and the minimum rear yard
line established by this chapter.



      C.   Front Yard:  25 feet. 



      D.   Side Yard:  8 feet for one story; 10 feet for two
stories; 12 feet for three stories; 12 feet for row dwelling/building. 



      E.   Rear Yard:  35 feet. 



      F.   Maximum Height:  Three stories or 35 feet. 



      G.   Minimum Building Width:  Any building containing
dwelling units must be a minimum of 24 feet in building width. 



165.16    “R-3” MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



This district is intended for medium-density residential areas of the City
now developed with one-family, two-family, multifamily and large scale
multifamily residential development and where residential development is
likely to occur. 



   1.   Permitted Uses.  A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      A.   Any use permitted in the “R-2” district.



      B.   Multiple dwellings.



      C.   Boarding or lodging houses, tourist homes.



      D.   Funeral homes.



      E.   Office of an architect, engineer, lawyer, dentist,
doctor, or other established and recognized profession.



      F.   Hospital, clinic, and similar uses.



      G.   Condominiums, row dwellings



      H.   Large scale residential development.



      I.   Beauty parlors, provided they are operated in the
residence by members of the family residing in the dwelling and are limited
to one chair.



      J.   Photography and video production business, which may
include the operation of tuxedo rental, wedding accessories and apparel, and
picture framing so long as such uses are ancillary or accessory uses to the
primary business of professional photography and video production.



      K.   Crematory in association with a funeral home.



(Ord. 1310 – Sep. 09 Supp.)



   2.   Accessory Uses.



      A.   Any accessory use permitted in the “R-2” district.



      B.   Storage garages, where the lot is occupied by multiple
dwellings, hospital, or institutional building.



      C.   Fences.  When fences are erected or constructed for row
dwellings, said fence shall be centered on the lot line and shall be erected
or constructed of the same material so that the appearance of the fence is
the same on either side.  Said fence shall not exceed six (6) feet in height
and shall be erected in the rear yard only. 



   3.   Interior Living Space.  The minimum ground floor area shall be
not less than 700 square feet in one and one and a half story dwellings, and
shall be the area included within the outside lines of the exterior walls of
the main structure at the ground floor level.  The minimum square feet of
floor area within each dwelling unit of an apartment, garden apartment,
terrace, or multiple dwelling building designed for two or more families
shall be 400 square feet.  The minimum square feet of ground floor area of a
two-story dwelling shall be 550 square feet. 



      A.   A multiple-family dwelling building may contain
efficiency dwelling units as provided for in the Building Code as adopted by
the City.  At least 60% of the dwelling units in a multiple-family dwelling
building must be standard size apartments as defined in this section. 



      B.   Condominiums, defined as a multifamily residence, except
that the units within a condominium may be sold to individuals with the owner
retaining ownership of the building, common corridors, surrounding ground and
accessory buildings.



      C.   Row dwellings, defined as a row of two or more (but not
more than ten) attached dwellings located on a single lot or in a common
frontage of a number of adjoining lots, which comprise a continuous structure
divided into separate dwellings by one or more unpierced party or lot line
wall extending from the ground upward to, or through, the roof deck.  The
entire structure shall be considered as a single building with respect to
side yard requirements.  If a parcel of land containing, or proposed to
contain, row dwellings is divided into lots in such a manner to provide
separate lots for separate row dwellings, the party wall shall be centered on
the appropriate lot lines.



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following minimum requirements shall be
observed: 



      A.   Lot Area:  Single-family dwellings -7,000 square feet;
two-family dwellings -9,000 square feet; each unit over two -2,000 square
feet.  Exception: if the lot is located within the boundaries of the 2013
Central Grinnell Urban Revitalization area then the lot area can be decreased
by 10 percent from the minimum requirements, all other bulk regulations shall
be met.



(Ord. 1384 - Dec. 13 Supp.)



      B.   Lot Width:  At street line –35 feet; at building line
–70 feet, except that the lot width at the building line may be reduced by
25% for a lot where the extension of the side lot lines intersects with an
interior angle of twenty degrees (20º) or more and the lot does have a width
of 70 feet at some point between the minimum front yard line and the minimum
rear yard line established by this chapter.  Row dwelling/dwelling unit –
20 feet. 



      C.   Front Yard:  25 feet. 



      D.   Side Yard:  8 feet for one story; 10 feet for two
stories, 12 feet for three stories; 14 feet for four stories.  Row
dwelling/building – 12 feet for non- interior units. 



      E.   Rear Yard.  35 feet. 



      F.   Maximum Height:  Four stories or 50 feet.  Row
dwelling/building – three habitable stories or 35 feet in height. 



      G.   Minimum Building Width:  Any building containing
dwelling units must be a minimum of 24 feet in building width. 



165.17    “C-1” GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



This district is intended to accommodate commercial services and products
outside the setting of the Central Business District. 



   1.   Permitted Uses.  A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes: 



      A.   Any use permitted in the “R-3” district.



      B.   The sale and manufacture of baked goods; the sale of food
and beverages of all kinds, including sale for consumption on the premises.



      C.   Sale of products.  The sale of general merchandise,
including department stores; the sale of apparel of all kinds; the sale of
furniture and household goods, including furniture and accessory furniture
storage; the sale of china, floor covering, hardware, paint, wallpaper and
similar materials; drugs, plants, flowers, gifts, music, photographic goods,
sporting goods, stationery; hobby shops, jewelry stores, monument sales and
cutting. 



      D.   Eating places of all types. 



      E.   Service establishments.  The sale of general services;
barber and beauty shops, tailors, laundries, radio and/or television station,
telephone exchange or transformer station; small animal hospital, or pet
shop, provided that noise and odors are effectively confined to the premises;
hotels and motels; music and dance studios. 



      F.   Automotive services.  Public garages, service stations
and service garages, parking lots, automobile laundries; new and secondhand
motor vehicles and/or trailer sales; mobile home sales. 



      G.   Amusement and recreation.  Armory, assembly hall,
bowling alley, dance hall, pool and billiards, theater, skating rink, or
other social, sport or recreation center operated as a business, provided the
place or building in which it is operated is sufficiently sound-insulated to
effectively confine the noise to the premises; golf driving range, miniature
golf course. 



      H.   Transportation services.  Railroad station; public
service station; bus passenger station; bus terminal. 



   2.   Accessory Uses.  Any accessory use permitted in the “R-3”
district.



   3.   Interior Living Space.  The same as required in the “R-3”
district. 



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following minimum requirements shall be
observed: 



      A.   Lot Area:  For a dwelling or any building containing any
dwelling units, the same as required in the "R-3" district.  No requirement
for any other permitted uses.  Exception: if the lot is located within the
boundaries of the 2013 Central Grinnell Urban Revitalization area then the
lot area can be decreased by 10 percent from the minimum requirements, all
other bulk regulations shall be met.



(Ord. 1384 - Dec. 13 Supp.)



      B.   Lot Width:  For a dwelling or any building containing
any dwelling units, the same as the “R-3” district.  No requirement for
any other permitted uses. 



      C.   Front Yard:  25 feet. When fronting on the right-of-way
of a major thoroughfare shown on the official major thoroughfare plan, the
front yard shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way line.  Where a
“C-1” district lies adjacent to a “C-2” district, the front yard
requirements may be reduced by 60% on any lot not adjacent to a residential
district (or if separated from said residential district by a street or
railroad right-of-way). 



      D.   Side Yard:  None required except as follows: 



         (1)   Five-foot side yards shall be required for a
dwelling and any building containing any dwelling units.



         (2)   A five-foot side yard shall be required on that
side of the lot which adjoins any “R-1”, “R-2”, or “R-3” district.



         (3)   Where no openings are provided in the walls of
commercial buildings adjacent to interior lot lines, no side yard shall be
required.



         (4)   Where there are openings in the walls of
commercial buildings adjacent to interior lot lines, there shall be a side
yard on that side of the lot not less than 3½ feet wide.



         (5)   Where any side yard is provided, though not
required, the same shall be not less than 3½ feet wide.



      E.   Rear Yard:  For a dwelling or any building containing
any dwelling units, the same as required in the “R-3” district.  No
requirement for any other uses except when the rear yard adjoins the side lot
line in an “R” district, in which case a ten-foot rear yard is required. 



   5.   Maximum Height:  Four stories or 50 feet. 



   6.   Minimum Building Width:  Any building containing dwelling
units must be a minimum of 24 feet in building width. 



165.18    “C-2” CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



This district is intended to provide for the sale of products and services
within one compact commercial area – the Central Business District.  No
property shall be zoned “C-2” commercial unless it lies adjacent to
property zoned “C-2”.  Off-street parking and loading facilities and
building setbacks are not required in this district in order to provide for
more intensive development of the land. 



   1.   Permitted Uses.  A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes: 



      A.   Any use permitted in the “C-1” district.



      B.   Wholesale business, storage buildings, warehouses and
yards.



   2.   Accessory Uses.  Any accessory use permitted in the “C-1”
district. 



   3.   Interior Living Space.  The same as required in the “R-3”
district. 



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following minimum requirements shall be
observed: 



      A.   For any structure used solely for residential purposes,
lot areas, widths, yards, and heights shall meet the minimum requirements,
including parking requirements of the "C-1" district.  Exception: if the lot
is located within the boundaries of the 2013 Central Grinnell Urban
Revitalization area then the lot area can be decreased by 10 percent from the
minimum requirements, all other bulk regulations shall be met.



(Ord. 1384 - Dec. 13 Supp.)



      B.   For any structure used solely for other permitted uses or
a combination of any other permitted use and residential use need not provide
any area, width, and yard or parking requirement.  However, a maximum height
of 45 feet is required; and any building containing dwelling units must be a
minimum of 24 feet in building width.



      C.   Front Yard:  25 feet. When fronting on the right-of-way
of a major thoroughfare shown on the official major thoroughfare plan, the
front yard shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way line.



(Ord. 1389 - Dec. 13 Supp.)



165.19    “M-1” LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



This district is intended to permit most compounding, assembly, or treatment
of articles or materials with the exception that no use shall be permitted to
be established which by reason of its nature or manner of operation may
become hazardous, noxious, or offensive owing to the emission of odor, dust,
smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, vibrations, glare, refuse matter, or
water-carried matter. 



   1.   Permitted Uses.  A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes: 



      A.   Any use permitted in the “C-2” district, except
dwelling units.



      B.   Automobile assembly or major repair.



      C.   Creamery, bottling, ice manufacturing, and cold storage
plant.



      D.   Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, or
treatment of cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and food products, except fish and
meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and the rendering of fats and oils.



      E.   Manufacturing, compounding, assembling, or treatment of
articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials such as bone,
cloth, cork, fiber, leather, paper, plastic, metals or stones, tobacco, wax,
yarns, and wood.



      F.   Manufacture of musical instruments, novelties, and molded
rubber products.



      G.   Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances,
instruments, and devices.



      H.   Manufacture of pottery or other similar ceramic products,
using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or
gas.



      I.   Laboratories – experimental, film, or testing.



      J.   Manufacture and repair of electric signs, advertising
structures, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating
equipment.



      K.   Blacksmith, welding, or other metal shop, excluding drop
hammers and the like.



      L.   Foundry casting, lightweight nonferrous metals, or
electric foundry not causing noxious fumes or odors.



      M.   Bag, carpet, and rug cleaning; provided necessary
equipment is installed and operated for the effective precipitation or
recovery of dust.



      N.   Enameling, lacquering, or japanning.



      O.   (Repealed by Ord. 1310 – Sep. 09 Supp.)



      P.   Concrete mixing, concrete products manufacture.



      Q.   Sawmill, planing mill, including manufacture of wood
products not involving chemical treatment.



      R.   Building material sales yards, lumberyard, contractor’s
equipment storage yard, or plant, or rental of equipment commonly used by
contractors, storage and sale of livestock feed and/or fuel, provided dust is
effectively controlled, and storage yards for vehicles of a delivery service.



      S.   Circus, carnival, or similar transient enterprise;
provided such structures or buildings shall be at least 200 feet from any
“R” district.



      T.   Inflammable liquids, storage and bulk station, provided
said storage meets the requirements of the building and fire prevention codes
of the City and State.



      U.   Printing and/or publishing house.



      V.   Truck terminal or yard, including repair.



      W.   Any uses similar to those described above and recognizing
the district’s statement of intent concerning nuisance factors.



   2.   Accessory Uses. 



      A.   An accessory use permitted in the “C-2” district.



      B.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction
work, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of
the construction work.



      C.   Temporary buildings may also be used if in conjunction
with an existing permitted use.  Permits for these temporary buildings shall
be issued for not more than one year.  If needed, it may be renewed on an
annual basis for not more than a maximum of two additional years.



   3.   Interior Living Space.  Structures used for dwelling purposes
are not permitted. 



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following minimum requirements shall be
observed: 



      A.   Lot Area:  No minimum required. 



      B.   Lot Width:  No minimum required. 



      C.   Front Yard:  30 feet. 



      D.   Side Yard:  None required except when adjacent to an
“R” district, in which case a minimum of 25 feet. 



      E.   Rear Yard:  40 feet, unless the rear lot line adjoins a
right-of-way, in which case none is required. 



      F.   Maximum Height:  None required. 



165.20    “M-2” HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



This district is intended for primarily manufacturing and fabrication
activities including operations having external effects which could have an
impact on adjacent less intense commercial or industrial use. 



   1.   Permitted Uses.  Any industrial, commercial or related use,
except the following uses which shall be specifically prohibited: 



      A.   Cattle or hog breeding, raising and feeding operations.



      B.   Fat rendering.



      C.   Garbage:  offal, or dead animal, or fish reduction or
dumping.



      D.   Manufacturing of explosives, acid, gas, glue, fertilizer,
or rubber goods.



      E.   Distillation of bones, coal, tar, petroleum, refuse,
grain or wood.



      F.   Storage or disposal of radioactive, toxic or hazardous
waste.



      G.   Petroleum or petroleum products refining.



      H.   Smelting of ores.



      I.   Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of paris manufacture.



      J.   Stock yard or slaughter of animals.



      K.   Tannery.



      L.   Commercial incinerators.



   2.   Special Exceptions:  Junk yards subject to Section
165.21(4)(N).



   3.   Required Conditions: 



      A.   The best practical means known for the disposal of refuse
matter or water- carried waste, the abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor,
dust, smoke, gas, noise, or similar nuisance shall be employed.



      B.   All principal buildings and all accessory buildings or
structures, including loading and unloading facilities, shall be located at
least 100 feet from any “R” district boundary, except where adjoining a
railroad right-of-way, and 100 feet from Iowa Highway 146 and U.S. Highway 6
right-of-way.



   4.   Bulk Regulations.  The following minimum requirements shall be
observed, except as noted in required conditions above. 



      A.   Lot Area:  No minimum required. 



      B.   Lot Width:  No minimum required. 



      C.   Front Yard:  30 feet. 



      D.   Side Yard:  15 feet. 



      E.   Rear Yard:  25 feet. 



      F.   Maximum Height:  No height limitation. 



165.21    EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS, AND INTERPRETATIONS.



   1.   Structures Permitted Above Height Limit.  The building height
limitations of this chapter may be modified as follows:  Parapet walls not
exceeding four feet in height, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads,
fire towers, grain elevators, stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, water
tanks, radio and television towers, monuments, cupolas, domes and spires, and
necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a height greater than
the permitted height in accordance with existing or hereafter adopted
ordinances. 



   2.   Double Frontage Lots.  Buildings on through lots and extending
through from street to street shall provide the required front yard on both
streets.



   3.   Other Exceptions to Yard Requirement.  Every part of a
required yard shall be open to the sky unobstructed with any building or
structure, except for a permitted accessory building in the rear or side
yard, and except for ordinary projections not exceeding four feet, including
roof overhang, eaves or gutters, awnings or canopies; projections not to
exceed 30 inches, including bay windows, chimneys, flues, cornices,
ornamental features or cantilevered stairs; projections not to exceed four
feet are unenclosed balconies, fire escapes, or unenclosed stairs.



   4.   Special Use Permits.  The Board of Adjustment, after public
hearing, and after receiving a report by the Commission and subject to such
restrictions and conditions as the board may deem necessary, may authorize
the location, construction, extension, or structural alteration of the
following buildings or uses by issuance of a special permit:



      A.   Airport, land field, or landing strip.



      B.   Area for dumping or disposing of trash or garbage.



      C.   Broadcasting towers, radio or television.



      D.   Exhibition area or fairground.



      E.   Hospitals, homes for the aged, nursing homes, nonprofit
fraternal institutions, and any lawful use of property by organizations or
entities which are exempt from tax under any provision of subchapter F,
chapter 1, subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code.



      F.   Mobile home parks, except in “R-1” and “R-2”
districts, subject to all of the applicable requirements of Chapter 145 of
this Code of Ordinances.



      G.   Preschools, nursery schools, or child nurseries.



      H.   Signs bearing the name of a residential development.



      I.   Public cemetery.



      J.   Telephone exchanges and static transformer stations,
water towers, pumping stations and sewage lift stations, provided there is no
public business office or any storage yard or storage building operated in
connection therewith.



      K.   Public swimming pools.



      L.   Such “M-2” uses as provided in Section 165.20.



      M.   Storage of not more than 20 obsolete and junk vehicles
with subsequent crushing of such vehicles not more than once per week in an
M-1 or M-2 district.  Issuance of this permit shall not exceed twelve (12)
months with the property reverting to prior permitted use restrictions.  The
previous permit holder may reapply for the issuance of such permit.  No
parts or salvage may be sold from any vehicle stored under this special
permit.



      N.   Junk yards subject to the following conditions:



         (1)   No operation shall be permitted closer than 1,000
feet from any established R zone.



         (2)   All outdoor storage shall be conducted entirely
within an enclosed fence, wall or other solid screen except for driveways. 
Such solid screen shall be constructed on or inside the lot lines and be
constructed in such a manner that no outdoor storage or salvage operations
shall be visible from an adjacent property or public right-of-way.



      O.   Light industrial use can be allowed in commercial zones,
if the following conditions are satisfied.  Violation of the conditions is a
violation of this chapter and is treated as a municipal infraction.



         (1)   Industrial activities and material inventory must
be contained within an enclosed space so that it cannot be detected from the
lot lines.



         (2)   The industry shall not generate more vehicular
traffic or pose a greater threat to neighbors and passersby than would a
commercial use occupying the same site.



         (3)   There shall be no emission of smoke, dust, odor,
fumes, glare, noise, vibration, electrical or electronic disturbance
detectable at the lot lines.



         (4)   An industrial use cannot be located in the main
level storefront of a building in a commercial zone unless it is incidental
to the retail business occupying the space.



Before issuance of any special use permit for any of the above buildings or
uses, the board shall refer the proposed application to the Commission, which
shall be given 45 days in which to make a report regarding the effect of such
proposed building or use upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic
conditions, public utility facilities, and other matters pertaining to the
general welfare.  No action shall be taken upon any application for a
proposed building or use above referred to until and unless the report of the
Commission has been filed; provided, however, if no report is received from
the Commission within 45 days, it shall be assumed that approval of the
application has been given by the Commission, unless an extension of time is
requested and granted to the Commission.



   5.   Front Yard Exceptions.  In “R-1”, “R-2” and “R-3”
districts, where some lots are developed with a front that is less than the
minimum required for the district by this chapter or where some lots have
been developed with a front yard greater than required by this chapter, the
following rule shall apply:  Any new building or addition in front thereof
shall not be closer to the street right-of-way than the average of the front
yard of the first building on each side within a distance of 200 feet
measured from building to building, except as follows:



      A.   Buildings located entirely on the rear half of a lot
shall not be counted.



      B.   No building shall be required to have a front yard
greater than 50 feet.



      C.   If no building exists on one side of a lot within 200
feet of the lot in question, the minimum front yard shall be the same as the
building on the other side, but in any event, a front yard greater than 50
feet shall not be required.



165.22    PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



This section is intended to provide for changing concepts of design for the
development or redevelopment of residential tracts of land on a unit basis by
allowing greater flexibility and diversification of land usage and building
locations than the conventional single lot method provided in other sections
of this chapter.  It is the intent of this section that the basic principles
of good land use planning, design standards, density, adequate light and air,
recreation and open space, and building coverage can be maintained through a
conscientious and sound design concept.



   1.   Procedure.



      A.   Preliminary Plans.  The owners of any tract of land as
described in subsection 2 of this section may submit to the Council
preliminary plans for the use and development of all of that tract for
residential and accessory purposes.  The development plans shall be referred
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for study and report.  The Commission
shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plans.  Notices for the
hearing shall be sent to all property owners within 200 feet of the proposed
development.  The Commission may approve or disapprove the preliminary plans
as submitted, or before approval may require that the applicant modify,
alter, adjust, or amend the preliminary plans as the Commission deems
necessary to the end that it preserve the intent and purpose of this chapter
to promote public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.  The
preliminary plans as approved by the commission shall then be referred to the
Council and shall contain a report stating the reasons for approval or
disapproval whereupon the Council may approve or disapprove the plans as
submitted or may require such changes thereto as it deems necessary.



      B.   Final Plans.  Final plans shall be submitted to the
Council for approval within one year after approval of the preliminary
plans.  If the final plans are not submitted within the one-year period,
approval of the preliminary plans shall become null and void unless an
extension of time is applied for and granted by the Council.  The final
plans shall first be referred to the Commission for final review and
report.  The Commission shall consider the final plans and if the final
plans substantially conform to the preliminary plans, the Commission shall
refer approval to the Council along with a certified copy of the
Commission’s resolution of approval.  If the final plans are not approved
by the Commission, the reasons for not approving the final plans shall be set
out in writing.  After receiving the report of the Commission, the Council
shall consider the final plans, and if the final plans substantially conform
to the preliminary plans, the Council shall accept the final plans by
resolution.  If the final plans are not approved, the reasons for not
approving the final plans shall be set out in writing.  The approval of the
final plans by the Council shall not waive any State code or local code
requirements which are not a part of the zoning ordinance.



   2.   Standards.  Since, to a degree, a planned unit development
does waive density and other requirements of this zoning ordinance, the land
usage, minimum lot areas, yard dimensions, building height, and accessory
uses shall be determined by the requirements set below, which shall prevail
over conflicting requirements of this chapter or of the subdivision ordinance
(Chapter 170).



      A.   Planned unit developments proposed for land which was not
platted as of January 1, 1995, shall be not less than five (5) acres in size.



      B.   Planned unit developments proposed for land platted prior
to January 1, 1995, shall be considered on a case-by-case basis.



      C.   The plans must be consistent with this chapter to promote
public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.



      D.   The buildings shall be used for the uses which are
permitted in the zone in which the planned unit development is located.



      E.   Under no circumstances will the density of any planned
unit development exceed:



         (1)   Six units per acre when the planned unit
development is located in an R-1 residential zone.



         (2)   Twelve units per acre when the planned unit
development is located in an R-2 residential zone.



         (3)   Twenty-four (24) units per acre when the planned
unit development is located in an R-3 residential zone.



         (4)   Thirty-six (36) units per acre when the planned
unit development is located in a C-1 General Commercial District.



         (5)   Forty-eight (48) units per acre when the planned
unit development is located in a C-2 Central Business District.



(Ord. 1389 - Dec. 13 Supp.)



      F.   The maximum yard requirements of the zoning district in
which the development is located need not apply except that minimum yards
specified in the zoning district in which the planned unit development is
located shall be provided around the boundaries of the area being
developed.  When developing an existing site, with existing structure/s the
yard requirements shall be waived if the existing structure is less than what
the zoning district requires.  If the plans indicate that the land involved
with the planned unit development will remain under the ownership of a single
person or corporation, the plans must identify which street frontage will be
the front yard and the other yards will then be identified as defined in this
chapter and will be the minimum yard dimensions required around the perimeter
of the planned unit development. If the plans call for the original parcel to
be divided and sold as a number of private parcels, then the development of
the individual parcels will define the front, rear, and side yards and the
setback from the adjoining properties will be governed by the appropriate
minimum yard dimensions.



(Ord. 1389 - Dec. 13 Supp.)



      G.   Uses or arrangement of uses along the project boundary
lines shall not be in conflict with those in adjoining or opposite
property.  To this end, the Commission may require, in the absence of an
appropriate physical barrier, that uses of least intensity or a buffer of
open space or screening be arranged along the border of this project.



      H.   The aggregate open space and common area is not to be
less than that which would have resulted from the application of open space
requirements of the zoning district in which the planned unit development is
located.



      I.   The project shall not strain the City’s capacity for
utilities and schools.



      J.   All parking requirements of the zoning ordinance shall be
met. If located in a C-2 zoning district, a structure containing less than
twenty (20) dwelling units requires no spaces for parking, when the structure
has 20 or more dwelling units; one (1) space for parking shall be provided
for each unit.



(Ord. 1389 - Dec. 13 Supp.)



      K.   In reviewing the proposed plans, the Commission shall
consider deed restrictions and covenants as concern the use and maintenance
of open space, common area, and rights-of-way.  If a homeowners association
contracts for maintenance of buildings and grounds, such articles of the
association shall be approved by the Commission and Council.



   3.   Content of Preliminary Plans.  The preliminary plans shall
consist of a site plan; showing number of units, foot print of a typical
unit, access to public right-of-way and utilities, sample unit plans and
appropriate elevations necessary to clearly convey to the Commission how the
project satisfies the intent of this chapter.



   4.   Content of Final Plans.  Final plans shall substantially
conform to the preliminary plans and consist of fully-developed plans and
specifications.  Final plans will be approved by the Commission and the
Council and will remain on file in the office of the City Clerk.



   5.   Individual Consideration.  It is the intent of this section
that all planned unit development projects be considered on a case-by-case
basis.  Any previous approvals or disapprovals by either the Commission or
the Council are not to be construed as establishing a precedent for any
future approvals or disapprovals by either the Commission or the Council.



   6.   Plat Required.  A plat of the development, if required by
State or local subdivision laws, shall be recorded in the same manner as any
subdivision plat.  The plat shall contain building lines, building
locations, common land, streets, easements, and other applicable items
required by the subdivision ordinance.  No building permits shall be issued
until the plat of development, if required, and as finally approved by the
Council has been recorded.



   7.   Significant Variance from the Approved Plans.  The final plans
shall not be approved by the Commission or the Council if there is
significant variance from the approved preliminary plan, unless the
Commission has conducted another public hearing as set out in subsection 1 of
this section.  The following are examples of (but not an all-inclusive list
of) significant variances from the preliminary plan:



      A.   If there is any change in the perimeter yard dimensions.



      B.   If there is any increase in the number of dwelling units
proposed.



      C.   If there is any change in the location of an entrance
which serves more dwelling units than a single-family or duplex dwelling unit.



165.23    OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS REQUIRED.



   1.   In all districts, except “C-2,” in connection with every
industrial, commercial, business, trade, institutional, recreational, or
dwelling use, or similar uses, space for parking and storage of vehicles
shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule:



      A.   Automobile sales and service garages:  one parking space
for each 600 square feet of gross floor area. 



      B.   Banks, business, and professional offices:  one parking
space for every 400 square feet of gross floor area, but in no case less than
five parking spaces. 



      C.   Bowling alleys:  five spaces for each alley. 



      D.   Churches and schools:  one parking space for every 80
square feet of gross floor area in a principal auditorium, including balcony,
if any; when no auditorium is involved, one parking space for every two
employees.  Churches within 500 feet of any commercial or industrial parking
lot may use such commercial or industrial parking lot to meet their parking
requirements so long as adequate written assurance is recorded in the County
Recorder’s office and presented to the building inspector.  The assurance
shall guarantee that the parking area will continue to be available for use
by the church until said church provides its own parking spaces.  At that
time, the recorded assurances may be withdrawn.



      E.   Dance halls, assembly halls:  one parking space for
every 150 square feet of floor area used for dancing or assembly. 



      F.   Dwelling:  two parking spaces for each single-family
dwelling unit and one and one-half (1½) spaces for each unit of a
multifamily dwelling unit.  A garage stall counts as one parking space. 



      G.   Funeral homes, mortuaries:  one parking space for each
five seats in the principal auditorium. 



      H.   Furniture and appliance stores, household equipment or
furniture repair shops:  one parking space for every 600 square feet of
gross floor area. 



      I.   Hospitals:  one parking space for each two beds. 



      J.   Hotels, lodging houses:  one parking space for each two
bedrooms, plus one parking space for each 200 square feet of commercial floor
area contained therein. 



      K.   Manufacturing plants:  one parking space for each three
employees on the maximum shift level. 



      L.   Restaurants, beer parlors, and nightclubs:  one parking
space for each 150 square feet of floor area. 



      M.   Retail stores, shops:  one parking space for each 200
square feet of floor area. 



      N.   Sports arenas, auditoriums, other than in schools:  one
parking space for each six seats. 



      O.   Theaters, assembly halls with fixed seats:  one parking
space for each six seats. 



      P.   Wholesale establishments or warehouses:  one parking
space for every two employees. 



      Q.   Floor area used for public assembly but not containing
fixed seats:  one parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area. 



In case of any building, structure, or premises, the use of which is not
specifically mentioned herein, requirements for a use which is so mentioned
and to which said use is similar shall apply.



   2.   Any existing building which meets the parking requirements of
this section on the effective date hereof, or at any subsequent time, shall
continue to comply fully with all requirements hereof.  Any existing
building which partially meets the requirements of this section on the
effective date hereof, or at any subsequent time, shall hereafter continue to
comply as nearly with these requirements as the highest degree of compliance
reached.



   3.   Off-street parking areas may be established in any “R”
district that immediately joins a “C” or “M” district, or is directly
across an alley or immediately behind an alley from a “C” or “M”
district, provided such parking shall be accessory to and for use of one or
more business or industrial establishments located in the adjoining “C”
or “M” district; provided, however, such transitional use shall not
extend more than 100 feet from the boundary of the less restricted zone.



   4.   Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area
including any commercial parking lots shall be so arranged as to reflect the
light away from adjoining premises in any “R” district.



   5.   “Floor area” means the gross floor area of the specific
use.  Where fractional spaces result from computation, the required parking
spaces are the nearest whole number. 



   6.   Off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with a minimum of
six (6) inches of rolled stone base with a two-inch asphaltic concrete
surface course.  Alternate materials may be used so long as they provide
comparable strength as determined by engineering studies or comparisons.



   7.   In the case of mixed uses upon one lot, the required parking
spaces shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed
separately.



   8.   Each required parking space shall be not less than nine (9)
feet in width and not less than nineteen (19) feet in length.



   9.   Maneuvering space required is the aisle width necessary to
permit the safe and convenient parking of a motor vehicle and is based on the
degree of angle parking provided.  Aisles shall be provided as follows:



 




Degree of Parking Angle

 

Required Aisle Width (feet)




0 (parallel)

 

12




20

 

11




30

 

11




40

 

12




45

 

12




50

 

12




60

 

18




70

 

19




80

 

24




90

 

24





 



165.24    OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES REQUIRED.



In any “C-1” or “M” district, in connection with every building or
part thereof hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of 10,000 square
feet or more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse,
goods display, retail store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry
cleaning, or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by
vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained
on the same lot with such building, at least one off- street loading space,
plus one additional such loading space for each 20,000 square feet or major
fraction thereof of gross floor area so used in excess of 10,000 square feet.



   1.   Each loading space shall not be less than 10 feet in width, 40
feet in length.



   2.   Such space may occupy any or all of a required yard or court
space.



165.25    BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE.



   1.   Administration and Enforcement.  An administrative official
designated by the Council shall administer and enforce this chapter.  Said
official may be provided with the assistance of such persons as the Council
may direct.  If the administrative official shall find that any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated, said official shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of
the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.  The
administrative official shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land,
buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of
additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any
illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this
chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.



   2.   Building Permits Required.  No building or other structure
shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit
therefor, issued by the administrative official.  No building permit shall
be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, except
after written order from the Board of Adjustment. 



   3.   Application for Building Permit.  All applications for
building permits shall be accompanied by plans drawn to scale, showing the
actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and
location on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; and the location
and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration.  The application
shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the
administrative official, including existing or proposed building or
alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of
families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to
accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be
necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of
this chapter. 



165.26    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   1.   Board Created.  A Board of Adjustment is hereby established
which shall consist of five (5) members.  The terms of office of the members
of the board and the manner of their appointment shall be as provided by
statute. 



   2.   Meetings.  Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of
the Chairperson, and at such other times as the board may determine.  Such
Chairperson, or in the absence of the Chairperson, the acting chairperson may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.  All meetings of
the board shall be open to the public.  The board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately
filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.  The presence
of three members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. 



   3.   Appeals.  Appeals to the board may be taken by any person
aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City
affected by any decision of the administrative official.  Such appeal shall
be taken within ten (10) days by filing with the administrative official and
with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.  The
administrative official shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken.  An
appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the administrative official certifies to the board after notice of
appeal shall have been filed with such official, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of the administrative
official cause imminent peril to life or property.  In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which
may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application, on notice
to the administrative official, and on due cause shown.



   4.   Hearings; Notice.  The board shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing on the appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice
to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. 
At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent, or by attorney. 
Before an appeal is filed with the board, the appellant shall pay an appeal
fee to be credited to the general fund of the City. 



   5.   Powers – Administrative Review.  The board shall hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative official
in the enforcement of this chapter. 



   6.   Powers – Special Exceptions.  The board shall permit the
following exceptions to the district regulations set forth in this chapter
subject to the requirements of this section: 



      A.   To permit erection and use of a building or the use of
premises or vary the height and the regulations in any location for a public
service corporation for public utility purposes or public communication,
which the board determines is reasonably necessary for the public convenience
or welfare.



      B.   To permit the extension of a use into a district where it
would be otherwise prohibited, in a case where a district boundary line is so
located that a lot or plot is in more than one district.



      C.   To hear and decide only such other special exceptions as
the board is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this chapter;
to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether special
exceptions should be granted; and to grant special exceptions with such
conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this chapter, or to deny
special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose or intent of this
chapter.  A special exception shall not be granted by the board unless and
until:



         (1)   A written application for special exception is
submitted indicating the section of this chapter under which the special
exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested.



         (2)   Notice of public hearing shall be given at least
15 days in advance of public hearing.  The owner of property for which
special exception is sought or such owner’s agent and any other affected
property owners shall be notified by mail.



         (3)   The public hearing shall be held.  Any party may
appear in person, or by agent or attorney.



         (4)   The board shall make a finding that it is
empowered under the section of this chapter described in the application to
grant the special exception, and that the granting of the special exception
will not adversely affect the public interest.



In granting any special exception, the board may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter.  Violations of
such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the
special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
The board may prescribe a time limit within which the action for which the
special exception is required shall be begun or completed, or both.  Failure
to begin or complete, or both, such action within the time limit set shall
void the special exception.



   7.   Powers – Variances.  The board may authorize upon appeal in
specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary
hardship.  A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by
the board unless and until: 



      A.   A written application for a variance is submitted
demonstrating:



         (1)   That special conditions and circumstances exist
which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved, and which
are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same
district; and



         (2)   That literal interpretation of the provisions of
this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter; and



         (3)   That the special conditions and circumstances do
not result from the actions of the applicant; and



         (4)   That granting the variance requested will not
confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter
to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.  No
nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same
district, and no permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in other
districts shall be considered to be grounds for the issuance of a variance.



      B.   Notice of public hearing shall be given at least fifteen
(15) days in advance of public hearing.  The owner of the property for which
a variance is sought or said owner’s agent and any other affected property
owners shall be notified by mail.



      C.   The public hearing shall be held.  Any party may appear
in person, or by agent or by attorney.



      D.   The board shall make findings that the requirements
stated above have been met by the applicant for a variance.



      E.   The board shall further make a finding that the reasons
set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that
the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable
use of the land, building, or structure.



      F.   The board shall further make a finding that the granting
of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this chapter, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare.



In granting any variance, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards in conformity with this chapter.  Violation of such conditions
and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.  Under no
circumstances shall the board grant a variance to allow a use not permissible
under the terms of this chapter in the district involved, or any use
expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in said
district.



   8.   Powers – Special Use Permits.  The board shall hear and
decide applications for special use permits in accordance with the provisions
in Section 165.21(4) of this chapter.



   9.   Decisions of the Board of Adjustment.  In exercising the
above-mentioned powers, the board may, so long as such action is in
conformity with the terms of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have powers of the
administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.  The concurring vote
of three (3) members shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision, or determination of the administrative official, or to decide in
favor of the applicant on any variation in the application of this chapter. 



   10.   Appeal from Decision of the Board of Adjustment.  Any
taxpayer or any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City, or any
person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board of
Adjustment may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified,
setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying
grounds of the illegality.  Such petition shall be presented to the court
within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the
board.  The court may reverse, affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the
decision brought up for review. 



165.27    DUTIES ON MATTERS OF APPEAL.



It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation and
enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative official, and that
such questions shall be presented to the board of adjustment only on appeal
from the decision of the administrative official and that recourse from the
decisions of the board of adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by
law and particularly by statute.  It is further the intent of this chapter
that the duties of the Council in connection with this chapter shall not
include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that
may arise.  The procedure for deciding questions shall be as stated in this
section and this chapter.  Under this chapter, the Council shall have only
the duties of:



   1.   Considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or
the repeal of this chapter, as provided by law.



   2.   Establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in
Section 165.28 which follows.



165.28    SCHEDULE OF FEES.



The Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses, and a
collection procedure for building permits, certificates of zoning compliance,
appeals, and other matters pertaining to this chapter.  The schedule of fees
listed hereinafter shall be posted in the office of the administrative
official and may be altered or amended only by the Council.  No permit,
certificate, special exception, or variance shall be issued unless or until
such costs, charges, fees, or expenses listed hereinafter have been paid in
full, nor shall any action be taken on proceedings before the Board of
Adjustment unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in
full.



   1.   Certificate of Zoning Compliance.



      A.   New structure: The building permit fee shall include the
certificate of zoning compliance.



      B.   Change of use: Residential use   $ 2.50



      C.   Any use other than residential    $ 5.00



   2.   Appeal to Board of Adjustment   $ 25.00 plus cost



   3.   Special Use Permit   $ 150.00



   4.   Petition for Amendment   $ 250.00



   5.   Subdivision   $ 250.00



   6.   Planned Unit Development   $ 250.00



A $50.00 per lot charge for subdivisions and PUDs, in addition to the base
fee, is due and payable prior to the approval of the final plat.



165.29    AMENDMENTS.



The Council may, from time to time, either of its own action or on petition
of interested property owners or on recommendation from the Commission, after
public notice and hearing as provided by law, amend, supplement, change,
modify, or repeal the boundaries or regulations herein or subsequently
established.  If such proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification,
or repeal is petitioned for by interested property owners, said petition
shall be signed by the owners of fifty percent (50%) of the area of all the
real estate included within the boundaries of said tract of real estate
described in said petition.  Whenever any amendment, supplement, change,
modification, or repeal of this chapter is proposed, such proposed amendment,
supplement, change, modification, or repeal shall first be submitted to the
Commission which shall within thirty (30) days after the date of the receipt
of such proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal,
report its recommendation to the Council either approving or disapproving
such proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal, unless
an extension of time is requested and granted to the Commission.  If the
report of the Commission on such proposed amendment, supplement, change,
modification, or repeal is unfavorable, or if a protest against such proposed
amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal is signed by the
owners of 20% or more either of the area of the lots included in such
proposed change, or of those within 200 feet of the boundary of such proposed
change exclusive of the width of intervening streets and alleys, such
amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of at least
four-fifths of all members of the Council.  The provisions of the statute
relative to public hearings and official notice shall apply to all changes or
amendments.  Public hearing cannot be held until at least seven (7) days
have elapsed after publication of the notice.  If any area is hereafter
transferred to another district by a change in district boundaries by an
amendment, supplement, change, modification, or appeal, as above provided,
the provisions of this chapter shall apply in regard to buildings or premises
existing at the time of such amendment in such transferred area.  It shall
be the duty of the Council to act upon such proposed amendment, supplement,
change, modification, or repeal within sixty (60) days after receiving the
report from the Commission.  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant
requesting a zoning change to supply the City with names and addresses of any
and all interested persons.  This list shall include, but is not limited to,
all owners of property within 200 feet of the proposed change.



165.30    COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.



Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint.  Such complaint stating fully the
causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the administrative official. 
The administrative official shall record properly such complaint, immediately
investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this chapter.



165.31    ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS.



   1.   Enforcement. All departments, officials, and employees of the
City who are vested with the duty or authority to issue building permits or
licenses shall issue no such permit or license for any use, structure, or
purpose if the same would not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 



   2.   Violations.  Violation of the provisions of this chapter, or
failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a
misdemeanor.  Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises,
or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other
person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation
may each be found guilty of a separate offense.  Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation.



 




EDITOR’S NOTE



The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map
described in Section 165.06 of this chapter and have not been included as a
part of this Code of Ordinances but have been specifically saved from repeal
and are in full force and effect.



ORDINANCE

 

ADOPTED

 

ORDINANCE

 

ADOPTED




775

 

6-9-77

 

1110

 

3-17-97




778

 

8-15-77

 

1113

 

5-5-97




781

 

9-19-77

 

1124

 

12-15-97




784

 

12-19-77

 

1127

 

5-18-98




806

 

2-19-79

 

1130

 

6-1-98




821

 

10-1-79

 

1136

 

8-17-98




825

 

12-21-79

 

1144

 

3-1-99




828

 

3-17-80

 

1149

 

6-7-99




840

 

11-3-80

 

1155

 

10-18-99




844

 

2-2-81

 

1156

 

10-18-99




861

 

3-15-82

 

1161

 

11-15-99




886

 

4-16-82

 

1169

 

7-3-00




889

 

4-16-84

 

1182

 

1-22-01




949

 

5-7-84

 

1194

 

12-3-01




951

 

7-18-84

 

1200

 

4-15-02




953

 

10-17-88

 

1208

 

11-4-02




954

 

10-17-88

 

1249

 

5-16-05




957

 

4-3-89

 

1264

 

3-6-06




958

 

5-15-89

 

1267

 

5-1-06




962

 

8-7-89

 

1272

 

6-5-06




967

 

11-6-89

 

1277

 

10-16-06




968

 

11-20-89

 

1278

 

10-16-06




977

 

6-4-90

 

1281

 

12-6-06




992

 

3-4-91

 

1283

 

3-5-07




1000

 

6-3-91

 

1284

 

3-19-07




1029

 

8-17-92

 

1287

 

3-5-07




1039

 

2-15-93

 

1307

 

8-4-08




1041

 

4-19-93

 

1319

 

8-3-09




1046

 

6-7-93

 

1331

 

11-2-09




1052

 

2-7-94

 

1353

 

5-16-11




1062

 

8-1-94

 

1366

 

7-2-12




1069

 

5-15-95

 

1375

 

5-6-13




1070

 

5-15-95

 

1376

 

5-6-13




1085

 

1-2-96

 

1379

 

7-15-13




1087

 

2-19-96

 

1390

 

12-2-13




1096

 

7-15-96

 

1397

 

6-16-14




1097

 

8-5-96

 

1398

 

6-16-14




1102

 

10-21-96

 

1409

 

4-20-15




1108

 

2-17-97

 

1412

 

6-15-15





 



CHAPTER 170
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



 

170.01  Definitions
 
170.07  Final Plat


170.02  Purpose
 
170.08  Standards and Specifications Generally


170.03  Jurisdiction
 
170.09  Street Pattern


170.04  Variances
 
170.10  Street Design


170.05  Plat Approval Procedure
 
170.11  Lots


170.06  Preliminary Plat
 
170.12  Improvements



 



170.01    DEFINITIONS.



The following definitions shall be in addition to those described in the Code
of Iowa.



   1.   “Block” means an area of land within a subdivision that is
entirely bounded by streets, except alleys, and the exterior boundary or
boundaries of the subdivision.



   2.   “Commission” means the Grinnell Planning and Zoning
Commission.



   3.   “Easement” means a grant by the property owner of the use
of a strip of land for a specific purpose by the general public, a
corporation, or a certain person, and within the limits of which the property
owner shall not erect any permanent structures but shall have the right to
make any other use of the land subject to such easement which is consistent
with the rights of the grantee.  Public utilities shall have the right to
trim or remove trees which interfere with the use of such easements.



   4.   “Landscape easement” means an easement of specified width,
which contains plants and shrubs provided by the subdivider and maintained by
the owner, according to the specifications of this chapter.  Permitted signs
and structures that are an integral part of the landscape plan, such as
sidewalks, benches, gazebos, may be allowed in landscape easements.



   5.   “Performance bond” means a surety bond or cash deposit made
out to the City in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements which
are required by this chapter, the cost being estimated by the City Engineer,
and the surety bond or cash deposit being legally sufficient to secure to the
City that the improvements will be constructed in accordance with this
chapter.



   6.   “Roadway” means that portion of the street available for
vehicular traffic, and where curbs are laid, the portion from back to back of
curbs.



   7.   “Street” means a way for vehicular traffic, including those
with the following designations:



      A.   Alleys are minor ways providing a second means of access
to a property.



      B.   Arterial streets are those which are used primarily for
fast or heavy traffic.



      C.   Collector streets are those which carry traffic from
minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including
the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for
circulation within such a development.



      D.   Cul-de-sac is a minor street with only one outlet and
having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of
traffic movement.



      E.   Service roads are minor streets which are parallel and
adjacent to highways or railroads; and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.



      F.   Minor streets are those which are used primarily for
access to the abutting properties.



170.02    PURPOSE.



It is deemed essential to establish minimum standards for the design and
development of all new subdivisions so that existing developments will be
protected and so that adequate provisions are made for public utilities and
other public requirements and to improve the health, safety and general
welfare.



170.03    JURISDICTION.



With respect to City jurisdiction within two (2) miles of its limits, the
City by this section adopts the restrictions now known as Section 354.9 of
the Code of Iowa.



170.04    VARIANCES.



Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that
strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter would result in
extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography or
other conditions, the Council may vary, modify or waive the requirements of
this chapter so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured.  However, the variance, modification or waiver will not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.  In no case
shall any variance or modification be more than a minimum easing of the
requirements and in no instance shall it be in conflict with any zoning
ordinance and such variances and waivers may be granted only by the
affirmative vote of three-fourths of the members of the Council.



170.05    PLAT APPROVAL PROCEDURE.



   1.   Applicability.  Subdivision plan approval shall be required
for any tract of land within the corporate limits or within two miles of the
corporate limits that is subdivided by repeated divisions or simultaneous
division into three (3) or more parcels.



   2.   Conformance Required.  In obtaining approval of a proposed
subdivision by the Commission and the Council, the subdivider shall submit a
preliminary plat, and a final plat in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



   3.   Building Lines.  Building lines shall be shown on all lots.
Such building lines shall not be less than required by an applicable zoning
ordinance.  Where the subdivided area is not under zoning control, the
Commission shall set building lines in accordance with the proposed land use.



170.06    PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   1.   Format and Contents; Filing.  The subdivider shall first
prepare and file with the Clerk 25 copies of a preliminary plat in
conformance with the Code of Iowa.  In addition to the requirements of the
Code of Iowa, the plat shall include the following:



      A.   Title, scale, north points, and date.



      B.   Subdivision boundary lines, showing dimensions, bearings,
angles, and references to section, townships, and range lines or corners.



      C.   Present and proposed streets, alleys, and sidewalks, with
their right- of-way, in or adjoining the subdivision, including dedicated
widths, approximate gradients, types and widths of surfaces, curbs, and
planting strips.



      D.   Proposed layout of lots, showing numbers, dimensions,
radii, chords, and the square foot area of lots.



      E.   Building setbacks.



      F.   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for
schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public, semipublic, or community
purposes.



      G.   Present and proposed easements, showing locations,
widths, purposes, and limitations.



      H.   Present and proposed utility systems, including sanitary
and storm sewers, other drainage facilities, water lines, gas mains, electric
utilities, and other facilities, with the size, capacity, and location of
each.



      I.   The proposed name of the subdivision which must be
distinct from other subdivisions’ names in the County.



      J.   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, builder,
and engineer or surveyor who prepared the preliminary plat, and the engineer
or surveyor who will prepare the final plat.



      K.   Any zoning of the site and adjoining property.



      L.   A general summary description of any protective covenants
or private restrictions to be incorporated in the final plat.



   2.   Referral of Copies.  Upon filing, the Clerk shall forthwith
refer one copy of the preliminary plat to the City Engineer and two copies to
the Commission.  Remaining copies shall be distributed as per City policy.



   3.   Examination by City Engineer.  The City Engineer shall
carefully examine the preliminary plat as to its compliance with the laws and
ordinances of the City, the existing street system, and good engineering
practices, and shall, as soon as possible, submit the findings to the
Commission.



   4.   Review by Commission and Council.  After receiving the City
Engineer’s report and following review of the preliminary plat and other
material submitted for conformity thereof to this chapter, and after
negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and
the extent of improvements to be made by the subdivider, the Commission
shall, within a reasonable time, submit a recommendation to the Council,
stating the conditions of approval, if any, or if disapproved, the Commission
shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor.  A copy of the
recommendation shall be forwarded to the subdivider.  The Council, upon
receipt of the Commission’s recommendation, shall by resolution grant
approval or reject the preliminary plat.  If the preliminary plat is
rejected, the Council will advise the subdivider of any changes which are
desired or should have consideration before approval will be given.  Upon
making such changes, the subdivider may resubmit the preliminary plat for
approval by the Commission and the Council.  Approval of the preliminary
plat by the Council shall constitute approval to proceed with the preparation
of the final plat but shall not be deemed approval of the subdivision.



170.07    FINAL PLAT.



   1.   Conformance to Approved Preliminary Plat.  The final plat
shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and, if
desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the
approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop
at the time, provided, however, that such portion conforms to all
requirements of this chapter.



   2.   Time for Submission.  The final plat shall be submitted to the
Commission for approval within one year after approval of the preliminary
plat; otherwise, such approval shall become null and void unless an extension
of time is applied for and granted by the Commission.



   3.   Format and Contents.  The final plat and 25 prints shall be
submitted to the Commission.  The plat shall conform to the requirements of
the Code of Iowa as amended and shall have the attachments required therein
and in addition profiles, typical cross-section and specifications of street
improvements and utility systems, to show the locations, size and grade. 
These should be shown on a fifty-foot horizontal scale and a five-foot
vertical scale with west and south at the left.



   4.   Review by Commission.  The Commission shall then consider the
final plat and, if the plat is approved, shall submit its recommendation of
approval to the Council, together with a certified copy of its resolution
showing the action of the Commission.



   5.   Action by the Council; Recording.  The Council shall consider
the final plat and, if the plat is acceptable and in accordance with this
chapter, the Council shall accept the plat.  If the plat is disapproved by
the Council, such disapproval shall point out in writing wherein the proposed
plat is objectionable.  The passage of a resolution by the Council accepting
the plat shall constitute final approval of the platting of the area shown on
the final plat, but the subdivider or owner shall cause such plat to be
recorded in the office of the County Recorder, as provided in the Code of
Iowa and amendatory acts thereto, and shall file satisfactory evidence of
such recording in the office of the Clerk before the City shall recognize the
plat as being in full force and effect.



170.08    STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS GENERALLY.



   1.   Conformance Required.  The requirements established in
Sections 170.08 through 170.11 of this chapter shall be followed by all
subdividers.



   2.   Easements.



      A.   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot
lines shall be provided for municipally owned utilities where necessary, and
shall be at least 20 feet wide.



      B.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water
easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of
such watercourse, and further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.



      C.   For landscape easements, size and type of trees and
planting specifications shall conform to those set out in Chapter 151 of this
Code of Ordinances.



   3.   Blocks.  No block may be more than 1,320 feet or less than 500
feet in length between the centerlines of intersecting streets, except where,
in opinion of the Commission, extraordinary conditions unquestionably justify
a departure from these limits.  In blocks over 700 feet in length, the
Commission may require, at or near the middle of the block, a public way or
easement of not less than ten (10) feet in width for use by pedestrians or as
an easement for municipally owned public utilities.



170.09    STREET PATTERN.



   1.   Factors for Consideration.  The arrangement, character,
extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall be considered in
their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographic conditions, to
public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of land to be served by such streets.



   2.   Streets Generally.  The design of streets in a subdivision
shall either:



      A.   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of
existing principal streets in the surrounding areas; or



      B.   Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved by the
Commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other
conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable.



   3.   Minor Streets.  Minor streets shall be so laid out that their
use by through traffic will be discouraged.



   4.   Subdivisions Containing or Abutting Highways.  Where a
subdivision abuts or contains a portion of U.S. Highway 6 or Iowa Highway
146, a landscape easement of 40 feet in width shall be provided adjacent to
the highway right-of-way.  In the landscape easement trees shall be planted
at a minimum rate of one large tree per every 20 feet of frontage or one
small tree per every 15 feet of frontage.



   5.   Service Roads.  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a
railroad right- of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the Commission
may require a service road on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park
purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes
in appropriate districts; such distances shall also be determined with due
regard for the requirements of approach grades, future grade separations and
landscape easements.



   6.   Half Streets.  Half streets shall be prohibited, except where
essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with
the other requirements of this chapter, and where the Commission finds it
will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is subdivided.  Where a half street is adjacent to a
tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within
such tract.



   7.   Relationship of Plat to Future Development.



      A.   Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the
subdivider’s plat, a sketch of the prospective street system of the part
not submitted shall be furnished and the street system of the part submitted
shall be considered in the light of the overall system.



      B.   Where the parcel is subdivided into larger tracts than
for typical building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for
the logical extension of streets and further subdivision of the parcel.



      C.   Subdivisions showing unplatted strips or private streets
controlling access to public ways will not receive approval.



170.10    STREET DESIGN.



This section applies to streets in proposed subdivisions.



   1.   Street Offsets.  Street offsets shall have a minimum of 125
feet between centerlines.



   2.   Minimum Tangent on Reverse Curves.  A tangent at least 100
feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and
collector streets.



   3.   Minimum Sight Distances for Deflecting Street Lines.  When
connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than
ten degrees (10º), they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate
to ensure a sight distance of not less than 200 feet for minor and collector
streets, and of such greater radii as the commission shall determine for
special cases.



   4.   Intersections.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect
as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect any
other street at less than sixty degrees (60º).



   5.   Right-of-Way Widths Generally.  Street right-of-way widths
shall be consistent with those shown in the City’s comprehensive plan.



   6.   Requirements for Cul-de-Sacs.  Cul-de-sac streets, designed to
be so permanently, shall not be longer than 500 feet, measured from the
right-of-way line of the turn-around.  A turn-around having an outside
roadway diameter of at least 80 feet and a street property line diameter of
at least 100 feet shall be provided at the closed end of the cul-de-sac
street.  The right-of-way width of the straight portion of the street shall
be a minimum of 50 feet.  The property line at the intersection of the turn-
around and the straight portion of the street shall be rounded at a radius of
not less than 20 feet.



   7.   Street Names.  No street names shall be used which will
duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets.  Street names
shall be subject to the approval of the Commission.



   8.   Maximum and Minimum Grades.  Street grades shall not exceed
six percent (6%), without the approval of the Council, and with due allowance
for reasonable vertical curves.  No street grade shall be less than one-half
of one percent.



   9.   Alleys. 



      A.   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial
districts, except that the Commission may waive this requirement where other
definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street
loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses
proposed. 



      B.   The width of an alley shall be a minimum of 20 feet. 



      C.   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall
be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to
permit safe vehicular movement. 



      D.   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if
unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the
dead end, as determined by the Commission.



170.11    LOTS.



   1.   Size and Shape Generally.  The lot size, width, depth, shape,
and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate
for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.



   2.   Minimum Dimensions.  Minimum lot dimensions and sizes shall
conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance except as follows:



      A.   Residential lots not served by public sewer, shall be a
minimum of 80 feet wide and a minimum of 10,000 square feet in area, or more
in order to meet with the approval of the County sanitarian.



      B.   Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra ten
(10) feet of width to permit appropriate building setback from and
orientation to both streets.



      C.   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for
commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the
off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and
development contemplated.



   3.   Access to Streets.  Each subdivided lot shall have
satisfactory access by means of a public street to an existing public street.



   4.   Double Frontage Lots and Lots Abutting Railroads.



      A.   Double frontage lots (lots with frontage on two parallel
streets) shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of
development from heavily traveled streets or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation.  A landscape easement of at
least 25 feet, in addition to the required yard and across which there shall
be no right of access, shall be provided along the length of the rear lot
lines of double frontage residential lots.



      B.   In residential districts a landscape easement at least 25
feet in depth, in addition to the required yard, shall be provided along the
length of the lot lines adjacent to a railroad right-of-way.



      C.   The plant materials in the landscape easements required
by this section shall meet the same requirements as set out in Section 152.06
of this Code of Ordinances for screening land uses.



   5.   Side Lot Lines.  Side lot lines shall be at right angles or
radial to street lines.



170.12    IMPROVEMENTS.



   1.   Supervisory Authority of the Council.  Except where waived by
the Council, the subdivider shall install and construct all improvements
required by this section and extend them to the outer boundaries of the
subdivision.  All required improvements shall be installed and constructed
in accordance with the City’s specifications and under the supervision of
the Council and to its satisfaction.  All improvements shall meet the
requirements of the appropriate State and Federal agencies.



   2.   Timing and Acceptance of Improvements.  Before the Council
approves the final plat, all of the improvements required by this section
shall be constructed and accepted by formal resolution of the Council. 
Before passage of the resolution of acceptance, the City Engineer shall
report that said improvements meet all City specifications, the provisions of
this Code, other City ordinances, or other City requirements, and agreements
between the subdivider and the City.  The requirements of this subsection
may be waived in the following manner:



      A.   At the discretion of the Council when unusual
circumstances exist and a public purpose will be served, if the subdivider
will post a performance bond or other assurance of performance with the
Council, guaranteeing that said improvements will be constructed within a
period of one year; or



      B.   If the City finds that unusual circumstances exist, which
make it desirable that the City construct some of the said improvements, and
that a public purpose would be served by such participation by the City.  In
such case, the developer shall remain responsible for all requirements of
this subsection which will not be constructed by the City.



If a performance bond or other assurance of performance is posted, final
acceptance of the plat will not constitute final acceptance by the City of
any improvements to be constructed.  Improvements will be accepted only
after their construction has been completed.



   3.   Monumentation.  Monumentation shall be as set out in the Code
of Iowa, as amended.



   4.   Streets and Alley Grades.  All streets and alleys within the
platted area which are dedicated for public use shall be brought to the grade
approved by the Council after receiving the report and recommendations of the
City Engineer.



   5.   Roadway Surfacing.  All roadways shall be surfaced with
Portland cement concrete meeting such City design specifications as the
Council and the Commission may require.



   6.   Curb and Gutter.  Curb and gutter shall be required on all
residential and commercial streets.  If appropriate, alleys may be
constructed with an inverted crown in lieu of curb and gutter.  In
industrial subdivisions, the curbs may be eliminated with approval of the
Council, provided that adequate shoulders and drainage are provided.  All
curb and gutter shall be constructed to the grade approved by the Council
after receiving the report and recommendation of the City Engineer.



   7.   Street Signs.  All traffic control and information signs
including, but not limited to, stop signs, street name signs and parking
control signs, shall be installed in the subdivision.



   8.   Sidewalks.  Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of
all streets unless a variance is granted by two-thirds vote of the entire
Council.  Sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete no less
than four (4) feet in width.  Sidewalks shall be constructed to the line and
grade approved by the Council after receiving the report and recommendation
of the City Engineer.



   9.   Water Connections.  The subdivision shall be connected with a
water supply system, owned and operated by the City, and shall provide a
water connection for each lot stubbed into the property line.



   10.   Sewage Systems.  The subdivision shall be connected to a
sanitary sewer system owned and operated by the City, and shall provide a
sewer connection for each lot stubbed into the property line.



   11.   Disposal of Storm Water. 



      A.   The subdivider shall provide for adequate collection and
conveyance of storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff and
drainage.  The collection and removal of these runoff waters and drainage
shall be accomplished by installing storm sewers, intakes, sewer access
openings, culverts, ditches, waterways, drains, streets and bridges.  All
structures and systems shall be designed and installed to meet City Standards
and Specifications.  In the event such standards and specifications have not
been developed then design and construction shall be done to the best
engineering practices available. Improvements shall extend to the boundaries
of the subdivision so as to provide for the connection and extension by
adjoining developers.  Where oversize storm sewers or drainage structures
are required to serve other areas of the watershed, the additional cost shall
be borne by the subdivider.  The plans and specifications shall be subject
to the approval of the Council and the City Engineer.



      B.   The subdivision shall be provided with a storm water
system to handle adequately a ten-year rainfall event for Grinnell, Iowa. 
The developer shall be responsible for providing the subdivision with a storm
water system to handle adequately a ten-year rainfall event for Grinnell,
Iowa.  To provide for the event that the storm water system may in the
future become blocked or its capacity exceeded, the developer shall, at the
developer’s expense, provide the subdivision with overland drainage courses
and easements to handle adequately storm water in excess of a ten-year
rainfall event and up to a one- hundred-year rainfall event.  For any
subdivision containing new storm sewers, the system shall be designed by a
licensed engineer registered to practice in the State of Iowa.



         (1)   Each lot shall be provided with a storm sewer
service line a minimum of six (6) inches in diameter stubbed out to the
property line to handle discharge from building footing drains.  System
design shall assume that all footing drains and sump pumps will operate
simultaneously at a rate of at least twenty (20) gallons/minute.  If eave
spouts will be attached to the storm water service line, the line shall be
sized to handle the additional flow.



         (2)   Underdrains for the purpose of draining
groundwater shall be located immediately behind the curb of all streets or,
where there is no curb, immediately adjacent to the pavement.



         (3)   Storm sewers shall run parallel to streets, except
where topography makes it impractical, and shall be connected to existing
City storm sewer or a natural drainage way.  Mains shall be a minimum of
twelve (12) inches in diameter.



         (4)   An adequate number of catch basins shall be
located at all street intersections, so that water does not flow across the
intersections.  On any given slope, the first catch basin shall be no more
than 500 feet from the slope’s crest, and from that point to the bottom of
the slope, catch basins shall be no more than 500 feet apart.



         (5)   If the storm sewer system discharges into an open
waterway, that has a constant flow of water, or into an existing storm sewer,
no other action may be necessary, unless good engineering practice for the
situation requires additional work.  Because of footing drains and under
drains that are connected to the storm sewer system, a storm sewer may have a
continual discharge of water for a number of days after the end of a rainfall
event.  The developer must make provisions to collect this water and
discharge into an existing storm sewer system or into an open waterway that
has a constant flow of water.  The purpose of this provision is to control
the intermittent flow of water which may cause erosion or prolonged wet or
soggy conditions.



         (6)   Dams proposed in any subdivision shall be designed
by a licensed engineer, registered to practice in the State of Iowa.  A
preliminary engineering report including soil investigations and design
procedures shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review.  When such
dam is constructed, the subdivider’s engineer shall certify to the City
Engineer that the dam is constructed in accordance with the approved plans
and specifications.



   12.   Underground Utility Lines; Streetlights.  The construction of
electrical and communication transmission lines shall be of underground
construction.  Streetlights shall be served by underground services and
shall be erected on metal or fiberglass streetlight standards.



   13.   Erosion Control.  The subdivider is responsible for erosion
control for activities conducted during the subdivision process that disturb
the top soil and vegetation growth making it susceptible to erosion.  No
soil shall be allowed to run off of the property being subdivided and onto
other private or public property.  Erosion control must meet all State and
Federal regulations.



CHAPTER 175
AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS



 

175.01  Definitions
 
175.08  Airport Zoning Administrator


175.02  Airport Zones
 
175.09  Board of Adjustment


175.03  Airport Zone Height Limitations
 
175.10  Appeals


175.04  Use Restrictions
 
175.11  Judicial Review


175.05  Nonconforming Uses
 
175.12  Violations


175.06  Permits
 
175.13  Conflicting Regulations


175.07  Enforcement
 



 



175.01    DEFINITIONS.



As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:



   1.   “Airport” means the Grinnell Regional Airport. 



   2.   “Airport elevation” means the highest point of an
airport’s usable landing area measured in feet from sea level.



   3.   “Approach surface” means a surface longitudinally centered
on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end
of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height
limitation slope set forth in Section 175.03 of this chapter.  In plan the
perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the
approach zone.



   4.   “Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones” are
set forth in Section 175.02 of this chapter.



   5.   “Board of Adjustment” means a board consisting of five (5)
members appointed by the Council as provided in Chapter 329 of the Code of
Iowa.



   6.   “Conical surface” means a surface extending outward and
upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty to
one (20:1) for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.



   7.   “Hazard to air navigation” means an obstruction determined
to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of
the navigable airspace.



   8.   “Height” – for the purpose of determining the height
limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning map,
the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.



   9.   “Horizontal surface” means a horizontal plane 150 feet
above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan
coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.



   10.   “Nonconforming use” means any pre-existing structure,
object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the
provision of this chapter or an amendment thereto.



   11.   “Nonprecision instrument runway” means a runway having an
existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities
with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a
straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or
planned.



   12.   “Obstruction” means any structure, growth, or other
object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth
in Section 175.03 of this chapter.



   13.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership,
corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or governmental
entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar
representative of any of them.



   14.   “Primary surface” means a surface longitudinally centered
on a runway.  When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the
primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military
runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned
hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway.  The
width of the primary surface is set forth in Section 175.02 of this
chapter.  The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as
the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.



   15.   “Runway” means a defined area on an airport prepared for
landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length.



   16.   “Structure” means an object, including a mobile object,
constructed or installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings,
towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines.



   17.   “Transitional surfaces” – these surfaces extend outward
at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline
extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically
from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect
the horizontal and conical surfaces.  Transitional surfaces for those
portions of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond
the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured
horizontally from the edge of the approach surface at 90-degree angles to the
extended runway centerline.



   18.   “Tree” means any object of natural growth.



   19.   “Utility runway” means a runway that is constructed for
and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum
gross weight and less.



   20.   “Visual runway” means a runway intended solely for the
operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures.



   21.   “Larger than utility runway” means a runway that is
constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of
greater than 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft.



175.02    AIRPORT ZONES.



In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby
created and established certain zones which include all of that land lying
beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces,
and conical surfaces as they apply to the Grinnell Regional Airport.  Such
zones are shown on the Grinnell Regional Airport zoning map which is attached
to the ordinance codified in this chapter and made a part hereof by
reference.  Said map is on file in the offices of the City.  An area
located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in
the zone with the more restrictive height limitation.  The various zones are
hereby established and defined as follows:



   1.   Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone (20:1
zone).  The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the
primary surface and is 500 feet wide.  The approach zone expands outward
uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from
the primary surface.  Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline
of the runway.



   2.   Runway Larger than Utility with a Visibility Minimum Greater
than ¾-Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone (34:1 zone).  The inner
edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface
and is 500 feet wide.  The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a
width 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary
surface.  Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the
runway. 



   3.   Horizontal Zone.  The horizontal zone is established by
swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for all runways designated utility or
visual and 10,000 feet for all others from the center of each end of the
primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing
lines tangent to those arcs.  The horizontal zone does not include the
approach and transitional zones.



   4.   Conical Zone.  The conical zone is established as the area
that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward
therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 



   5.   Transitional Zone.  The transitional zone is established as
the areas under the transitional surfaces. 



   6.   Runway Protection Zone (RPZ).  The runway protection zone is
established as an area off the end of the runway intended to enhance the
protection of people and property on the ground. 



175.03    AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.



Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected,
altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone
created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit
herein established for such zone.  Such applicable height limitations are
hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:



   1.   Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone (20:1
zone).  Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of
and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
This approach zone shall apply to runway ends three (3) and twenty-one (21). 



   2.   Runway Larger than Utility with a Visibility Minimum Greater
than ¾-Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone (34:1 zone).  Slopes 34
feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of
10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.  This approach zone shall
apply to runway ends thirteen (13) and thirty-one (31). 



   3.   Transitional Zone.  Slopes seven feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above
the airport elevation which is 1,009 feet above mean sea level.  In addition
to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same
elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the
conical surface. 



   4.   Horizontal Zone.  Established at 150 feet above the airport
elevation or at a height of 1,159 feet above mean sea level. 



   5.   Conical Zone.  Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the
airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport
elevation. 



   6.   Certain Structures Prohibited.  No structure shall be erected
in the City, Poweshiek County or Jasper County that raises the published
Minimum Descent Altitude of Decision Height for an instrument approach to any
runway, nor shall any structure be erected that causes the minimum
obstruction clearance altitude or minimum en route altitude to be increased
on any federal airway in the City, Poweshiek County or Jasper County. 



175.04    USE RESTRICTIONS.



   1.   Generally.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by
this chapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft,
make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and
others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or
otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 



   2.   Landfill Restrictions.  Landfills and waste disposal sites
shall not be located within five and three-quarter (5.75) miles of the
Grinnell Regional Airport. 



   3.   Permitted Uses in the Runway Protection Zones (RPZ).  The
following uses are permitted in the RPZ’s provided they do not attract
wildlife, are outside the runway OFA as shown on the Grinnell Regional
airport layout plan, and do not interfere with navigational aids: golf
courses (but not club houses) and agricultural operations (other than
forestry or livestock farms) are expressly permitted under this proviso. 
Automobile parking facilities, although discouraged, may be permitted,
provided the parking facilities and any associated appurtenances, in addition
to meeting all of the preceding conditions, are located outside of the OFA
extension. 



   4.   Prohibited Uses in the Runway Protection Zones (RPZ).  Land
uses prohibited from the RPZ are:  residences and places of public assembly
such as churches, schools, hospitals, office buildings, shopping centers, and
other uses with similar concentrations of persons typifying places of public
assembly, and fuel storage facilities. 



175.05    NONCONFORMING USES.



   1.   Regulations Not Retroactive.  The regulations prescribed by
this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other
change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the
regulations as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of nonconforming use. 
Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction,
alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration
of which was begun prior to the effective date of such ordinance and which is
completed within one (1) year thereafter. 



   2.   Marking and Lighting.  Notwithstanding the preceding provision
of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is
hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon
of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the airport zoning
administrator to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the
airport the presence of such airport obstruction.  Such markers and lights
shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the Grinnell
Regional Airport. 



175.06    PERMITS.



The airport zoning administrator shall review the development or planting of
any structure or growth within the airport zones to assure compliance with
the height limitations as established in Section 175.03 of this chapter.



   1.   No City Permit Required.  No City permit shall be required for
the construction or alteration of any structure or growth of any tree if the
height of said structure or tree falls into the following categories: 



      A.   No permit shall be required for any structure or growth
of any tree up to a height of 50 feet above the surface of the land.



      B.   In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal
zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any structure or
growth of any trees less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such
tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such
zones.



      C.   In the area lying within the limits of the transitional
zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be
required for any structure or growth of any tree less than 75 feet of
vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because
of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the
height limit prescribed for such transitional zones.



      D.   In addition, in any of the individual areas described in
paragraphs B and C above, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure which, regardless of its proposed vertical height above the ground,
does not extend to as great a height above sea level as any of the natural
terrain located directly between the location of the proposed tree or
structure and any portion of the existing or proposed airport runways.



The foregoing exceptions shall not be construed as permitting or intending to
permit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any
tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this chapter except
as set forth in paragraph A.



   2.   City Permit Required.  A City permit shall be required when
the construction or alteration of any structure or growth of any tree exceeds
the height limitations of the foregoing exceptions as set forth in paragraphs
A, B or C above.  An application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for
which the permit is desired, with sufficient information to allow it to be
determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the
regulations hereby prescribed.  If such determination is in the affirmative,
the permit shall be granted.  No permit for a use inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter shall be granted unless a variance has been
approved in accordance with subsection 4 of this section.



   3.   Existing Uses.  No permit shall be granted that would allow
the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming
use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it
was on the effective date of the ordinance codified herein or any amendments
thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made.  Except as
indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 



   4.   Variances.  Any person desiring to erect or increase the
height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property,
not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply
to the Board of Adjustment for a variance from such regulations.  However,
no such variance shall be granted unless the board finds, based upon written
advice from the Federal Aviation Administration that: 



      A.   In an application to permit any structure, tree or use of
land to exceed the height or use limitations of this chapter, that such
structure, tree or use of land, would not obstruct landing and takeoff of
aircraft at the airport.



      B.   In an application to permit a use of land otherwise
prohibited herein, that such use would not be incompatible with airport
operations.



An applicant for a variance hereunder shall, as part of the application
submitted to the board, file the required written advice of the Federal
Aviation Administration.  No application for a variance hereunder shall be
set for hearing by the board until such advice has been filed.  Such advice
shall not be binding upon the Board of Adjustment, but shall be one of the
factors considered by the board when reaching its decision.



   5.   Obstruction Marking and Lighting.  Any permit or variance
granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of
this chapter and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to
require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate,
and maintain, at the owner’s expense, such markings and lights as may be
necessary.  If deemed proper by the Board of Adjustment, this condition may
be modified to require the owner to permit the Grinnell Regional Airport at
its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and
lights. 



   6.   FAA Permit Required.  The following construction or
alterations shall require the filing of FAA form 7460-1, notice of proposed
construction or alteration: (i) Any construction or alteration of more than
200 feet in height above the ground level at its site; (ii) any construction
or alteration of greater height than an imaginary surface which extends
outward and upward and slopes 100 feet outward distance for each foot upward
for a horizontal distance of 20,000 feet from the nearest point of the
nearest runway of the airport.  The notice required under FAA Part 77,
Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace, Sec. 77.13(a) (1) through (4) must be
submitted at least 30 days before the earlier of the following dates:  (i)
the date the proposed construction or alteration is to begin; (ii) The date
an application for a construction permit is to be filed.  However, a notice
relating to proposed construction or alteration that is subject to the
licensing requirements of the Federal Communications Act may be sent to FAA
at the same time the application for construction is filed with the Federal
Communications Commission, or at any time before that filing.



175.07    ENFORCEMENT.



It shall be the duty of the airport zoning administrator to administer and
enforce the regulations prescribed herein.  Applications for permits and
variances shall be made to the airport zoning administrator upon a form
published for that purpose.  Applications required by this chapter to be
submitted to the airport zoning administrator shall be promptly considered
and granted or denied.  Application for action by the Board of Adjustment
shall be forthwith transmitted by the airport zoning administrator.



175.08    AIRPORT ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



The airport zoning administrator shall be the Grinnell City administrative
official.



175.09    BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   1.   Created; Powers.  There is hereby created a Board of
Adjustment to have and exercise the following powers: 



      A.   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the airport zoning administrator in the
enforcement of this chapter;



      B.   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of
this chapter upon which such Board of Adjustment under such regulations may
be required to pass; and



      C.   To hear and decide specific variances.



   2.   Membership; Terms; Removal of Members.  The Board of
Adjustment shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Council/Board
of Supervisors to serve for staggered terms of five (5) years until a
successor is duly appointed and qualified.  Members shall be removable by
the appointing authority for cause, upon written charges after a public
hearing. 



   3.   Organization; Meetings; Minutes; Records.  The Board of
Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and in harmony with the
provisions of this chapter.  Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be
held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board of
Adjustment may determine.  The Chairperson or, in the absence of the
Chairperson, the acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses.  All hearings of the Board of Adjustment shall be
public.  The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question; or if absent or failing
to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office
of the airport zoning administrator and on due cause shown. 



   4.   Written Findings of Fact.  The Board of Adjustment shall make
written findings of fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which
it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming,
or modifying any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes
before it under the provisions of this chapter. 



   5.   Voting.  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of
the Board of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the airport zoning administrator
or decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required
to pass under this chapter, or to effect variation to this chapter. 



175.10    APPEALS.



   1.   Generally.  Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by
any decision of the airport zoning administrator made in the administration
of this chapter may appeal to the Board of Adjustment. 



   2.   Filing.  All appeals hereunder must be taken within a
reasonable time as provided by the rules of the Board of Adjustment, by
filing with the airport zoning administrator a notice of appeal specifying
the grounds thereof.  The airport zoning administrator shall forthwith
transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken. 



   3.   Staying of Proceedings.  An appeal shall stay all proceedings
in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the airport zoning
administrator certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of
appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the
certificate a stay would in the opinion of the airport zoning administrator
cause imminent peril to life or property.  In such case, proceedings shall
not be stayed except by the order of the Board of Adjustment on notice to the
airport zoning administrator and on due cause shown. 



   4.   Time; Public Notice; Decision of Board.  The Board of
Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public
notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within
a reasonable time.  Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by
agent or by attorney. 



   5.   Affirming or Reversing.  The Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, in whole
or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or
determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 



175.11    JUDICIAL REVIEW.



Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Board
of Adjustment, may appeal to the court of record as provided in Section
414.15 of the Iowa Code.



175.12    VIOLATIONS.



Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order, or ruling
promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and each day a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



175.13    CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.



Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this chapter and any other regulation applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict is with respect to the height of structures or
trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent
limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.



CHAPTER 180
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



 

180.01  Statutory Authority, Findings of Fact and Purpose
 
180.06  Nonconforming Uses


180.02  General Provisions
 
180.07  Penalties for Violation


180.03  Establishment of Floodplain (Overlay) District
 
180.08  Amendments


180.04  Standards for Floodplain (Overlay) District
 
180.09  Definitions


180.05  Administration
 



 



180.01    STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.



   1.   The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter 414, Code
of Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning
regulations to secure safety from flood and to promote health and the general
welfare.



   2.   Findings of Fact.



      A.   The flood hazard areas of the City of Grinnell are
subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare of the community.



      B.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects
are caused by: (i) The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
flood damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being
inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flooding and (ii) the
cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing increases in
flood heights and velocities.



   3.   Statement of Purpose.  It is the purpose of this chapter to
protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City of
Grinnell and its residents and to preserve and improve the peace, safety,
health, welfare, and comfort and convenience of its residents by minimizing
those flood losses described in Section 180.01(2)(A) of this chapter with
provisions designed to:



      A.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety or property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in
flood heights or velocities.



      B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public
facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the
time of initial construction or substantial improvement.



      C.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be
suited for intended purposes because of flood hazard.



      D.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners
in the community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood
Insurance Program.



180.02    GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   1.   Lands to Which Chapter Apply.  The provisions of this chapter
shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Grinnell
which are located within the boundaries of the Floodplain (Overlay) District
as established in the Establishment of Floodplain (Overlay) District.



   2.   Rules for Interpretation of Floodplain (Overlay) District. 
The boundaries of the Floodplain (Overlay) District areas shall be determined
by scaling distances on the official Flood Insurance Rate Map.  When an
interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Director
of Building and Planning shall make the necessary interpretation.  The Board
of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is
an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Director
of Building and Planning in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.



   3.   Compliance.  No structure or land shall hereafter be used and
no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.



   4.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.  It is not intended by
this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants,
or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall prevail.  All other
ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent
of the inconsistency only.



   5.   Interpretation.  In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall
be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed
a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.



   6.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.  The standards required
by this chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes.  This
chapter does not imply that areas outside the designated Floodplain (Overlay)
District areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.  This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the City of Grinnell or any officer
or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made there under.



   7.   Severability.  If any section, clause, provision or portion of
this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.



180.03    ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT.



The areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Grinnell having special
flood hazards are hereby designated as a Floodplain (Overlay) District and
shall be subject to the standards of the Floodplain (Overlay) District (as
well as those for the underlying zoning district).  The Floodplain (Overlay)
District boundaries shall be as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
for Poweshiek County and Incorporated Areas, City of Grinnell, Panels
19157C0040B, 0155B, dated May 19, 2014.



180.04    STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT.



All uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and meet
the following applicable performance standards.  Where 100-year flood
elevations and floodway data have not been provided on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to
compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing the
Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make
such determination.



   1.   All Development Within the Floodplain (Overlay) District shall:



      A.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.



      B.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize
flood damage.



      C.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.



      D.   Obtain all other necessary permits from federal, state
and local governmental agencies including approval when required from the
Iowa Department of Natural Resources.



   2.   Residential Buildings - All new or substantially improved
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level. 
Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no
lower than 1.0 ft. above the 100-year flood level and extend at such
elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected
thereon.  Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed
subject to favorable consideration by the Board of Adjustment, where existing
topography, street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill.  In
such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the structure as
well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated with flooding. 
All new residential structures shall be provided with a means of access which
will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.



   3.   Non-residential Buildings - All new or substantially improved
non-residential buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level, or
together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such
a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered
in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are
adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and
uplift forces and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that
the structure, below the 100-year flood level is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water.  A record of the
certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to North
American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are floodproofed shall
be maintained by the Administrator.



   4.   All New and Substantially Improved Structures:



      A.   Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" (not
including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters.  Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:



         (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.



         (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade.



         (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.



      Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access and low damage potential storage.



      B.   New and substantially improved structures must be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.



      C.   New and substantially improved structures must be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.



   5.   Factory-built Homes:



      A.   All factory-built homes, including those placed in
existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum
of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level.



      B.   All factory-built homes, including those placed in
existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors.



   6.   Utility and Sanitary Systems:



      A.   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be
located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from
the system during flooding.



      B.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters.  Wastewater
treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a
level of flood protection equal to or greater than one (1) foot above the
100-year flood elevation.



      C.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
Water supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be
provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than one (1) foot
above the 100-year flood elevation.



      D.   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system
and the risk associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.



   7.   Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable,
explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless
elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level.  Other
material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or (i) not be
subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to
flood waters or (ii) be readily removable from the area within the time
available after flood warning.



   8.   Flood control structural works such as levees, flood walls,
etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a
minimum of 3 ft. of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior
drainage.  In addition, structural flood control works shall be approved by
the Department of Natural Resources.



   9.   Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to
maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion.  In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by
the Department of Natural Resources.



   10.   Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation
of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this
chapter.  Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide
all lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles
during the 100-year flood.  Proposals for subdivisions greater than five (5)
acres or fifty (50) lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-year flood
elevation data for those areas located within the Floodplain (Overlay)
District.



   11.   Accessory Structures:



      A.   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures accessory
to a residential use are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation
requirements where the following criteria are satisfied. 



         (1)   The structure shall not be used for human
habitation.



         (2)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential.



         (3)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters.



         (4)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent
flotation which may result in damage to other structures.



         (5)   The structure's service facilities such as
electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at
least one foot above the 100-year flood level.



      B.   Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements
for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance coverage of the structure and its contents.



   12.   Recreational Vehicles:



      A.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of
subsection 5 (factory-built homes) of this section regarding anchoring and
elevation of factory-built homes when the following criteria are satisfied.



         (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the
site for less than 180 consecutive days, and,



         (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed
and ready for highway use.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.



      B.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for
more than 180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy
requirements of subsection 5 (factory-built homes) of this section regarding
anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes.



   13.   Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the
streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture
due to channel degradation and meandering.



180.05    ADMINISTRATION.



   1.   Appointment, Duties and Responsibilities of Zoning
Administrator.



      A.   The Director of Building and Planning is hereby appointed
to implement and administer the provisions of this chapter and will herein be
referred to as the Administrator.



      B.   Duties of the Administrator shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to the following:



         (1)   Review all floodplain development permit
applications to assure that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.



         (2)   Review floodplain development applications to
assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state and
local governmental agencies including approval when required from the
Department of Natural Resources for floodplain construction.



         (3)   Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in
relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures in the
Floodplain (Overlay) District.



         (4)   Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in
relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which all new or
substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.



         (5)   Notify adjacent communities/counties and the
Department of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.



         (6)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such
other transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of
this chapter.



   2.   Floodplain Development Permit.



      A.   Permit Required - A Floodplain Development Permit issued
by the Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development
(any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but
not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations), including the placement of
factory-built homes.



      B.   Application for Permit - Application shall be made on
forms furnished by the Administrator and shall include the following:



         (1)   Description of the work to be covered by the
permit for which application is to be made.



         (2)   Description of the land on which the proposed work
is to be done (i.e., lot, block, track, street address or similar
description) that will readily identify and locate the work to be done.



         (3)   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the
proposed work is intended.



         (4)   Elevation of the 100-year flood.



         (5)   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical
Datum 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the
level to which a building is to be floodproofed.



         (6)   For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the
estimated cost of improvements and market value of the building prior to the
improvements.



         (7)   Such other information as the Administrator deems
reasonably necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this
chapter.



      C.   Action on Permit Application - The Administrator shall,
within a reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed
floodplain development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and
shall approve or disapprove the application.  For disapprovals, the
applicant shall be informed, in writing, of the specific reasons therefore. 
The Administrator shall not issue permits for variances except as directed by
the City Board of Adjustment.



      D.   Construction and Use to be as Provided in Application and
Plans - Floodplain Development Permits based on the basis of approved plans
and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set
forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement
or construction.  Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with
that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.  The applicant
shall be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land
surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished
fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection 
measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.



   3.   Variance.



      A.   The City Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request
in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not
be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship.  Variances granted must meet the following applicable
standards.



         (1)   Variances shall only be granted upon:  (i) a
showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to
grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
(iii) a determination that the granting of the variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.



         (2)   Variances shall only be granted upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.



         (3)   In cases where the variance involves a lower level
of flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this
chapter, the applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the
Administrator that:  (i) the issuance of a variance will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage and (ii) such construction increases risks to life and
property.



      B.   Factors Upon Which the Decision of the City Board of
Adjustment Shall be Based - In passing upon applications for Variances, the
Board shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this
chapter and:



         (1)   The danger to life and property due to increased
flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.



         (2)   The danger that materials may be swept on to other
land or downstream to the injury of others.



         (3)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems
and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and
unsanitary conditions.



         (4)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.



         (5)   The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the City.



         (6)   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain
location.



         (7)   The availability of alternative locations not
subject to flooding for the proposed use.



         (8)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.



         (9)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area.



         (10)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.



         (11)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise and sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.



         (12)   The cost of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities (sewer, gas, electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and
bridges. 



         (13)   Such other factors which are relevant to the
purpose of this chapter.



      C.   Conditions Attached to Variances - Upon consideration of
the factors listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions
to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of
this chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:



         (1)   Modification of waste disposal and water supply
facilities.



         (2)   Limitation of periods of use and operation.



         (3)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and
deed restrictions.



         (4)   Requirements for construction of channel
modifications, dikes, levees, and other protective measures, provided such
are approved by the Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only
practical alternative to achieving the purpose of this chapter.



         (5)   Floodproofing measures.



180.06    NONCONFORMING USES. 



   1.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was
lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to
the following conditions:



      A.   If such use is discontinued for six (6) consecutive
months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.



      B.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances
shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.



   2.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more
than fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.  This limitation does not include the cost of any
alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building
or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure
listed on the National Register of Historic Places, provided that the
alteration shall not preclude its continued designation.



180.07    PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.



Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
the requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor.  Any person who violates
this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days.  Nothing herein contained
prevents the City of Grinnell from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy violation.



180.08    AMENDMENTS.



The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time
be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed.  No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.



180.09    DEFINITIONS.



Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   1.   Base Flood - The flood having one (1) percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.  (See 100-year flood).



   2.   Basement - Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor
or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides.  Also see
"lowest floor."



   3.   Development - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to building or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations
or storage of equipment or materials. “Development” does not include
“minor projects” or “routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities” as defined in this section. It also does not include gardening,
plowing, and similar practices that do not involve filling, grading.



   4.   Existing Construction - Any structure for which the "start of
construction" commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.



   5.   Existing Factory-Built Home Park or Subdivision - A
factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.



   6.   Expansion of Existing Factory-Built Home Park or Subdivision -
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   7.   Factory-Built Home - Any structure, designed for residential
use, which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or
assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and
installation, on a building site.  For the purpose of this chapter
factory-built homes include mobile homes, manufactured homes, and modular
homes; and also include "recreational vehicles" which are placed on a site
for greater than 180 consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready
for highway use.



   8.   Factory-Built Home Park - A parcel or contiguous parcels of
land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.



   9.   Flood - A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of
streams or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from
any source.



   10.   Flood Elevation - The elevation floodwaters would reach at a
particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the
100-year flood elevation is the elevation of flood waters related to the
occurrence of the 100-year flood.



   11.   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - The official map prepared as
part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which
delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.



   12.   Floodplain - Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water as a result of a flood.



   13.   Floodplain Management - An overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.



   14.   Floodproofing - Any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including
utility and sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage
to such structures.



   15.   Floodway - The channel of a river or stream and those portions
of the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to
carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood
flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot.



   16.   Floodway Fringe - Those portions of the floodplain, other than
the floodway, which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed without
causing substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.



   17.   Historic Structure - Any structure that is:



      A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places, maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing of the National Register;



      B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;



      C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or,



      D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified by either (i) an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior
in states without approved programs.



   18.   Lowest Floor - The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building including a basement except when all the following criteria are met:



      A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize
hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the
provisions of Section 180.04(4)(A) of this chapter and



      B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled,
etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access,
parking or storage, and



      C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater,
furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at
least one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level, and



      D.   The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this
section.



   In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria A, B, C, and
D above, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that
does not satisfy the criteria above.



   19.   Minor Projects - Small development activities (except for
filling, grading and excavating) valued at less than $500.



   20.   New Construction - (new buildings, factory-built home parks) -
Those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations
adopted by the community.



   21.   New Factory-Built Home Park or Subdivision - A factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.



   22.   One Hundred (100) Year Flood - A flood, the magnitude of which
has a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
or which, on the average, will be equaled or exceeded a least once every one
hundred (100) years.



   23.   Recreational Vehicle - A vehicle which is:



      A.   Built on a single chassis;



      B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projection;



      C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and



      D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   24.   Routine Maintenance of Existing Buildings and Facilities –
Repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that
do not trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a
general improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such
repairs include: 



      A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing,
replacing roofing tiles and replacing siding;



      B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling,
carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work;



      C.   Basement sealing;



      D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;



      E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating
or air conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.



   25.   Special Flood Hazard Area - The land within a community
subject to the "100-year flood".  This land is identified as Zone A on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map.



   26.   Start of Construction - Includes substantial improvement, and
means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement,
or other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date.  The actual
start means either the first placement or permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation
of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. 
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building. 



   27.   Structure - Anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories,
sheds, cabins, factor-built homes, storage tanks, and other similar uses.



   28.   Substantial Damage - Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage
condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.



   29.   Substantial Improvement - Any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:



      A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the
market value of the structure either (i) before the "start of construction"
of the improvement , or (ii) if the structure has been "substantially
damaged" and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does
not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions.  The term also does not include any alteration of an "historic
structure", provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's
designation as an "historic structure".



      B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a
building by 25 percent or more.  All additions constructed after the first
floodplain management regulations adopted by the community shall be added to
any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original
floor space would exceed 25 percent.



   30.   Variance - A grant of relief by a community from the terms of
the floodplain management regulations.



   31.   Violation - The failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.



(Ch. 180 - Ord. 1391 – Oct. 14 Supp.)



