
Hiawatha, Iowa Code of Ordinances


CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES



 

1.01  Title
 
1.08  Amendments


1.02  Definitions
 
1.09  Catchlines and Notes


1.03  City Powers
 
1.10  Altering Code


1.04  Indemnity
 
1.11  Severability


1.05  Personal Injuries
 
1.12  Warrants


1.06  Rules of Construction
 
1.13  General Standards for Action


1.07  Extension of Authority
 
1.14  Standard Penalty



 



1.01   TITLE.



   This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



1.02   DEFINITIONS.



   Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined in
the Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of
Ordinances unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the Council or repugnant to the context of the provision.  Other
words and phrases used herein have the following meanings, unless
specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this Code of Ordinances
or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the Council or repugnant to the context of the provision:



   1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street,
affording secondary means of access to abutting property. 



   2.   “City” means the City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



   3.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of Hiawatha, Iowa.



   4.   “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of
Ordinances in which a specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive
title word (such as the Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by
reference).



   5.   “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



   6.   “Council” means the city council of Hiawatha, Iowa.



   7.   “County” means Linn County, Iowa.



   8.   “May” confers a power.



   9.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or
motion.



   10.   “Must” states a requirement.



   11.   “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land,
includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or
land, whether alone or with others.



   12.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Hiawatha,
Iowa, as embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the
ordinance adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.



   13.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic
or foreign corporation, company, association or joint stock association,
trust or other legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or
similar representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.



   14.   “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard,
parkway, highway, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.



   15.   “Shall” imposes a duty.



   16.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street
between the edge of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the
adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.



   17.   “State” means the State of Iowa.



   18.   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the
Code of Iowa, as amended.



   19.   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between
property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof
is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of
vehicular traffic.



   Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of
Iowa have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the
context of the provision.



1.03   CITY POWERS.



   The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and
if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any
power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve
the rights, privileges, and property of the City and of its residents, and to
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and
convenience of its residents, and each and every provision of this Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and
the performance of the foregoing functions.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)



1.04   INDEMNITY.



   The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances,
by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for any injury to or
death of any person or persons whomsoever, and any loss of or damage to
property whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto,
however arising from or related to, directly, indirectly, or remotely, the
issuance of the permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or
the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such
applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances or the terms and conditions of such permit or license, and such
applicant, by making such application, forever agrees to indemnify the City
and its officers, agents, and employees, and agrees to save them harmless
from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any
loss, damage, injury, or death, including all costs and expenses incident
thereto, by reason of the foregoing.  The provisions of this section shall
be deemed to be a part of any permit or license issued under this Code of
Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City, whether expressly recited
therein or not.



1.05   PERSONAL INJURIES.



   When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged
to have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any
person by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused.  The notice
shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name
and location of the court where the action is pending, a brief statement of
the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the City believes that the
person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City,
and asking the person to appear and defend.  A judgment obtained in the suit
is conclusive in any action by the City against any person so notified, as to
the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the
liability of the City to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to
the amount of the damage or injury.  The City may maintain an action against
the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment together with all
the expenses incurred by the City in the suit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)



1.06   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of statutory
construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized
to ascertain the intent of the Council, with the understanding that the term
“statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term
“ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.



1.07   EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.



   Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act
by a provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed
as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate, or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.



1.08   AMENDMENTS.



   All ordinances that amend, repeal, or in any manner affect this Code of
Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection, or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City. 
Any changes that will affect this Code of Ordinances in any manner shall be
made only after a public hearing is held on said changes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)



1.09   CATCHLINES AND NOTES.



   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code of Ordinances,
titles, headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross
references, and State law references, unless set out in the body of the
section itself, contained in this Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any
part of the law and are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement, or
clarify the contents of a section.



1.10   ALTERING CODE.



   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code of Ordinances, or to
insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this
Code of Ordinances in any manner that will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented.



1.11   SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, provision, or part of this Code of Ordinances is
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the
validity of this Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision, or
part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.



1.12   WARRANTS.



   If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure, or
property pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having
the lawful right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to
enter upon or conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in
and for the County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an
administrative search warrant.  No owner, operator or occupant, or any other
person having charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit,
structure, building, or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of
a search warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or
employee.



1.13   GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.



   Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the
Council or any commission, board, or officer or employee of the City and does
not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be
exercised in light of the following standard:  The discretionary power to
grant, deny, or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts
and circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due
consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and
welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under
similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.



1.14   STANDARD PENALTY.



   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances
for any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing to
perform a duty, or obtain a license required by, or violating any provision
of this Code of Ordinances, or any rule or regulation adopted herein by
reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to only a monetary fine as
provided for a misdemeanor violation under Section 903.1[1a] of the Code of
Iowa.† 1



 


Notes

1 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  For civil penalty for violations of this Code of
Ordinances, see Chapter 4.



CHAPTER 2
CHARTER



 

2.01  Title
 
2.05  Term of Mayor


2.02  Form of Government
 
2.06  Eligibility


2.03  Powers and Duties of City Officers
 
2.07  Copies on File


2.04  Number and Term of Council
 



 



2.01   TITLE.



   This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



2.02   FORM OF GOVERNMENT.



   The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council form of
government.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)



2.03   POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.



   The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and
shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by
the ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City.



2.04   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.



   The Council consists of five Council Members elected at large for
overlapping terms of four years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)



2.05   TERM OF MAYOR.



   The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)



2.06   ELIGIBILITY. 



   To be eligible to be elected to hold and retain the office of Council
member or Mayor, a person must be at least 18 years old, reside in the City
of Hiawatha and possess all the qualifications necessary to entitle the
person to register to vote, as defined in Code of Iowa Section 39.3 Eligible
Elector.



2.07   COPIES ON FILE.



   The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the
official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep
copies of the charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)



CHAPTER 3
BOUNDARIES



 

3.01  Corporate Limits
 
3.02  Voting Precincts



 



3.01   CORPORATE LIMITS.



   The corporate limits of the City are described as follows:



   Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Blairs Ferry Road
and the east line of Tucker’s First Addition to Hiawatha, Iowa, thence west
along the centerline of said Blairs Ferry Road to the west right-of-way line
of Center Point Road (Old Highway 150);  thence northwesterly along the
westerly right-of-way line of Center Point Road to the north right-of-way
line of Blairs Ferry Road; thence west along the north right-of-way line of
Blairs Ferry Road to the east line of Auditors Plat No. 281; thence south to
the centerline of Blairs Ferry Road; thence S88°40'05" along the centerline
of Blairs Ferry Road 846 feet to a point; thence S00°06'05"W 6.97 feet to a
point; thence S89°45'35"W 365.52 feet to a point; thence N87°44'20"W 94.13
feet to a point; thence S88°16'40" W 49.90 feet; thence S78°47'40" 66.62
feet; thence N88°34'20"W 136.88 feet; thence S87°45'25"W 42.07 feet; thence
N01°14'25"E to the centerline of Blairs Ferry Road; thence west along the
centerline of Blairs Ferry Road to a point which is 1,833.03 feet west of the
east line of Auditor’s Plat No. 281; thence N01°19'50"W 13.78 feet; thence
S87°11'30"W 381.05 feet to the centerline of Blairs Ferry Road; thence west
along the centerline of Blairs Ferry Road to the intersection of Blairs Ferry
Road and the centerline of Nemiah Aquilla Miller Road; thence continuing on
the centerline of said Blairs Ferry Road to the east line of Packingham’s
Addition to Linn County, Iowa; thence along the east line of said
Packingham’s Addition to the northeast corner of said Packingham’s
Addition; thence N88°41'21"W, 370.05 feet to a point; thence N0°22'48"W,
7.00 feet to a point; thence N88°41'21"W, 550.04 feet to a point; thence
N0°00'11"W, 375.40 feet to a point on the south line of the SW ¼ of Section
31-84-7; thence N0°18'32"E, 1,065.63 feet to a point; thence S89°56'46"E,
82.60 feet to a point; thence N0°39'00"W, 264.00 feet to a point on the
south line of the NE ¼ SW ¼, Section 31-84-7; thence S89°50'54"W along
said south line of the NE ¼ SW ¼, to the east line of the former Chicago
Rock Island and Pacific Railroad; thence N02°00'46"E along said east line,
699.55 feet to the SW corner of Wolf Creek First Addition; thence
S89°52'37"E along the south line of said Wolf Creek First Addition, 222.33
feet to the west right-of-way line of Wolf Creek Trail; thence southeasterly
on an arc of 25.48 feet of an 800-foot radius curve to the left, having a
chord distance of 25.47 feet, bearing S07°52'43"E; thence N81°12'32"E,
66.00 feet to the east right-of-way line of said road; thence S89°52'37"E
along the south line of said First Addition, 289.55 feet to the SE corner of
Lot 5 of said First Addition; thence S00°00'59"W along the west line of
Country Estates Acres Second Addition and Country Estates Third Addition,
both to Linn County, 380.16 feet to the south right-of-way line of Riverview
Road; thence S89°57'30"E along said south right-of-way line, 56.70 feet;
thence S00°02'30"W along said west line of said Second Addition, 300.92 feet
to the said south line of the NE¼ SW¼; thence S89°56'46"E, along said
south line of the NE¼ SW¼  to a point on the east line of the SW¼ of
Section 31-84-7; thence continuing east along the south line of the SE¼ of
said Section 31 to a point in the centerline of Nemiah Aquilla Miller Road;
thence north and east along the centerline of said Nemiah Aquilla Miller Road
to the south line of the NE¼ , Section 31-84-7; thence west along the south
line of the NE¼ and the NW¼ of said Section 31 to the easterly line of the
former railroad; thence northerly along the said easterly line to a line of
the SE¼ NW¼ of Section 31-84-7; thence east along the north line of the
SE¼ NW¼ and the SW¼ NE¼ of said Section 31; thence north along the west
line of the NE¼ NE¼ of said Section 31 to the SW corner of the SE¼ SE¼ of
Section 30-84-7; thence north along the west line of the SE¼ SE¼ and the
west line of the NE¼ SE¼ of said Section 30 to the NW corner of the NE¼
SE¼ of said Section 30; thence east along the north line of the SE¼ of said
Section 30 to the W¼ corner of Section 29-84-7; thence northerly along the
west line of the SW¼  NW¼ of said Section 29 to the NW corner of the SW¼
NW¼ of said Section 29; thence west along the south line of the NE ¼ NE ¼
and the NW ¼ NE ¼ Section 30-84-7 to the centerline of Loggerhead Road;
thence northwesterly along the centerline of Loggerhead Road to a point on a
line that bears 54°20'00"W; thence from a point on the north line of the
NW¼ NE¼ said Section 30 that is 421.4 feet of the northwest corner of the
NW ¼ NE ¼ said Section 30; thence N40°20'00"E to a point on the north line
of the NW¼ NE¼ said Section 30; that is 421.4 feet east of the northwest
corner of the NW¼ NE¼ said Section 30; thence west along the north line of
the NW¼ NE¼ said Section 30 421.4 feet to the NW corner of the NW¼ NE¼
said Section 30; thence continuing west along the south line of the SE¼ SW¼
Section 19-84-7 and the south line of the SW¼ SW¼ said Section 19 to the SW
corner of the SW¼ SW¼ said Section 19; thence north along the west line of
the SW¼ SW¼ said Section 19 and the west line of the NW¼ SW¼ said Section
19 to the NW corner of the NW¼ SW¼ said Section 19; thence east along the
north line of the NW¼ SW¼ said Section 19 to the point of intersection of
the north line of the NW¼ SW¼ said Section 19 and the northerly extension
of the west line of Rolling Prairie Estates First Addition to Linn County,
Iowa; thence south along the west line of said Rolling Prairie Estates First
Addition to the SW corner of said Addition; thence southeasterly along the
southwesterly line of said Rolling Prairie Estates First Addition to the
southwest corner of Lot 5, said Rolling Prairie Estates First Addition;
thence east along the south line of said Lot 5 to the west right-of-way line
of Marygreen Road; thence south along the west right-of-way line of Marygreen
Road to the south line of said Rolling Prairie Estates First Addition; thence
east along the south line of said Rolling Prairie Estates First Addition to
the west line of the NW¼ SE¼ said Section 19; thence north along the west
line of the NW¼ SE¼ and the SW¼ NE¼ of said Section 19 to the north line
of Sharon’s Third Addition to Linn County, Iowa, extended to intersect with
the west line of the SW¼ NE½ said Section 19; thence west along the north
line of said Sharon’s Third Addition and continuing west along the north
line of Sharon’s First Addition to Linn County, Iowa, to the west line of
the E½ W¼ said Section 19;  thence north along the west line of E½ NW¼
said Section 19 to the NW corner of the E¼ NW¼ said Section 19; thence east
along the north line of the E½ NW¼ said Section 19 to the NE corner E½
NW¼ Section 19; thence south along the west line of the NW¼ NE¼ said
Section 19, 50.0 feet to a point; thence east along a line 50.0 feet south of
and parallel to the north line of the NW¼ NE¼ said Section 19 150.0 feet to
a point; thence north along a line that is 150.0 feet east of and parallel to
the west line of the NW¼ NE¼ said Section 19 and continuing north along a
line that is 150 feet east of and parallel to the west line of the SW¼ SE¼
Section 18-84-7 to a point that is 100.0 feet south of the north line of the
SW¼ SE¼ said Section 18; thence east along a line that is 100.0 feet south
of and parallel to the north line of the SW¼ SE¼ and the SE¼ SE¼ said
Section 18 to the east right-of-way line of Interstate 380; thence southerly
along the east line of Interstate 380 to the south line of the NE¼ SE¼
Section 19-84-7; thence west along the south line of the NW¼ SE¼ said
Section to the SW corner of the NW¼ SE¼ said Section 19; thence south along
the east line of the SW¼ SE¼ said Section 19 to the SE corner of the SW¼
SE¼ said Section 19; thence east along the north line of the NE¼ NE¼
Section 30-84-7 to the NE corner of the NE¼ NE¼ said Section 30; thence
south along the east line of the NE¼ NE¼ said Section 30 to the north line
of the south 5 acres of the NW¼ NW¼ Section 29-84-7; thence east along the
north line of the south 5 acres of the NW¼ NW¼ said Section 29 to the NE
corner of the south 5 acres of the NW¼ NW¼ said Section 29; thence north
along the east line of the NE¼ NW¼ said Section 29 to the north line of the
south 18 rods of the NE¼ NW¼ said Section 29; thence east along the north
line of the south 18 rods of the NE¼ NW¼ said Section 29 to the east line
of the NE¼ NW¼ said Section 29; thence south along the east line of the
NE¼ NW¼ and the SE¼ NW¼ said Section 29 to the SE corner of the SE¼ NW¼
said Section 29; thence east along the north line of the SE¼ said Section 29
to the West¼ corner of Section 28-84-7; thence east along the north line
NW¼ SW¼ said Section 28; to the NE corner of the NW¼ SW¼ said Section 28;
thence north along the west line of the SE¼ NW¼ said Section 28 to the
north line of Stonegate Fourth Addition to the City of Hiawatha; thence east
along the north line of said Stonegate Fourth Addition to the NE corner of
lot 5 said Stonegate Fourth Addition ; thence north 0°44'40"E to the south
line of Stonegate Second Addition to the City of Hiawatha; thence west along
the south line of said Stonegate Second Addition to the west line of the NE¼
NW¼ said Section 28; thence north along the west line of the NE¼ NW¼ said
Section 28 to the north line of Stonegate Third Addition to the City of
Hiawatha; thence east along the north line of said Stonegate Third Addition
to the NE corner of lot 1 said Stonegate Third Addition; thence southerly and
easterly along the easterly, northeasterly and northerly boundaries of
Stonegate Third, Stonegate First and Stonegate Second Addition to the City of
Hiawatha to the east line of the NE¼ NW¼ said Section 28; thence south
along the east line of the NE¼ NW¼ and the SE¼ NW¼ said Section 28 to the
SE corner of the SE¼ NW¼ said Section 28; thence east along the north line
of the SE¼  of said Section 28 to the westerly right-of-way line of the
Illinois Central Gulf Railroad; thence southwesterly along said westerly
right-of-way line to the north line of the SE¼ SW¼ of said Section 28;
thence east along said north line of the SE¼ SW¼ and the north line of the
SW¼ SE¼ of said Section 28 to a point that is 165 feet east of the NW
corner of the SW¼ SE¼ of said Section 28; thence S0°03'SW, 261.0 feet
along a line parallel to the west line of the SW¼ SE¼ of said Section 28;
thence S70º19.5'E, 693.0 feet; thence S89°36.5'E, 511.6 feet to a point on
the east line of the SW¼ SE¼ of said Section 28, said point being 495.7
feet south from the NE corner thereof; thence south along the east line of
the SW¼ SE¼ of said Section 28 to the SE corner thereof; thence west along
the south line of the SW¼ SE¼  of said Section 28 to the NE corner of the
west 369.00 feet of the NW¼ E¼ Section 33-84-7; thence south along the east
line of the west 369.00 feet of said NW¼ NE¼ to the SE corner of the west
369.00 feet of said NW¼ NE¼ ; thence southerly to a point which is 380 feet
east and 445 feet south of the northwest corner of the SW¼ of the NE¼ of
said Section 33; thence southwesterly to a point that is 306 feet east and
530 feet south of the northwest corner SW¼ of the NE¼ of said Section 33;
thence south 130 feet; thence west, 306 feet to the east line of the SE¼ of
the NW¼ of said Section 33; thence south along the east line of the SE¼ 
NW¼ and the east line of the NE¼ SW¼ of said Section 33 to the NE corner
of the SE¼  NE¼ SW¼  of said Section 33; thence east to a point 490.38
feet east of the west line of the SE¼ of said Section 33, thence south to
the south line of said Section 33; thence east, 6.7 feet to the east line of
Lot 41, Tucker’s First Addition to Hiawatha, Iowa; thence south, 757.7 feet
to the point of beginning.



3.02     VOTING PRECINCTS.



   The City is divided into four voting precincts described as follows:



   1.   First Precinct.  That entire portion of the City located west
of Interstate 380 south of Boyson Road to southern City limits.



   2.   Second Precinct.  That entire portion of the City located east
of North Center Point Road and north of Boyson Road and that entire portion
of the City located south of Boyson Road and east of Interstate 380 to the
southern point of City limits.



   3.   Third Precinct.  That entire portion of the City located north
of Boyson Road and west of North Center Point Road and south of Tower Terrace
Road and that entire portion of the City located north of Tower Terrace Road
and west of North Center Point Road and east of Loggerhead Road to the
northern City limits and that entire portion of the City located west of
Loggerhead Road and north of Canterbury Lane and south of Todd Hills Road and
that portion of the City located west of Loggerhead Road and south of Hunt
Road and north of Tower Terrace Road in the southeast quarter of the
southwest quarter of Section 19-84-7.



   4.   Fourth Precinct.  That portion of the City located west of
Loggerhead Road and south of Hunt Road and north of Tower Terrace Road
excluding the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 19-84-7
and that entire portion of Monroe Township Linn County located west of
Loggerhead Road and south of Hunt Road and north of Tower Terrace Road and
that entire portion of Monroe Township Linn County located south of Tower
Terrace Road and east of Milburn Road and west of Miller Road.



CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS



 

4.01  Municipal Infraction
 
4.05  Real Property


4.02  Environmental Violation
 
4.06  Alternative Relief


4.03  Penalties
 
4.07  Alternative Penalties


4.04  Civil Citations
 



 



4.01   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.



   A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein
adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty
required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically
provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious
misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the
Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as
provided herein.† 2



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])



4.02   ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION.



   A municipal infraction that is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code
of Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the
Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an
environmental violation.  However, the provisions of this section shall not
be applicable until the City has offered to participate in informal
negotiations regarding the violation or to the following specific violations:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])



   1.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.



   2.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the
handling, drying, or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the
industrial production or manufacturing of grain products.



   3.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the
handling, drying, or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial
production or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to
January 15.



4.03   PENALTIES.



   A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])



   1.   Standard Civil Penalties.



      A.   First offense – not to exceed $750.00



      B.   Each repeat offense – not to exceed $1,000.00



   Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a
repeat offense.



   2.   Special Civil Penalties.



      A.   A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an
industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for
each day a violation exists or continues.



      B.   A municipal infraction classified as an environmental
violation is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each
occurrence.  However, an environmental violation is not subject to such
penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:



         (1)   The violation results solely from conducting an
initial startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance,
testing, or conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation
or the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.



         (2)   The City is notified of the violation within 24
hours from the time that the violation begins.



         (3)   The violation does not continue in existence for
more than eight hours.



4.04   CIVIL CITATIONS.



   Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances
may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. 
A copy of the citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule
of Civil Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at
defendant’s last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by
publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and
subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311.  A copy of the
citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation
shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court.  The citation shall serve
as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain the
following information:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])



   1.   The name and address of the defendant.



   2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the
officer issuing the citation.



   3.   The location and time of the infraction.



   4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative
relief sought, or both.



   5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.



   6.   The time and place of court appearance.



   7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.



   8.   The legal description of the affected real property, if
applicable.



4.05     REAL PROPERTY.



   Upon receiving a citation under Section 4.04 that affects real property
and that charges a violation relating to the condition of the property,
including a building code violation, a local housing regulation violation, a
housing code violation, or a public health or safety violation, the clerk of
the district court shall index the citation pursuant to Code of Iowa Section
617.10, if the legal description of the affected property is included in or
attached to the citation.  After filing the citation with the clerk of the
district court, the City shall also file the citation in the office of the
County Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall include a notation of the
pendency of the action in the county system, as defined in Code of Iowa
Section 445.1, until the judgment of the court is satisfied or until the
action is dismissed. Pursuant to Code of Iowa Section 446.7, an affected
property that is subject to a pending action shall not be offered for sale by
the County Treasurer at tax sale.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[5A])



4.06   ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.



   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude
the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. 
Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for
abatement or injunctive relief.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[8])



4.07   ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES.



   This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal
citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal
penalties are also provided for the violation.  Nor does it preclude or
limit the authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])



 


Notes

2 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  For criminal penalty for violations of this Code of
Ordinances, see Section 1.14.



CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES



 

5.01  Oaths
 
5.07  Conflict of Interest


5.02  Bonds
 
5.08  Resignations


5.03  Powers and Duties
 
5.09  Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees


5.04  Books and Records
 
5.10  Vacancies


5.05  Transfer to Successor
 
5.11  Gifts


5.06  Meetings
 



 



5.01   OATHS.



   The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance
with the following:



   1.   Qualify for Office.  Each elected or appointed officer shall
qualify for office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when
required, a bond.  The oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after such
officer is certified as elected but not later than noon of the first day that
is not a Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the term
for which the officer was elected.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)



   2.   Prescribed Oath.  The prescribed oath is:  “I, (name), do
solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United States and
the Constitution of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and
impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of
(name of office) in Hiawatha as now or hereafter required by law.”



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)



   3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths.  The following are
empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter
pertaining to the business of their respective offices:



      A.   Mayor



      B.   City Clerk



      C.   Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies created by
law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)



5.02   BONDS.



   Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:



   1.   Required.  The Council shall provide by resolution for a
surety bond or blanket position bond running to the City and covering the
Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer, and such other officers and employees as may be
necessary and advisable.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)



   2.   Bonds Approved.  Bonds shall be approved by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)



   3.   Bonds Filed.  All bonds, after approval and proper record,
shall be filed with the Clerk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])



   4.   Record.  The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the
“Record of Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds
of all City officers, elective or appointive.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])



5.03   POWERS AND DUTIES.



   Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by
the Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



5.04   BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be
open to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions
of law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept
confidential.  Access to public records that are combined with data
processing software shall be in accordance with policies and procedures
established by the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A)



5.05   TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.



   Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all
books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



5.06   MEETINGS.



   All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any
multi-membered body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing
bodies shall be held in accordance with the following:



   1.   Notice of Meetings.  Reasonable notice, as defined by State
law, of the time, date, and place of each meeting and its tentative agenda
shall be given.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)



   2.   Meetings Open.  All meetings shall be held in open session
unless closed sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)



   3.   Minutes.  Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the
date, time and place, the members present, and the action taken at each
meeting.  The minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and
information sufficient to indicate the vote of each member present.  The
vote of each member present shall be made public at the open session.  The
minutes shall be public records open to public inspection.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)



   4.   Closed Session.  A closed session may be held only by
affirmative vote of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members
present at the meeting and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)



   5.   Cameras and Recorders.  The public may use cameras or
recording devices at any open session.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)



   6.   Electronic Meetings.  A meeting may be conducted by electronic
means only in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or
impractical and then only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of
the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)



5.07   CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or
indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof
or services to be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly
permitted by law.  A contract entered into in violation of this section is
void.  The provisions of this section do not apply to:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)



   1.   Compensation of Officers.  The payment of lawful compensation
of a City officer or employee holding more than one City office or position,
the holding of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not
prohibited by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3a])



   2.   Investment of Funds.  The designation of a bank or trust
company as a depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3b])



   3.   City Treasurer.  An employee of a bank or trust company, who
serves as Treasurer of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3c])



   4.   Stock Interests.  Contracts in which a City officer or
employee has an interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest
of the kind described in subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the
contracts are made by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and
opened, or if the remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as
a result of the contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve
the procurement or preparation of any part of the contract.  The competitive
bid qualification of this subsection does not apply to a contract for
professional services not customarily awarded by competitive bid.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3e])



   5.   Newspaper.  The designation of an official newspaper. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3f])



   6.   Existing Contracts.  A contract in which a City officer or
employee has an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer
or employee was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3g])



   7.   Volunteers.  Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil
defense volunteers.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3h])



   8.   Corporations.  A contract with a corporation in which a City
officer or employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less
than five percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or
controlled directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or
immediate family of such officer or employee.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3i])



   9.   Contracts.  Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in
writing, publicly invited and opened. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3d])



   10.   Cumulative Purchases.  Contracts not otherwise permitted by
this section, for the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City
officer or employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do
not exceed a cumulative total purchase price of $1,500.00 in a fiscal year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3j])



   11.   Franchise Agreements.  Franchise agreements between the City
and a utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of
essential City utility services.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])



   12.   Third Party Contracts.  A contract that is a bond, note or
other obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from
the City but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may
not be the original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3m])



5.08   RESIGNATIONS.



   An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a
resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and
considered.  A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible
for appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was
elected if, during that time, the compensation of the office has been
increased.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])



5.09   REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons
appointed to City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body
making the appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. 
The order shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a
copy shall be sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request
filed with the Clerk within 30 days after the date of mailing the copy, shall
be granted a public hearing before the Council on all issues connected with
the removal.  The hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date the
request is filed, unless the person removed requests a later date.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)



5.10   VACANCIES.



   A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be
filled in accordance with Section 372.13[2] of the Code of Iowa.



5.11   GIFTS.



   Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a
public official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate
family member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift
or series of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B
and a restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or
jointly with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a
series of gifts to a public official, public employee, or candidate.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)



CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS



 

6.01  Nominating Method to Be Used
 
6.04  Preparation of Petition and Affidavit


6.02  Nominations by Petition
 
6.05  Filing; Presumption; Withdrawals; Objections


6.03  Adding Name by Petition
 
6.06  Persons Elected



 



6.01   NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.



   All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under
the provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)



6.02   NOMINATIONS BY PETITION.



   Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by
nomination paper or papers signed by not less than 25 eligible electors,
residents of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)



6.03   ADDING NAME BY PETITION.



   The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than
by petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)



6.04   PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT.



   Nomination papers shall include a petition and an affidavit of
candidacy.  The petition and affidavit shall be substantially in the form
prescribed by the State Commissioner of Elections, shall include information
required by the Code of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code
of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5 & 45.6)



6.05   FILING; PRESUMPTION; WITHDRAWALS; OBJECTIONS.



   The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of
validity thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the
effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency
of such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed
by the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)



6.06   PERSONS ELECTED.



   The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office
on the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])



CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT



 

7.01  Purpose
 
7.05  Operating Budget Preparation


7.02  Director of Finance
 
7.06  Budget Amendments


7.03  Cash Control
 
7.07  Accounting


7.04  Fund Control
 
7.08  Financial Reports



 



7.01   PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for
rules and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of
the City.



7.02   DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.



   The Director of Finance is the accounting officer and treasurer of the
City and is responsible for the administration of the provisions of this
chapter.



7.03   CASH CONTROL.



   To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the
following shall apply:



   1.   Deposit of Funds.  All moneys or fees collected for any
purpose by any City officer shall be deposited through the office of the
Director of Finance.  If any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be
paid to the officer by check drawn by the Director of Finance and approved by
the Council only upon such officer’s making adequate reports relating
thereto as required by law, ordinance, or Council directive. 



   2.   Deposits and Investments.  All moneys belonging to the City
shall be promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in
amounts not exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the
Council or invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy
and State law, including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of
the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)



   3.   Petty Cash Fund.  The Director of Finance shall be custodian
of a petty cash fund for the payment of small claims for minor purchases,
collect-on-delivery transportation charges, and small fees customarily paid
at the time of rendering a service, for which payments the Director of
Finance shall obtain some form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the
vendor or agent.  At such time as the petty cash fund is approaching
depletion, the Director of Finance shall draw a check for replenishment in
the amount of the accumulated expenditures and said check and supporting
detail shall be submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual manner for
claims and charged to the proper funds and accounts.  It shall not be used
for salary payments or other personal services or personal expenses.



7.04   FUND CONTROL.



   There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds
in accordance with the following: 



   1.   Revenues.  All moneys received by the City shall be credited
to the proper fund as required by law, ordinance, or resolution.



   2.   Expenditures.  No disbursement shall be made from a fund
unless such disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance, or resolution, was
properly budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council. 



   3.   Emergency Fund.  No transfer may be made from any fund to the
Emergency Fund.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])



   4.   Debt Service Fund.  Except where specifically prohibited by
State law, moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt
Service Fund to meet payments of principal and interest.  Such transfers
must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])



   5.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund.  Except where specifically
prohibited by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the
Capital Improvements Reserve Fund.  Such transfers must be authorized by the
original budget or a budget amendment.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4])



   6.   Utility and Enterprise Funds.  A surplus in a Utility or
Enterprise Fund may be transferred to any other City fund, except the
Emergency Fund, by resolution of the Council.  A surplus may exist only
after all required transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in
accordance with the terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan
agreements relating to the Utility or Enterprise Fund.  A surplus is defined
as the cash balance in the operating account or the unrestricted net position
calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, after
adding back the net pension and other postemployment benefits, liabilities,
and the related deferred inflows of resources and deducting the related
deferred outflows of resources, in excess of:



      A.   The amount of the expenses of disbursements for operating
and maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three months; and



      B.   The amount necessary to make all required transfers to
restricted accounts for the succeeding three months.



(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5])



   7.   Balancing of Funds.  Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the
close of each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.



7.05   OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.



   The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance
with the following:



   1.   Proposal Prepared.  The Director of Finance is responsible for
preparation of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council
and adoption by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and
Council.



   2.   Boards and Commissions.  All boards, commissions, and other
administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and
administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the Director of
Finance for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such
form as required by the Council.



   3.   Submission to Council.  The Director of Finance shall submit
the completed budget proposal to the Council no later than February 15 of
each year.



   4.   Council Review.  The Council shall review the proposed budget
and may make any adjustments it deems appropriate in the budget before
accepting such proposal for publication, hearing, and final adoption.



   5.   Notice of Hearing.  Upon adopting a proposed budget the
Council shall set a date for public hearing thereon to be held before March
15 and cause notice of such hearing and a summary of the proposed budget to
be published not less than 10 or more than 20 days before the date
established for the hearing.  Proof of such publication must be filed with
the County Auditor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])



   6.   Copies of Budget on File.  Not less than 20 days before the
date that the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less
than 10 days before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a
sufficient number of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of
taxpayers and organizations, and have them available for distribution at the
offices of the Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])



   7.   Adoption and Certification.  After the hearing, the Council
shall adopt, by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and
the Clerk shall certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to
the County Auditor and the County Board of Supervisors.  The tax levy
certified may be less than, but not more than, the amount estimated in the
proposed budget.  Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of
the tax certificate must be transmitted to the County Auditor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])



7.06   BUDGET AMENDMENTS.



   A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes
effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and
purpose specified therein until amended as provided by this section.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)



   1.   Program Increase.  Any increase in the amount appropriated to
a program must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same
manner as the original budget.



(IAC, 545-2.2[384, 388])



   2.   Program Transfer.  Any transfer of appropriation from one
program to another must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the
same manner as the original budget. 



(IAC, 545-2.3[384, 388])



   3.   Activity Transfer.  Any transfer of appropriation from one
activity to another activity within a program must be approved by resolution
of the Council. 



(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])



   4.   Administrative Transfers.  The Director of Finance shall have
the authority to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations
allocated within a specific activity without prior Council approval. 



(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])



7.07   ACCOUNTING.



   The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:



   1.   Books of Original Entry.  There shall be established and
maintained books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash
received and disbursed. 



   2.   General Ledger.  There shall be established and maintained a
general ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for
recording unappropriated surpluses.   



   3.   Checks.  Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the
Director of Finance following Council approval, except as provided by
subsection 5 hereof. 



   4.   Budget Accounts.  There shall be established such individual
accounts to record receipts by source and expenditures by program and
activity as will provide adequate information and control for budgeting
purposes as planned and approved by the Council.  Each individual account
shall be maintained within its proper fund and so kept that receipts can be
immediately and directly compared with revenue estimates and expenditures can
be related to the authorizing appropriation.  No expenditure shall be posted
except to the appropriation for the function and purpose for which the
expense was incurred.



   5.   Immediate Payment Authorized.  The Council may by resolution
authorize the Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due,
which if not paid promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late
payment or additional interest cost.  Any such payments made shall be
reported to the Council for review and approval with and in the same manner
as other claims at the next meeting following such payment.  The resolution
authorizing immediate payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized
and may include (but is not limited to) payment of utility bills, contractual
obligations, payroll, and bond principal and interest.



   6.   Utilities.  The Director of Finance shall perform and be
responsible for accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities,
except those utilities under the control and management of the Water Utility
Board of Trustees.



7.08   FINANCIAL REPORTS.



   The Director of Finance shall prepare and file the following financial
reports:



   1.   Monthly Reports.  There shall be submitted to the Council each
month a report showing the activity and status of each fund, program,
sub-program, and activity for the preceding month.



   2.   Annual Report.  Not later than December 1 of each year there
shall be published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding
fiscal year of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and
all expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt
limit of the City for the current fiscal year.  A copy of the annual report
must be filed with the Auditor of State not later than December 1 of each
year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)



CHAPTER 8
URBAN RENEWAL



 

8.01  Purpose
 
8.02  Hiawatha Urban Renewal Areas



 



8.01     PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the division of taxes
levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Areas of the City each
year by and for the benefit of the State, City, County, school districts or
other taxing districts after the effective date of the ordinance codified by
this chapter in order to create a special fund to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, advances or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be
issued by the City, to finance projects in such areas.



8.02     HIAWATHA URBAN RENEWAL AREAS.



   1.   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:



      A.   Original Area means that portion of the City of Hiawatha,
Iowa, described in the Urban Renewal Plan for the Hiawatha Urban Renewal Area
approved by Resolution No. 91-68 on June 19, 1991, which Original Area
includes the lots and parcels located within the area legally described as
follows:



ORIGINAL AREA



   Beginning at the intersection of the southern corporate limits and
Thirteenth Avenue; then north on Thirteenth Avenue to Rainbow Boulevard; then
west on Rainbow Boulevard to Fourteenth Avenue; then north on Fourteenth
Avenue and North 4th Avenue to Cress Parkway; then east on Cress Parkway to
North 12th Avenue; then north on North 12th Avenue to Lyndhurst Drive; then
east on Lyndhurst Drive to North 10th Avenue; then south on North 10th Avenue
to Emmons Street; then east on Emmons Street to Robins Road; then north on
Robins Road to the corporate limits; then following the corporate limits
along the northeast, north, northwest, west, and southwest boundaries to the
point of beginning.



      B.   Amendment No. 1 did not add or remove land.



      C.   Amendment No. 2 Area means that portion of the City of
Hiawatha, Iowa, described in Amendment No. 2 to the Urban Renewal Plan for
the Hiawatha Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 98-87 adopted July
16, 1998, which Amendment No. 2 Area includes the lots and parcels located
within the area legally described as follows:



      1)  The West 369.00 feet of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of the
Northeast Quarter (NE1/4), Section Thirty-three (33), Township Eighty-four
(84), Range Seven (7), and all that part of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of
the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of Section Thirty-three (33), Township
Eighty-four (84), Range Seven (7), lying southeasterly of the Illinois
Central Railroad right-of-way



      AND



      The East Half of Robins Road adjacent to this property and all of
that part of East Boyson Road lying North of the East West 1/4 1/4 line that
describes the NE1/4 NW1/4 of Section 33-T84N-R7W and NW1/4 NE1/4 of Section
33-T84N-R7W



      AND



      2)  NW1/4 Section 28-84-7, Linn County, Iowa, except the West
1037 feet of South 260 feet thereof, and further excepting that part
described as follows: Commencing at the NW corner said E1/2 NW1/4; thence due
South 1175 feet along the West line said E1/2 NW1/4 to point of beginning;
thence continuing due South along said West line 500 feet; thence due East
853.5 feet to an existing fence; thence North 0 44'40" East 500.04 feet along
an existing fence; thence due West 800 feet to point of beginning.



      AND



      West 1037 feet of the South 260 feet SE1/4 NW1/4 Section 28-84-7,
Linn County, Iowa



      AND



      3)  The South Twenty-nine and five-tenths (29.5) acres of the
Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of Section
Twenty-nine (29), Township Eighty-four (84) North, Range Seven (7), West of
the 5th P.M., Linn County, Iowa



      AND



      The North Half of Tower Terrace Road that abuts the above legally
described property.



      AND



      The West One-Half of the East One-Half of the following two
tracts: The South 5 acres of the North 10 acres of the Southwest Quarter of
the Northwest Quarter of Section 29. Township 84 North, Range 7, West of the
5th P.M., and the North One-Half acre of the South 30 acres of the Southwest
Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 29, Township 84, North Range 7
West of the 5th P.M., Linn County, Iowa, subject to a 20 foot road easement
of record along the South side of the premises herein described, together
with an equal right and share in an easement along the South 20 feet of the
reserved or East One-Half of the premises herein above described.



      AND



      4)  A part of the SE1/4 NW1/4 and the SW1/4 NE1/4 of Section
31-T84N-R7W of the 5th P.M., Linn County, Iowa, described as follows:



      The SE1/4 NW¼ and the SW1/4 NE1/4 of said Section 31



      EXCEPT



      The south 882 feet of said SE1/4 NW1/4.



      and EXCEPT



      Beginning at the SE corner of said SW1/4 NE1/4 of Section 31;
thence northerly along the East line of said SW1/4 NE1/4, 360 feet; thence
westerly parallel to and 360 feet north of the South line of said SW1/4
NE1/4, 500 feet; thence northerly parallel to and 500 feet west of the East
line of said SW1/4 NE1/4, 522 feet; thence westerly parallel to and 882 feet
north of the South line of said SW1/4 NE1/4, to the west line of said SW1/4
NE1/4; thence southerly along said west line, 882 feet to the SW corner of
said SW1/4 NE1/4; thence easterly along the south line of said SW1/4 NE1/4 to
the point of beginning containing 19.72 acres more or less.



      AND



      5)  That part of the NW1/4 NE1/4 Section 6-83-7, Linn County,
Iowa, described as follows:



      Commencing at the North Quarter corner of said Section 6-83-7;
thence South a distance of 408.40 feet; thence South 88º11' East a distance
of 1021.40 feet to the centerline of the County Road; thence South 0º58'
West on said Road centerline a distance of 150.0 feet to the point of
beginning; thence continuing South 0º58' West a distance 240.0 feet to the
centerline of Blairs Ferry Road; thence North 88º11' West on the centerline
of said Blairs Ferry Road a distance of 540.00 feet; thence North 0º58' East
a distance of 240.0 feet; thence South 88º11' East a distance of 540.0 feet
to the point of beginning.



      The Urban Renewal District includes the full right-of-way of all
roads forming the boundary.



      D.   Amendment No. 3 Area means that portion of the City of
Hiawatha, Iowa, described in Amendment No. 3 to the Urban Renewal Plan for
the Hiawatha Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 01-145 adopted
December 5, 2001, which Amendment No. 3 Area includes the lots and parcels
located within the area legally described as follows:



   Lots 1, 15, 16, 17 and A Tucker’s First Addition to Hiawatha, Iowa,
including the adjoining streets;



and



   Lots 1, 2, 3, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 and 36 Hartl’s First
Addition to Hiawatha, Iowa, including the adjoining streets;



and



   Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and B (Lot B is also known as
Plat of Survey No. 181 parcels A and B) Auditor's Plat No. 281 Linn County,
Iowa, including the adjoining streets.



      E.   Amendment No. 4 Area means that portion of the City of
Hiawatha, Iowa, described in Amendment No. 4 to the Urban Renewal Plan for
the Hiawatha Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 2-38 adopted March
20, 2002, which Amendment No. 4 Area includes the lots and parcels located
within the area legally described as follows:



   Reynold’s First Addition to the City of Hiawatha, Iowa, including the
streets within and adjoining;



and



   Pirie’s First Addition to the City of Hiawatha, Iowa, including the
streets within and adjoining;



and



   Lots 1-4 inclusive and lots 15-18 inclusive Auditor’s Plat no. 275
Linn County, Iowa, including the adjoining streets;



and



   Lot 1 Chaffee’s Second Addition to Hiawatha, Iowa, including the
adjoining streets;



and



   Lot 1 Chaffee’s First Addition to Hiawatha, Iowa, including the
adjoining streets;



and



   The South Eight (8) rods of the North twenty-four (24) rods of the
Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of the Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4) of the Southwest
Quarter (SW1/4) of Section Thirty-three (33), excepting therefrom the East
two hundred fifty (250) feet, All in Township Eighty-four (84), North, Range
Seven (7), West of the 5th P.M., Linn County, Iowa, including the adjoining
streets;



and



   South 4 Rods West 200 Feet North 8 Rods South 16 Rods SW¼ NE¼ SW¼
Section 33-84-7, Linn County, Iowa, subject to Public Highway, including the
adjoining streets;



and



   The South 8 rods of the SW¼ NE¼ SW¼ except the East 250 feet in
Section 33 Township 84 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M. in Linn County,
Iowa, including the adjoining streets;



and



   The North eight (8) rods of the South sixteen (16) rods of the
Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of the Southwest
Quarter (SW1/4) in Section 33-84-7, Linn County, Iowa, except the South four
(4) rods of the West two hundred (200) feet thereof, including the adjoining
streets;



and



   The East two hundred fifty (250) feet of the South eight (8) rods of
the North twenty-four (24) rods of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of the
Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of Section
33-84-7, Linn County, Iowa;



and



   The East two hundred fifty (250) feet of the South eight (8) rods of
the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of the
Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of Section 33-84-7, Linn County, Iowa;



and



   The North 8 Rods of the NW¼, SE¼, SW¼ of Section 33-84-7, Linn
County, Iowa, including the adjoining streets;



and



   South 16 rods of the North 24 rods of the NW¼ of the SE¼ of the SW¼
and the West ½  of the NE¼ of the SE¼ of the SW¼ and the West 100 feet
of SE¼ of NE¼ of the SE¼ of the SW¼ and the SW¼ of the SE¼ of the NE¼
of the SW¼ all in Section 33, Twp 84, North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M.,
including the adjoining streets;



and



   Auditor’s Plat No. 396 to Linn County, Iowa including the streets
within and adjoining;



   And



   Lots 4 through 9 inclusive and vacated A Avenue adjoining Lot 9
Hartl’s First Addition to Hiawatha, Iowa, including the adjoining streets.



   The Urban Renewal District includes the full right-of-way of all roads
forming the boundary.



      F.   Amendment No. 5 Area means that portion of the City of
Hiawatha, Iowa, described in Amendment No. 5 to the Urban Renewal Plan for
the Hiawatha Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 05-182 adopted
November 18, 2005, which Amendment No. 5 Area includes the lots and parcels
located within the area legally described as follows:



   BEGINNING AT THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF THE SE ¼ OF THE NW ¼ OF SECTION
29-84-7 LINN COUNTY, IOWA; THENCE NORTH ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID SE ¼ 
OF THE NW ¼ AND CONTINUING ALONG THE EAST LINE OF THE NE ¼ NW ¼ SAID
SECTION 29 TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF THE SOUTH 18 RODS OF SAID NE ¼ NW ¼;
THENCE WESTERLY ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF THE SOUTH 18 RODS OF SAID NE ¼ NW ¼
TO THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF SAID SOUTH 18 RODS; THENCE SOUTH ALONG THE WEST
LINE OF NE ¼ NW ¼ TO THE NORTH LINE OF THE SOUTH 5 ACRES OF THE S ½  OF
THE NW ¼ OF THE NW ¼ OF SECTION 29-84-7 LINN COUNTY, IOWA; THENCE WEST
ALONG SAID NORTH LINE OF SOUTH 5 ACRES OF THE S ½ OF THE NW ¼ OF THE NW ¼
OF SECTION 29-84-7 TO THE WEST LINE OF SAID NW ¼  NW ¼ THENCE NORTH ALONG
THE WEST LINE OF SAID NW ¼ NW ¼ TO THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF NE ¼ SECTION
30-84-7 LINN COUNTY, IOWA; THENCE WEST ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF SAID NE ¼ 
TO A POINT LOCATED 421.4 FEET EAST OF THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF SAID NE ¼;
THENCE SOUTH ALONG A LINE BEARING S4° 20'W (ASSUMING THE NORTH LINE OF THE
NE ¼ SECTION 30-84-7 TO BEAR DUE WEST) TO THE CENTERLINE OF LOGGERHEAD ROAD,
LINN COUNTY, IOWA; THENCE SOUTHEASTERLY ALONG THE CENTERLINE OF LOGGERHEAD
ROAD TO THE SOUTH LINE OF THE NW ¼ NE ¼ OF SECTION 30-84-7; THENCE EAST
ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF THE NW ¼ NE ¼ AND THE SOUTH LINE OF THE NE ¼ NE
¼  OF SECTION 30-84-7 TO THE EAST LINE OF THE NE ¼ SECTION 30-84-7; THENCE
SOUTH ALONG THE EAST LINE OF THE NE ¼ SECTION 30-84-7 TO THE SOUTH LINE OF
THE NORTH ½ ACRE OF THE SOUTH 30 ACRES OF THE SW ¼  NW ¼ SECTION 29-84-7
LINN COUNTY, IOWA; THENCE EAST ALONG SAID SOUTH LINE TO THE EAST LINE OF THE
W ½ OF THE NORTH ½  ACRE OF THE SOUTH 30 ACRES OF THE SW ¼ NW ¼ SECTION
29-8.4-7; THENCE NORTH ALONG THE SAID EAST LINE AND THE EAST LINE OF THE W ½
OF THE SOUTH 5 ACRES OF THE NORTH 10 ACRES OF THE SW ¼  NW ¼ SECTION
29-84-7 TO THE NORTH LINE OF THE SOUTH 5 ACRES OF THE NORTH 10 ACRES OF THE
SW ¼ NW ¼ SECTION 29-84-7; THENCE EAST ALONG SAID NORTH LINE TO THE WEST
LINE OF THE E ¼ OF THE SOUTH 5 ACRES OF THE NORTH 10 ACRES OF THE SW ¼ NW
¼ SECTION 29-84-7; THENCE SOUTH ALONG SAID WEST LINE AND THE WEST LINE OF
THE E ¼ OF THE N ¼ ACRE OF THE SOUTH 30 ACRES OF THE SW ¼ NW ¼ OF SECTION
29-84-7 TO THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID NORTH ¼ ACRE; THENCE EAST ALONG SAID SOUTH
LINE TO THE WEST LINE OF THE SE ¼ NW ¼ SECTION 29-84-7; THENCE SOUTH ALONG
SAID WEST LINE TO THE SOUTH LINE OF THE SE ¼ NW ¼  SECTION 29-84-7; THENCE
EAST ALONG SAID SOUTH LINE TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING.



*Territory extends to centerline of all secondary roads adjacent to the above
described properties.



      G.   Amendment No. 6 Area means that portion of the City of
Hiawatha, Iowa, described in Amendment No. 6 to the Urban Renewal Plan for
the Hiawatha Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 10-106adopted May
19, 2010, and corrected by Resolution No. 10-257, adopted November 3, 2010,
which Amendment No. 6 Area includes the lots and parcels located within the
area legally described as follows:



Tom G. Sharpe and Katherina I. Sharpe (Linn County)



   Lot Four (4) containing 0.74 acres in Auditor’s Plat #448 filed
January 21, 1971, in Plat Records Volume 18, page 47; and Lot One (1)
Irregular Survey of the West Fractional Half of the Northwest Quarter (W.
Frl. ½ NW ¼) of Section 30, Township 84 North, Range 7 West of the 5th
P.M., containing 8.67 acres as shown in Book 3, page 126.



   And



   All that part of the 100 foot former right-of-way of the Chicago, Rock
Island and Pacific Railroad Company lying S-ly of a line drawn at right
angles to the centerline of said former right-of-way through the most N-ly
corner of Lot 4, Auditor’s Plat No. 448 and lying N-ly of the N-ly line of
the Public Highway, as described in Warranty Deed recorded in Volume 1886
page 365, records of the Linn County, Iowa, Recorder’s Office, extended
SE-ly across former Railroad right-of-way



Tim L. McCalley and Eunice R. McCalley (Linn County)



   Lot 3 and Lot 4, Auditor’s Plat No. 448, Linn County, Iowa



   And



   All that part of the 100 foot former right-of-way of the Chicago, Rock
Island and Pacific Railroad Company lying S-ly of the most N-ly line of Lot
2, Auditor’s Plat No. 448, Linn County, Iowa extended NE-ly across said
former right-of-way and lying N-ly of a line drawn at right angles to the
centerline of said former right-of-way through the most N-ly corner of Lot 4,
said Auditor’s Plat No. 448



Timothy A. Myers and Jean Flickinger (Linn County)



   Lot 4, Meadowbrook Estates Addition to Linn County, Iowa and all that
part of 100 foot former right-of-way of the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific
Railroad Company lying S-ly of the North line of the NW ¼ Section 30-84-7,
Linn County, Iowa and lying N-ly of the most N-ly line of Lot 2, Auditor’s
Plat No. 448, Linn County, Iowa, extended NE-ly across said former
right-of-way.



Edwin L. Arkema and Leona M. Arkema (Linn County)



   Lot 2, Meadowbrook Estates Addition to Linn County, Iowa



   And



   Lot 3, Meadowbrook Estates Addition to Linn County, Iowa, excepting
therefrom Plat of Survey #1069, Linn County, Iowa, being a part of Lot 3,
Meadowbrook Addition to Linn County, Iowa, as described in Volume 5651 at
Page 256 and recorded May 10, 2004, in the Office of the Linn County, Iowa
Recorder, subject to conditions, covenants, easements and restrictions of
record.



Rodney G. Powell and Connie S. Powell (Linn County)



   Lot 1, Meadowbrook Estates Addition to Linn County, Iowa



J. Patrick Geraghty and Pamela K. Geraghty (Linn County)



   Lot 5, Meadowbrook Estates Addition to Linn County, Iowa



Dorothea J. O’Brien Revocable Trust dated February 23, 2002 (Linn County)



   Lot 6, Meadowbrook Estates Addition to Linn County, Iowa



Charles D. Veldhuizen and Marsha R. Veldhuizen, Trustees, the Veldhuizen
Family Trust dated November 7, 1998 (Linn County)



   Lot 7, Meadowbrook Estates Addition to Linn County, Iowa



Richard L. White and Joyce A. White (Linn County)



   Lot 8 and Lot 9, Meadowbrook Estates Addition to Linn County, Iowa



Gary R. Grimm and Elsie R. Grimm (Linn County)



   That part of Lot 1 Irregular Survey NE ¼ Section 25-84-8 lying NE-ly
of the Public Highway except 149 feet and 3 inches off the East side thereof,
Linn County, Iowa and further excepting public highway



Gerard A. Herman and Linda L. Herman (Linn County)



   Lot 11, Meadowbrook Estates Addition to Linn County, Iowa



Winston D. Zenor and Deann M. Zenor (Linn County)



   Lot 10, Meadowbrook Estates Addition to Linn County, Iowa



Roland L. Hiemstra and Patty L. Hiemstra (Linn County)



   All that part of the West Twenty-three and One-half (23 ½) Acres of
the Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of Section
Thirty (30) lying Northerly and Easterly of the Public Highway extending
through the said Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼)
of said Section Thirty (30); and



   All that part of Lot Three (3), Irregular survey of the Southwest
Quarter (SW ¼) of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of said Section Thirty (30)
lying Northerly and Easterly of the Public Highway extending through said Lot
Three (3); all in Township Eighty-four (84) North, Range Seven (7), West of
the 5th P.M., Linn County, Iowa, excepting therefrom that portion conveyed to
Linn County, Iowa, by Warranty Deed recorded in Vol. 1877, page 668.



   And



   That part of the NW ¼ NE ¼ lying SW-ly of the public highway



   And



   West 13 ½ Acres SW ¼ NE ¼ and East 16 ½ Acres SE ¼ NW ¼ all in
Section 30-84-7, Linn County, Iowa except public highway



Iowa 7th Day Adventist Association (Linn County)



   Commencing at the Northwest corner of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of
the Northeast Quarter (NE ¼) of Section 30, Township 84 North, Range 7 West
of the 5th P.M., thence South along the West line of said Northwest Quarter
of the Northeast Quarter (NW ¼ NE ¼) of Section 30, Township 84 North,
Range 7, 823.5 feet; thence South 85°41’ E 33.1 feet to the East line of
County Road and point of beginning; thence S 85°41’ East 326.5 feet;
thence South 4°20’ West 377.6 feet to the Northeasterly line of County
Road; thence North 52°19’ West 375.9 feet along the Northeasterly line of
County Road; thence North 52°19’ West 375.9 feet along the Northeasterly
line of County Road; thence North 171.1 feet along the East line of County
Road to point of beginning, and containing two (2) acres all in the Northwest
Quarter of the Northeast Quarter (NW ¼ NE ¼) of Section 30, Township 84
North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M.



   The West line of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter (NW ¼
NE ¼) of Section 30, Township 84 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M. is
assumed to run North and South



   And



   Commencing at a point in the North line of the NW ¼ of NE ¼ of
Section 30, Township 84 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M., which point is
33 feet East of the Northwest corner of said NW ¼ NE ¼ of Section 30, Twp.
84 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M.; thence South 825.8 feet; thence South
85 degrees 41 minutes East, 326.5 feet; thence North 4 degrees 20 minutes
East 849.6 feet to point in the North line of said NW ¼ NE ¼ of Section 30,
Twp. 84 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M.; thence North 89 degrees 35
minutes West, 388.4 feet along the North line of said NW ¼ NE ¼ of Section
30, Twp. 84 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M. to the point of beginning.



Iowa Electric Light and Power Company – 70% interest, Central Iowa Power
Cooperative – 20% interest and Corn Belt Power Cooperative – 10% interest
(Linn County)



   The North 100 feet of the Southwest Quarter (SW ¼) of the Southeast
Quarter (SE ¼) of Section 18, Township 84 North, Range 7 West of the 5th
P.M., excepting therefrom the public highway; and the West 150 feet of the
Southwest Quarter (SW ¼) of the Southeast Quarter (SE ¼) of said Section
18, excepting therefrom the public highway; and the North 50 feet of the West
150 feet of the Northwest Quarter (NW ¼) of the Northeast Quarter (NE ¼) of
Section 19, Township 84 North, Range 7 West of the 5th P.M. excepting
therefrom the public highway.



Jane Ellen Fink Revocable Trust dated May 22, 1997 (To be annexed)



   The SW Fractional ¼ of the SW ¼, except the right of way of the C. R.
I. & P. Ry. Co.; in Section 19, Township 84, Range &, Linn County, Iowa



   Subject to public highway and subject to covenants, conditions,
restrictions and easements of record.



Hawkeye Land Company %Rick Stickle (To be annexed)



100-foot wide strip of abandoned railroad right of way in the SW Fractional
¼ of the SW ¼, in Section 19, Township 84 North, Range 7 West, Linn County,
Iowa



Patrick Kilburg and Diane L. Kilburg (To be annexed)



   The North One-Half (N ½) of the Southwest Quarter (SW ¼) of Section
Nineteen (19), Township Eighty-four (84) North, Range Seven (7) West of the
5th P.M., excepting Rolling Prairie Estates First Addition to Linn County,
Iowa



Jane Ellen Fink Revocable Trust dated May 22, 1997 (City of Hiawatha)



   The SW ¼ of the SE ¼; and



   The SE ¼ of the SW ¼, excepting therefrom V & J First Addition to
Linn County, Iowa;



   All in Section 19, Township 84, Range 7, Linn County, Iowa



Rodney C Saari and Vicki L. Saari (City of Hiawatha)



   Lot #1, V and J First Addition to Linn County, Iowa



Francis J. Pruss Estate (City of Hiawatha)



   Tract One:



   NW ¼ SE ¼ and that part of the NE ¼ SE ¼ lying Westerly of
Interstate 380, all in Section 19-84-7, Linn County, Iowa



   Tract Two:



   SW ¼ NE ¼ except road Section 19-84-7, Linn County, Iowa



Dell Ridge, LLC, Forrest Kramer, Manager (City of Hiawatha)



   NW ¼ NE ¼ Section 19-84-7, Linn County, Iowa except North 50 feet
West 150 feet thereof; and SW ¼ SE ¼ Section 18-84-7, Linn County, Iowa
excepting therefrom North 100 feet of said SW ¼ SE ¼ excepting therefrom
West 150 feet and further excepting therefrom West 150 feet said SW ¼ SE ¼
excepting from all the above the public highways, together with servient
easements and estates and subject to covenants, easements and restrictions of
record.



Mooney-Engle Land Company, LLC (City of Hiawatha)



   N 50 acres E ½ NW ¼ Section 19-84-7, Linn County, Iowa subject to
public highway and easements of record.



Mooney-Engle Land Company, LLC (Linn County)



   That part of the E ½ NW ¼ Section 19-84-7, Linn County, Iowa lying
South of the N 50 Acres thereof and lining North of Sharon’s First Addition
to Linn County, Iowa, and Sharon’s Third Addition to Linn County, Iowa



Loggerhead Road (City of Hiawatha)



   That part of Loggerhead Road lying contiguous and adjacent to in the N
50 acres of the E ½ of the NW ¼, the NW ¼ of the NE ¼, except the North
50 feet of the West 150 feet thereof, the SE ¼ of the NW ¼, the NE ¼ of
the SW ¼, the SW ¼ of the NE ¼, the NW ¼ of the SE ¼, the SE ¼ of the
SW ¼ and the SW ¼ SE ¼ all in Section 19-84-7, Linn County, Iowa



Loggerhead Road (Linn County)



   That part of Loggerhead Road lying contiguous and adjacent to the SW ¼
of the SW ¼ and the SW ¼ of the SE ¼, Section 18-84-7, and lying
contiguous and adjacent to the NE ¼ of the NW ¼ and the NW ¼ of the NE ¼,
Section 19-84-7 all in Linn County, Iowa



Todd Hills Road (City of Hiawatha)



   That part of Todd Hills Road lying contiguous and adjacent to the NE ¼
of the NW ¼, Section 19-84-7, Linn County, Iowa



Todd Hills Road (Linn County)



   That part of Todd Hills Road lying contiguous and adjacent to the SW ¼
of the SW ¼, Section 18-84-7, Linn County, Iowa,



Hay Lane (City of Hiawatha)



   That part of Hay Lane lying contiguous and adjacent to the NW ¼ of the
NE ¼ and the SW ¼ of the NE ¼, Section 19-84-7, Linn County, Iowa



Interstate 380 (City of Hiawatha)



   That part of Interstate 380 lying contiguous and adjacent to the S ½
of the SE ¼ in Section 18-84-7, excepting the North 100 feet thereof, Linn
County, Iowa; the NE ¼ of Section 19-84-7 and the N ½ of the SE ¼ of
Section 19-84-7, Linn County, Iowa



Tower Terrace Road (Linn County)



   That part of Tower Terrace Road lying in the unincorporated area of
Linn County, north of the centerline lying contiguous and adjacent to the SW
¼ of the NE ¼ and the SE ¼ of the NW ¼ all in Section 19-84-7, Linn
County, Iowa



   And



   That part of Tower Terrace Road lying in the unincorporated area of
Linn County north of the centerline lying contiguous and adjacent to Lot
Three (3), Irregular Survey of the Southwest Quarter (SW ¼) of the Northwest
Quarter (NW ¼) lying Northerly and Easterly of the Public Highway extending
through said Lot Three (3) in Section Thirty (30), Township Eighty-four (84)
North, Range Seven (7) West of the 5th, Linn County, Iowa.



   And



   That part of Tower Terrance Road lying in the unincorporated area of
Linn County lying contiguous and adjacent Lot Four (4) containing 0.74 acres
in Auditor’s Plat #448 filed January 21, 1971, in Plat Records Volume 18,
page 47; and Lot One (1) Irregular Survey of the West Fractional Half of the
Northwest Quarter (W. Frl. ½ NW ¼) of Section 30, Township 84 North, Range
7 West of the 5th P.M., containing 8.67 acres as shown in Book 3, page 126.



   And



   That part of Tower Terrace Road lying in the unincorporated area of
Linn County lying contiguous and adjacent to Lot 7, Irregular Survey of the
SW ¼ NW ¼, Section 30-84-7, Linn County, Iowa and a 100-foot wide strip of
land as same is presently laid out and located in the east half of the
Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 30, Township 84 North,
Range 7 West, Linn County, said strip commences at the East/West centerline
of said Section and runs northerly 1040 feet.



   And



   That part of Tower Terrace Road lying in the unincorporated area of
Linn County lying contiguous and adjacent to Lot 3 and Lot 4, Auditor’s
Plat No. 448, Linn County, Iowa and all that part of the 100 foot former
right-of-way of the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad Company lying
S-ly of the most N-ly line of Lot 2, Auditor’s Plat No. 448, Linn County,
Iowa extended NE-ly across said former right-of-way and lying N-ly of a line
drawn at right angles to the centerline of said former right-of-way through
the most N-ly corner of Lot 4, said Auditor’s Plat No. 448.



   And



   That part of Tower Terrace Road lying in the unincorporated area of
Linn County lying contiguous and adjacent to Lot 1, Lot 9 and Lot 11,
Meadowbrook Estates Addition to Linn County, Iowa



   And



   That part of Tower Terrace Road lying in the unincorporated area of
Linn County lying contiguous and adjacent to Lot 8, Tower Acres Third
Addition to Linn County, Iowa



   And



   That part of Tower Terrace Road lying in the unincorporated area of
Linn County lying contiguous and adjacent to Lot 1, Tower Acres Addition to
Linn County, Iowa



   And



   That part of Tower Terrace Road lying in the unincorporated area of
Linn County north of the centerline lying contiguous and adjacent to Lot 8,
Meadowbrook Estates Addition to Linn County, Iowa



   And



   That part of Tower Terrace Road lying in the unincorporated area of
Linn County north of the centerline lying contiguous and adjacent to that
part of Lot 1 Irregular Survey NE ¼ Section 25-84-8 lying NE-ly of the
Public Highway except 149 feet and 3 inches off the East side thereof, Linn
County, Iowa and further excepting public highway



   And



   That part of Tower Terrace Road lying in the unincorporated area of
Linn County lying contiguous and adjacent to Tower Drive in the NW ¼ of the
NW ¼, Section 30-84-7, Linn County, Iowa



Hunt Road (Linn County)



   That part of Hunt Road lying contiguous and adjacent to the SW ¼ of
the NE ¼, the SE ¼ of the NE ¼, the NW ¼ of the SW ¼ and the NE ¼ of
the SW ¼ all in Section 19-84-7



Tower Drive (Linn County)



   That part of Tower Drive lying within Meadowbrook Estates Addition to
Linn County, Iowa



Springbrook Drive (Linn County)



   That part of Springbrook Drive lying within Meadowbrook Estates
Addition to Linn County, Iowa



      H.   Amendment No. 7 did not add or remove land.



      I.   Amendment No. 8 did not add or remove land.



      J.   Amendment No. 9 did not add or remove land.



      K.   Amendment No. 10 Area means that portion of the City of
Hiawatha, State of Iowa, described in Amendment No. 10 to the Urban Renewal
Plan for the Hiawatha Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 15-020 on
the 18th day of February, 2015, which Amendment No. 10 Area includes the lots
and parcels located within the area legally described as follows:



   The West 40 rods of the SW ¼ NE 1/4 Section 18-84-7, Linn County,
Iowa, except the South 24 rods thereof and further excepting the public
highways



   And



   The South 24 rods of the West 40 rods of the SW ¼ NE 1/4 Section
18-84-7, Linn County, Iowa, subject to public highway



   And



   Beginning at a point S88"39'E 662.2 ft. from the center of said Sec.
18, said point being on the South line of said NE 1/4; thence N0"17'W 1266.1
ft.; thence N78"37 ½’E 284.2 ft.; thence S88"30 ½’E 75.2 ft.; thence
S13" 24 ½’E 966.0 ft.; thence S1"23'E 394.3 ft. to a point on the said
South line; thence N88"39'W 581.2 ft. along the South line, to the point of
beginning;  Containing 14.97 acres more or less.



   Note: The South line of the NE 1/4 of said Sec. 18 is assumed to bear
S88"39'E.



   AND



   Lot 1, Bowers Second Addition to Linn County, Iowa



   And



   That part of the Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter in Section
7-84-7, Linn County, Iowa lying West of Interstate 380



   And



   That part of the Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter in Section
7-84-7, Linn County, Iowa lying West of Interstate 380



   AND



   That part of Cora Mae Lane lying contiguous and adjacent to Lot 1,
Bowers First Addition to Linn County, Iowa and contiguous and adjacent to Lot
1, Bowers Second Addition to Linn County, Iowa also lying in the Northwest
Quarter of the Northeast Quarter in Section 18-84-7, Linn County, Iowa



   AND



   The West Half of Interstate 380 lying adjacent and contiguous to
Brittany Estates First Addition to Linn County, Iowa and the North 100 feet
of the Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter and the Northwest Quarter
of the Northeast Quarter in Section 18-84-7, the Southwest Quarter of the
Southeast Quarter and the Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter in
Section 7-84-7, Linn County, Iowa



Except



   That part of the West Half of Interstate 380 lying adjacent and
contiguous to Lot 3, Bowers Second Addition to Linn County, Iowa, also
located in the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter in Section 18-84-7,
Linn County, Iowa



   AND



   That part of County Home Road lying adjacent and contiguous to the
Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter in Section 18-84-7, and adjacent
and contiguous to Lot 1, Bowers Second Addition to Linn County, Iowa and Lot
1, Bowers First Addition to Linn County, Iowa, also located in the Northwest
Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 18-84-7, Linn County, Iowa



   AND



   The East Half of Loggerhead Road lying adjacent and contiguous to the
Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter in Section 18-84-7, Linn County,
Iowa



   The territory extends to the centerline of all secondary roads adjacent
to the above described properties.



      L.   Amendment No. 11 did not add or remove land.



      M.   Amendment No. 12 did not add or remove land.



      N.   Amendment No. 13 Area means that portion of the City of
Hiawatha, State of Iowa, described in Amendment No. 13 to the Hiawatha Urban
Renewal Plan for the Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 18-109 on
the 20th day of June, 2018, which Amendment No 13 Area removes the lots and
parcels located within the area legally described as follows:



   Lot 3 and Part of Lots 4, 5 and 6, Auditor’s Plat No.345, Linn
County, Iowa, described as follows:



   Beginning at the Northeast corner of Lot 3, Auditor’s Plat No.345,
Linn County, Iowa; Thence S 00°44'16” E along the East line of said Lot 3
to a Southerly corner of Lot 3, Hawkeye Communication First Addition to the
City of Hiawatha, Linn County. Iowa a distance of 10.00 feet; Thence N
87°54'43” E along a south line of said Lot 3. Hawkeye Communication First
Addition a distance of 124.78 feet; thence southwesterly 125.92 feet along
the arc of a 260.00 foot radius curve concaved Northwesterly (chord bears S
34°39’54” W a distance of 124.69 feet); Thence S 48°32’21” W a
distance of 48.97 feet; Thence N 41°23’44” W a distance of 45.00 feet;
thence S 48°32’21” W to the easterly right-of-way of North Center Point
Road a distance of 42.84 feet; Thence N 41°31’03” W along said easterly
right-of-way to the northwest corner of said Lot 3, Auditor’s Plat No. 345
a distance of 146.15 feet; Thence N 79°44’33” E along the north line of
said Lot 3, Auditor’s Plat No. 345 to the Point of Beginning a distance of
143.83 feet.



   Said parcel contains 0.50 acres and subject to easements and
restrictions of record.



AND



   Part of Lot 5, Auditor's Plat No. 345, Linn County, Iowa, and Part of
the existing right-of-way of Robins Road, Hiawatha, Iowa, described as
follows:



   Beginning at the west corner of Lot 1, Hartl’s First Addition to
Hiawatha, Iowa; Thence N 42°12’02” W along the easterly right-of-way of
North Center Point Road a distance of 182.22 feet; Thence N 41°31 ’03”W
along said easterly right-of-way a distance of 46.32 feet; Thence N
48°32’20” E a distance of 42.26 feet: Thence N 41°13’23” W a
distance of 45.00 feet: Thence N 48°32’21” E a distance of 49.14 feet;
Thence northeasterly 223.18 feet along the arc of a 340.00 foot radius curve
concaved northwesterly to the east right-of-way of Robins Road (chord bears N
29°44’04'’ E a distance of 219.19 feet); Thence S 00°41 ’55” E
along said east right-of-way to the Pont of Beginning a distance of 454.40
feet.



   Said parcel contains 0.76 acres and subject to easements and
restrictions of record.



AND



   Part of Lot 1, Auditor’s Plat No. 322, Linn County, Iowa, described
as follows:



   Beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 1, Auditor’s Plat No. 322.
Linn County, Iowa: Thence N 88°49’37”E along the north line of said Lot
1 a distance of 29.42 feet; Thence S 41°22'50” E a distance of 107.85
feet; Thence S 48°32’21” W a distance of 44.98 feet; Thence S 41
°36’29” E a distance of 44.79 feet: Thence southwesterly 172.68 feet
along the arc of a 260.00 foot radius curve concaved northerly (chord bears S
69°51’24” W a distance of 169.52 feet); Thence S 88°52’59” W to a
West line of said Lot 1 a distance of 83.94 feet; Thence N 03°52’31” W
along said west line to the southwest corner of Lot 9 of said Auditor’s
Plat a distance of 80.52 feet; Thence N 88°50’03” E along the south line
of said Lot 9 and south line of Lot 10 of said Auditor’s Plat to the
southeast corner of said Lot 10 a distance of 158.89 feet; Thence N
03°22’36” W along a West line of said Lot 1 to said northwest corner and
the Point of Beginning a distance of 120.25 feet.



   Said parcel contains 0.57 acres and is subject to easements and
restrictions of record.



   AND



   ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 6; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG B UNIT 6; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 8; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B
UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 12; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 13;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG C UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 12; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C
UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 16; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 6;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 16; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 19; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG D UNIT 26; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 28; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E
UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 12;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 17; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 18; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG E UNIT 19



   SW 1/4 SE NE SW SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



   W1/2 NE SE SW SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



   S 16RDS N 24RDS NW SE SW SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



      A.P. #396 LOT 8 W67.5'



   HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 1; HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 5; HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 6;
HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 8



   S 8RDS N 24RDS SW NE SW-EX E250' SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



   ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 2; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 5; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG A UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A
UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 13; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 1;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 2; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 16; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG C UNIT 4; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 5; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C
UNIT 20; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 22; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 1;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 2; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 12; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG D UNIT 13; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D
UNIT 17; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 21; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 22;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 33; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 34; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG E UNIT 1; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 7; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E
UNIT 8; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 22;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 24; HAWKEYE COMMUNICATIONS 1 ST LOT 3 - EX RD



   N 8RDS NW SE SW SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



      A.P. #396 LOTS 1 & 2



      A.P. #396 LOT 5



      A.P. #396 LOT 6



      A.P. #396 LOT 11



   HARTLS’ 1 ST LOTS 2 & 3



   HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 9



      P.O.S. #2050 PARCEL A



      P.O.S. #2050 PARCEL B



   ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 1; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 7; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG A UNIT 12; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A
UNIT 16; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 4;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 7; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO
BLDG B UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 6; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 7;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 8; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG C UNIT 13; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 19; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C
UNIT 24; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 4;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 7; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 8; ROBINWOOD CONDO
BLDG D UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT
18; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 20; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 23; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG D UNIT 24; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 27; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D
UNIT 30; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 31; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 36;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 2; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD CONDO
BLDG E UNIT 4; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 5; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 16;
S 8RDS SW NE SW-EX E250' SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



      P.O.S. #60 PARCEL A



      A.P. #322 LOT 9 EX P.O.S. #60, A.P. #396 LOT 4



      A.P. #396 LOT 9



      A.P. #396 LOT 10



   ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 4; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 8; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG A UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 5; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B
UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 1; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 2;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG C UNIT 17; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 18; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C
UNIT 21; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 23; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 5;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG D UNIT 25; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 29; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D
UNIT 32; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 35; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 6;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 13; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG E UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 20; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E
UNIT 21; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 23



   N66' S198’ W200' NE SW EX RD SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



      A.P. #322 LOT 10; A.P. #396 LOT 3



      A.P. #396 LOT 7 & LOT 8 EX W67.5'



   HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 7



      O.   Amendment No. 14 Area means that portion of the City of
Hiawatha. State of Iowa, described in Amendment No. 14 to the Hiawatha Urban
Renewal Plan for the Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 18-123 on
the 18th day of July, 2018, which Amendment No. 14 Area adds the lots and
parcels located within the area legally described as follows:



   Lot 3 and Part of Lots 4, 5 and 6, Auditor’s Plat No.345, Linn
County, Iowa, described as follows:



   Beginning at the northeast corner of Lot 3, Auditor’s Plat No.345,
Linn County, Iowa; Thence S 00°44’16” E along the East line of said Lot
3 to a southerly corner of Lot 3, Hawkeye Communication First Addition to the
City of Hiawatha, Linn County, Iowa a distance of 10.00 feet; Thence N
87°54’43” E along a south line of said Lot 3, Hawkeye Communication
First Addition a distance of 124.78 feet; Thence southwesterly 125.92 feet
along the arc of a 260.00 foot radius curve concaved northwesterly (chord
bears S 34°39’54” W a distance of 124.69 feet); Thence S 48°32’21”
W a distance of 48.97 feet; Thence N 41°23’44” W a distance of 45.00
feet; Thence S 48°32’21” W to the easterly right-of-way of North Center
Point Road a distance of 42.84 feet: Thence N 41°31’03” W along said
easterly right-of-way to the northwest corner of said Lot 3, Auditor’s Plat
No. 345 a distance of 146.15 feet: Thence N 79°44’33” E along the north
line of said Lot 3, Auditor’s Plat No. 345 to the Point of Beginning a
distance of 143.83 feet.



   Said parcel contains 0.50 acres and subject to easements and
restrictions of record.



AND



   Part of Lot 5, Auditor’s Plat No. 345, Linn County, Iowa and Part of
the existing right-of-way of Robins Road, Hiawatha, Iowa, described as
follows:



   Beginning at the west corner of Lot 1, Haiti’s First Addition to
Hiawatha. Iowa: Thence N 42°12’02” W along the easterly right-of-way of
North Center Point Road a distance of 182.22 feet; Thence N 41 °31 ’03”W
along said easterly right-of-way a distance of 46.32 feet; Thence N
48°32’20” E a distance of 42.26 feet; Thence N 41°13’23” W a
distance of 45.00 feet; Thence N 48°32’21” E a distance of 49.14 feet;
Thence northeasterly 223.18 feet along the arc of a 340.00 foot radius curve
concaved northwesterly to the east right-of-way of Robins Road (chord bears N
29°44'04” E a distance of 219.19 feet); Thence S 00°41’55” E along
said east right-of-way to the Pont of Beginning a distance of 454.40 feet.



   Said parcel contains 0.76 acres and subject to easements and
restrictions of record.



AND



   Part of Lot 1. Auditor’s Plat No. 322, Linn County, Iowa, described
as follows:



   Beginning at the Northwest corner of Lot 1, Auditor's Plat No. 322,
Linn County, Iowa; Thence N 88°49’37”E along the North line of said Lot
1 a distance of 29.42 feet; Thence S 41°22’50” E a distance of 107.85
feet; Thence S 48°32’21” W a distance of 44.98 feet; Thence S
41°36’29” E a distance of 44.79 feet; Thence southwesterly 172.68 feet
along the arc of a 260.00 foot radius curve concaved northerly (chord bears S
69°51'24” W a distance of 169.52 feet); Thence S 88°52’59" W to a west
line of said Lot 1 a distance of 83.94 feet; Thence N 03°52’31” W along
said West line to the southwest corner of Lot 9 of said Auditor’s Plat a
distance of 80.52 feet; Thence N 88°50’03” E along the south line of
said Lot 9 and south line of Lot 10 of said Auditor's Plat to the southeast
corner of said Lot 10 a distance of 158.89 feet; Thence N 03°22’36” W
along a west line of said Lot 1 to said northwest corner and the Point of
Beginning a distance of 120.25 feet.



   Said parcel contains 0.57 acres and is subject to easements and
restrictions of record.



AND



   ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 6; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG B UNIT 6; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 8; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B
UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 12; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 13;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG C UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 12; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C
UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 16; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 6;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 16; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 19; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG D UNIT 26; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 28; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E
UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 12;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 17; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 18; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG E UNIT 19



   SW 1/4 SE NE SW SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



   W 1/2 NE SE SW SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



   S 16RDS N 24RDS NW SE SW SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



      A.P. #396 LOT 8 W67.5'



   HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 1; HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 5; HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 6;
HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 8



   S 8RDS N 24RDS SW NE SW-EX E250’ SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



   ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 2; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 5; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG A UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A
UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 13; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 1;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 2; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 16; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG C UNIT 4; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 5; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C
UNIT 20; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 22; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 1;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 2; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 12; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG D UNIT 13; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D
UNIT 17; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 21; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 22;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 33; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 34; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG E UNIT 1; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 7; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E
UNIT 8; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 22;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 24



   HAWKEYE COMMUNICATIONS 1ST LOT 3 - EX RD



   N 8RDS NW SE SW SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



      A.P. #396 LOTS 1 & 2



      A.P. #396 LOT 5



      A.P. #396 LOT 6



      A.P. #396 LOT 11



   HARTLS’ 1ST LOTS 2 & 3



   HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 9



      P.O.S. #2050 PARCEL A



      P.O.S. #2050 PARCEL B



   ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 1; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 7; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG A UNIT 12; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A
UNIT 16; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 4;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 7; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO
BLDG B UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 6; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 7;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 8; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG C UNIT 13; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 19; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C
UNIT 24; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 4;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 7; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 8; ROBINWOOD CONDO
BLDG D UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT
18; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 20; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 23; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG D UNIT 24; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 27; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D
UNIT 30; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 31; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 36;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 2; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD CONDO
BLDG E UNIT 4; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 5; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 16



   S 8RDS SW NE SW-EX E250' SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



      P.O.S. #60 PARCEL A



      A.P. #322 LOT 9 EX P.O.S. #60 A.P. #396 LOT 4



   W100' SENESESW SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



      A.P. #396 LOT 9



      A.P. #396 LOT 10



   ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 4; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 8; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG A UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 5; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B
UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 1; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 2;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG C UNIT 17; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 18; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C
UNIT 21; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 23; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 5;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG D UNIT 25; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 29; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D
UNIT 32; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 35; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 6;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 13; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG E UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 20; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E
UNIT 21; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 23



   N66' SI98’ W200' NE SW EX RD SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



      A.P. #322 LOT 10 A.P. #396 LOT 3



      A.P. #396 LOT 7 & LOT 8 EX W67.5’



   HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 7



      P.   Amended Area means that portion of the City of Hiawatha,
State of Iowa, included within the Original Area (described in paragraph A
above), Amendment No. 2 Area (described in paragraph C above), Amendment No.
3 Area (described in paragraph D above), Amendment No. 4 Area (described in
paragraph E above). Amendment No. 5 Area (described in paragraph F above),
Amendment No. 6 Area (described in paragraph G above), Amendment No. 10 Area
(described in paragraph K above), and Amendment No. 14 Area (described in
paragraph O above), less the Amendment No. 13 Area (described in paragraph N
above).



   2.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Amended Area,
legally described in subsection 1 hereof, by and for the benefit of the State
of Iowa, County of Linn, Iowa, Cedar Rapids Community School District, and
all other taxing districts from and after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter shall be divided as hereinafter provided.



   3.   As to the Original Area, that portion of the taxes which would
be produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each
of the taxing districts taxing property in the Original Area upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Original Area as
shown on the assessment roll as of January 1, 1990, being the first day of
the calendar year preceding the effective date of Ordinance No. 279, shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective
taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other
property taxes are paid. The taxes so determined shall be referred herein as
the “base period taxes” for such area.



   As to Amendment No. 2 Area, base period taxes shall be computed in the
same manner using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of
January 1, 1997. being the assessment roll applicable to property in such
area as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of
Ordinance No. 467.



   As to Amendment No. 3 Area, base period taxes shall be computed in the
same manner using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of
January 1, 2000, being the assessment roll applicable to property in such
area as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of
Ordinance No. 512.



   As to Amendment No. 4 Area, base period taxes shall be computed in the
same manner using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of
January 1, 2001, being the assessment roll applicable to property in such
area as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of
Ordinance No. 513.



   As to Amendment No. 5 Area, base period taxes shall be computed in the
same manner using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of
January 1, 2004, being the assessment roll applicable to property in such
area as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of
Ordinance No. 584.



   As to Amendment No. 6 Area, base period taxes shall be computed in the
same manner using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of
January 1, 2009, being the assessment roll applicable to property in such
area as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of
Ordinance No. 684.



   As to Amendment No. 10 Area, base period taxes shall be computed in the
same manner using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of
January 1, 2014, being the assessment roll applicable to property in such
area as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of
Ordinance No. 824.



   As to Amendment No. 13 Area, base period taxes shall be reduced due to
the removal of area from the above sub-areas.



   As to Amendment No. 14 Area, base period taxes shall be computed in the
same manner using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of
January 1, 2017, being the assessment roll applicable to the property in such
area as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter.



   4.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base
period taxes for the Amended Area, determined for each sub-area thereof as
provided in subsection 3 of this section, shall be allocated to and when
collected be paid into the special tax increment fund previously established
by the City of Hiawatha. State of Iowa, to pay the principal of and interest
on loans, monies advanced to, or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded,
assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under authority of Section 403.9
or Section 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City of Hiawatha,
State of Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal
projects undertaken within the Amended Area pursuant to the Urban Renewal
Plan, as amended, except that (i) taxes for the regular and voter-approved
physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to
Code of Iowa Section 298.2 and taxes for the instructional support program of
a school district imposed pursuant to Code of Iowa Section 257.19 (but in
each case only to the extent required under Code of Iowa Section 403.19(2));
(ii) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district;
(iii) taxes imposed under Code of Iowa Section 346.27(22) related to joint
county-city buildings; and (iv) any other exceptions under Code of Iowa
Section 403.19 shall be collected against all taxable property within the
Amended Area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.



   5.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the areas of the Amended Area exceeds the total assessed value of
the taxable property in the areas shown by the assessment rolls referred to
in subsection 3 of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon
the taxable property in the Amended Area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the
same manner as all other property taxes.



   6.   At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the City of Hiawatha. State of Iowa, referred to
in Section 4 hereof have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes
upon the taxable property in the Amended Area shall be paid into the funds
for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other
property.



   7.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.  The provisions of this
chapter are intended and shall be construed so as to continue the division of
taxes from property within the Amended Area under the provisions of Section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as authorized in Ordinance Nos. 279, 467, 512,
513, 584, 684, 824 and 900, and to fully implement the provisions of Section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the Amendment No. 14 Area as described above. 
Notwithstanding any provisions in any prior ordinances or other documents,
the provisions of this chapter and all prior ordinances relating to the Urban
Renewal Area, as amended, shall be construed to continue the division of
taxes from property within the Amended Area to the maximum period of time
allowed by Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa.  In the event that any
provision of this chapter shall be determined to be contrary to law it shall
not affect other provisions or application of this chapter, which shall at
all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of Section 403.19 of
the Code of Iowa with reference to the Amended Area and the territory
contained therein.



CHAPTER 9
URBAN REVITALIZATION



9.01   DESIGNATION OF REVITALIZATION AREA.



   In accordance with Chapter 404 of the Code of Iowa, the following
described area of the City is hereby designated as the Town Village Center
Urban Revitalization Area. 



   Lot 3 and Part of Lots 4, 5 and 6, Auditor’s Plat No.345, Linn
County, Iowa, described as follows:



   Beginning at the northeast corner of Lot 3, Auditor’s Plat No.345,
Linn County, Iowa; Thence S 00°44'16? E along the east line of said Lot 3 to
a southerly corner of Lot 3, Hawkeye Communication First Addition to the City
of Hiawatha, Linn County, Iowa, a distance of 10.00 feet; Thence N 87°54'43?
E along a south line of said Lot 3, Hawkeye Communication First Addition a
distance of 124.78 feet; Thence southwesterly 125.92 feet along the arc of a
260.00 foot radius curve concaved northwesterly (chord bears S 34°39'54? W a
distance of 124.69 feet); Thence S 48°32'21? W a distance of 48.97 feet;
Thence N 41°23'44? W a distance of 45.00 feet; Thence S 48°32'21? W to the
easterly right-of-way of North Center Point Road a distance of 42.84 feet;
Thence N 41°31'03? W along said easterly right-of-way to the northwest
corner of said Lot 3, Auditor’s Plat No. 345 a distance of 146.15 feet;
Thence N 79°44'33? E along the north line of said Lot 3, Auditor’s Plat
No. 345 to the Point of Beginning a distance of 143.83 feet.



   Said parcel contains 0.50 acres and subject to easements and
restrictions of record.



   AND



   Part of Lot 5, Auditor’s Plat No. 345, Linn County, Iowa, and Part of
the existing right-of-way of Robins Road, Hiawatha, Iowa, described as
follows:



   Beginning at the west corner of Lot 1, Hartls’ First Addition to
Hiawatha, Iowa; Thence N 42°12'02? W along the easterly right-of-way of
North Center Point Road a distance of 182.22 feet; Thence N 41°31'03? W
along said easterly right-of-way a distance of 46.32 feet; Thence N
48°32'20? E a distance of 42.26 feet; Thence N 41°13'23? W a distance of
45.00 feet; Thence N 48°32'21? E a distance of 49.14 feet; Thence
northeasterly 223.18 feet along the arc of a 340.00 foot radius curve
concaved northwesterly to the east right-of-way of Robins Road (chord bears N
29°44'04? E a distance of 219.19 feet); Thence S 00°41'55? E along said
east right-of-way to the Pont of Beginning a distance of 454.40 feet.



   Said parcel contains 0.76 acres and subject to easements and
restrictions of record.



   AND



   Part of Lot 1, Auditor’s Plat No. 322, Linn County, Iowa, described
as follows:



   Beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 1, Auditor’s Plat No. 322,
Linn County, Iowa; Thence N 88°49'37?E along the north line of said Lot 1 a
distance of 29.42 feet; Thence S 41°22'50? E a distance of 107.85 feet;
Thence S 48°32'21? W a distance of 44.98 feet; Thence S 41°36'29? E a
distance of 44.79 feet; Thence southwesterly 172.68 feet along the arc of a
260.00 foot radius curve concaved northerly (chord bears S 69°51'24? W a
distance of 169.52 feet); Thence S 88°52'59? W to a West line of said Lot 1
a distance of 83.94 feet; Thence N 03°52'31? W along said west line to the
southwest corner of Lot 9 of said Auditor’s Plat a distance of 80.52 feet;
Thence N 88°50'03? E along the south line of said Lot 9 and south line of
Lot 10 of said Auditor’s Plat to the southeast corner of said Lot 10 a
distance of 158.89 feet; Thence N 03°22'36? W along a west line of said Lot
1 to said northwest corner and the Point of Beginning a distance of 120.25
feet.



   Said parcel contains 0.57 acres and is subject to easements and
restrictions of record.



   AND



   ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 6; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG B UNIT 6; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 8; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B
UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 12; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 13;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG C UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 12; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C
UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 16; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 6;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 16; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 19; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG D UNIT 26; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 28; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E
UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 12;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 17; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 18; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG E UNIT 19



   SW 1/4 SE NE SW SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



   W 1/2 NE SE SW SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



   S 16RDS N 24RDS NW SE SW SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



      A.P. #396 LOT 8 W67.5'



   HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 1; HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 5; HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 6;
HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 8



   S 8RDS N 24RDS SW NE SW-EX E250' SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



   ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 2; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 5; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG A UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A
UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 13; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 1;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 2; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 16; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG C UNIT 4 ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 5 ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT
20; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 22; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 1; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG D UNIT 2; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 12; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D
UNIT 13; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 17;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 21; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 22; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG D UNIT 33; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 34; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E
UNIT 1 ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 7; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 8;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 22; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG E UNIT 24



   HAWKEYE COMMUNICATIONS 1ST LOT 3 - EX RD



   N 8RDS NW SE SW SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



      A.P. #396 LOTS 1 & 2



      A.P. #396 LOT 5



      A.P. #396 LOT 6



      A.P. #396 LOT 11



   HARTLS’ 1ST LOTS 2 & 3



   HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 9



      P.O.S. #2050 PARCEL A



      P.O.S. #2050 PARCEL B



   ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 1; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 7; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG A UNIT 12; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A
UNIT 16; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 4;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 7; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO
BLDG B UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 6; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 7;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 8; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG C UNIT 13; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 19; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C
UNIT 24; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 4;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 7; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 8; ROBINWOOD CONDO
BLDG D UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 11; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT
18; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 20; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 23; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG D UNIT 24; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 27; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D
UNIT 30; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 31; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 36;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 2; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 3; ROBINWOOD CONDO
BLDG E UNIT 4; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 5; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 16



   S 8RDS SW NE SW-EX E250' SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



      P.O.S. #60 PARCEL A



      A.P. #322 LOT 9 EX P.O.S. #60; A.P. #396 LOT 4



   W100' SE NE SE SW SEC 33 TWP 84 R 7



      A.P. #396 LOT 9



      A.P. #396 LOT 10



   ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 4; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG A UNIT 8; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG A UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B UNIT 5; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG B
UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 1; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 2;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 10; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 14; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG C UNIT 17; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 18; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C
UNIT 21; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG C UNIT 23; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 5;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG D UNIT 25; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 29; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D
UNIT 32; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG D UNIT 35; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 6;
ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 9; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 13; ROBINWOOD
CONDO BLDG E UNIT 15; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 20; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E
UNIT 21; ROBINWOOD CONDO BLDG E UNIT 23



   N66' SI98’ W200' NE SW EX RD SEC 33; TWP 84 R 7



      A.P. #322 LOT 10; A.P. #396 LOT 3



      A.P. #396 LOT 7 & LOT 8 EX W67.5'



   HARTLS’ 1ST LOT 7



   The Urban Revitalization Plan for the City is on file in the office of
the Clerk.



CHAPTER 15
MAYOR



 

15.01  Term of Office
 
15.04  Compensation


15.02  Powers and Duties
 
15.05  Voting


15.03  Appointments
 



 



15.01   TERM OF OFFICE.



   The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)



15.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:



   1.   Chief Executive Officer.  Act as the chief executive officer
of the City and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all City
departments except for supervisory duties delegated by the City Council to
the City Administrator, and have the power to examine all functions of the
City departments, their records, and to request special reports from
department heads through the City Administrator at any time.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])



   2.   Proclamation of Emergency.  Have authority to take command of
the police and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination
that a time of emergency or public danger exists.  Within the City limits,
the Mayor has all the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])



   3.   Special Meetings.  Call special meetings of the Council when
the Mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.   



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])



   4.   Mayor’s Veto.  Sign, veto, or take no action on an
ordinance, amendment, or resolution passed by the Council.  The Mayor may
veto an ordinance, amendment, or resolution within 14 days after passage. 
The Mayor shall explain the reasons for the veto in a written message to the
Council at the time of the veto.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2])



   5.   Reports to Council.  Make such oral or written reports to the
Council as required.  These reports shall concern municipal affairs
generally, the municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for
Council action.



   6.   Negotiations.  Represent the City in all negotiations properly
entered into in accordance with law or ordinance.  The Mayor shall not
represent the City where this duty is specifically delegated to another
officer by law, ordinance, or Council direction.



   7.   Contracts.  Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts
on behalf of the City.



   8.   Professional Services.  Upon order of the Council, secure for
the City such specialized and professional services not already available to
the City.  In executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in
accordance with this Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State. 



   9.   Licenses and Permits.  Sign all licenses and permits which
have been granted by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance
to be issued by another municipal officer.  Upon authorization of the
Council, revoke permits or licenses granted by the Council when their terms
are violated or the provisions of this Code of Ordinances and/or the laws of
the State are violated by holders of said permits or licenses.



   10.   Nuisances.  Issue written order for removal, at public
expense, any nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.



   11.   Absentee Officer.  Make appropriate provision that duties of
any absentee officer be carried on during such absence.



15.03   APPOINTMENTS.



   The Mayor shall appoint the following officials:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)



   1.   City Attorney



   2.   Library Board of Trustees



   3.   Parks and Recreation Commission



   4.   Utility Board of Trustees



   5.   Board of Appeals



   6.   Planning and Zoning Commission



   7.   Board of Adjustment



   8.   Police Chief



   9.   Fire Chief



   10.   Deputy Chiefs



   11.   Historical Commission



15.04     COMPENSATION.



   The Mayor receives an annual salary of $5,000.00, to be paid in equal
monthly installments.  The Mayor shall abide by the Policy, Benefits and
Procedures of the City when traveling on the business of the City is
necessary.  The Mayor shall be reimbursed for actual out-of-pocket expense,
including automobile expenses, occasioned by the performance of his or her
duties as Mayor, for which the Mayor shall submit an expense account prior to
receipt of reimbursement for the approval of the Council.  However, no
provision of this section or of any other law shall be construed to give the
Mayor or any other municipal employee both mileage and expenses for the same
transaction.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



15.05   VOTING.



   The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member
of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4) 



CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM



 

16.01  Vice President of Council
 
16.05  Alternate Mayor Pro Tem


16.02  Powers and Duties
 
16.06  Absence


16.03  Voting Rights
 
16.07  Return from Absence


16.04  Compensation
 



 



16.01   VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.



   The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who
shall serve as vice president of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])



16.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.



   Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem
shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the
Mayor to perform such duties.  In the exercise of the duties of the office
the Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ, or discharge from
employment officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint,
employ, or discharge without the approval of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])



16.03   VOTING RIGHTS.



   The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the
Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])



16.04   COMPENSATION.



   If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the
Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of 15 days or more,
the Mayor Pro Tem shall, starting on the fifteenth day, receive $10.00 for
each day thereafter that he or she performs the duties.  The Mayor Pro Tem
will not receive Council wages while he or she is receiving compensation as
Mayor Pro Tem.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



16.05   ALTERNATE MAYOR PRO TEM.



   In the event of an extended absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem may
designate one member of the Council as alternate Mayor Pro Tem, which
appointment shall be made subject to the approval of the Council.  This
appointment shall be in effect for the duration of the Mayor’s absence. 
When the Mayor Pro Tem is absent or unable to act during the Mayor’s
extended absence, the alternate Mayor Pro Tem shall have all the powers and
duties as the Mayor Pro Tem.



16.06   ABSENCE.



   Absence is defined as any time the Mayor or both the Mayor and Mayor
Pro Tem are out of the City limits in excess of 50 miles and/or 48 hours.



16.07   RETURN FROM ABSENCE.



   Return is defined as the return to within the City limits and
notification to the alternate Mayor Pro Tem in the case of the Mayor Pro Tem;
and Mayor Pro Tem or the alternate Mayor Pro Tem in the case of the Mayor.



CHAPTER 17
CITY COUNCIL



 

17.01  Number and Term of Council
 
17.04  Council Meetings


17.02  Powers and Duties
 
17.05  Appointments


17.03  Exercise of Power
 
17.06  Compensation



 



17.01   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.



   The Council consists of five Council members elected at large for
overlapping terms of four years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 & 376.2)



17.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to
the following:



   1.   General.  All powers of the City are vested in the Council
except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])



   2.   Wards.  By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into
wards based upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards,
or create new wards. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])



   3.   Fiscal Authority.  The Council shall apportion and appropriate
all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and
order payment thereof.  It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement, or repairs that
may be specially assessed.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38[1])



   4.   Public Improvements.  The Council shall make all orders for
the construction of any improvements, bridges, or buildings.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])



   5.   Contracts.  The Council shall make or authorize the making of
all contracts.  No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
approved by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 26.10)



   6.   Employees.  The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the
number, duties, term of office and compensation of employees or officers not
otherwise provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   7.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers.  By ordinance, the
Council shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and
other elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor
does not become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and
the Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of
any elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of
a regular City election.  A change in the compensation of Council members
becomes effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the
Council members elected at the election next following the change in
compensation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



17.03   EXERCISE OF POWER.



   The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])



   1.   Action by Council.  Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or
resolution requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. 
Passage of a motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council.  A
resolution must be passed to spend public funds in excess of $100,000.00 on a
public improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities
upon their completion.  Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be
recorded.  A measure that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage
shall be considered defeated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)



   2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto.  Within 30 days after the Mayor’s
veto, the Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than
two-thirds of all of the members of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])



   3.   Measures Become Effective.  Measures passed by the Council
become effective in one of the following ways:



      A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes
effective when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published,
unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.   



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])



      B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective
immediately upon signing.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])



      C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of
the motion by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])



      D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution
and the Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution
becomes effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment
becomes a law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published,
unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])



      E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment
or resolution, a resolution becomes effective 14 days after the date of
passage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a
summary of the ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the
date of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the
ordinance or amendment.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])



“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the
Council including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but
does not include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason
of a conflict of interest.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1[a])



17.04   COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other
provisions regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section
5.06 of this Code of Ordinances.  Additional particulars relating to Council
meetings are the following:



   1.   Regular Meetings.  The time and place of the regular meetings
of the Council shall be fixed by resolution of the Council.



   2.   Special Meetings.  Special meetings shall be held upon call of
the Mayor or upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])



   3.   Quorum.  A majority of all Council members is a quorum. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])



   4.   Rules of Procedure.  The Council shall determine its own rules
and maintain records of its proceedings.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])



   5.   Compelling Attendance.  Any three members of the Council can
compel the attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or
duly called meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to
attend at once. 



17.05   APPOINTMENTS.



   The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their
powers, duties, compensation, and term of office:



   1.   City Clerk



   2.   City Administrator



17.06   COMPENSATION.



   The salary of each Council member is $50.00 for each regular or special
meeting of the Council.  Each Council person shall accrue the equivalent of
two meetings per year as vacation time.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])



CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK



 

18.01  Appointment and Compensation
 
18.08  Records


18.02  Powers and Duties: General
 
18.09  Attendance at Meetings


18.03  Publication of Minutes
 
18.10  Licenses and Permits


18.04  Recording Measures
 
18.11  Notification of Appointments


18.05  Other Publications
 
18.12  Elections


18.06  Authentication
 
18.13  City Seal


18.07  Certification
 



 



18.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.



   The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk to serve at the
pleasure of the Council.  The Clerk shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])



18.02   POWERS AND DUTIES:  GENERAL.



   The Clerk or, in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy
Clerk has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of
Ordinances, and the law.



18.03   PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.



   Within 15 days following a regular or special meeting, the Clerk shall
cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published.  Such
publication shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all
receipts and shall show the gross amount of the claims.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])



18.04   RECORDING MEASURES.



   The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council
and record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether
the Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether the
measure was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 & 2])



18.05   OTHER PUBLICATIONS.



   The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments,
proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3)



   1.   Time.  If notice of an election, hearing, or other official
action is required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be
published at least once, not less than four or more than 20 days before the
date of the election, hearing, or other action, unless otherwise provided by
law.



   2.   Manner of Publication.  A publication required by this Code of
Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and
having general circulation in the City, except that ordinances and amendments
may be published by posting in the following places:



   City Hall



   Library



   Post Office



   The Clerk is hereby directed to post promptly such ordinances and
amendments, and to leave them so posted for not less than 10 days after the
first date of posting.  Unauthorized removal of the posted ordinance or
amendment prior to the completion of the ten days shall not affect the
validity of said ordinance or amendment.  The Clerk shall note the first
date of such posting on the official copy of the ordinance and in the
official ordinance book immediately following the ordinance.



18.06   AUTHENTICATION.



   The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the
Clerk’s signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when
required.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])



18.07   CERTIFICATION.



   The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district,
building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or
limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the
City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)



18.08   RECORDS.



   The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following
manner:



   1.   Ordinances and Codes.  Maintain copies of all effective City
ordinances and codes for public use.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])



   2.   Custody.  Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping
of all writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless
otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   3.   Maintenance.  Maintain all City records and documents, or
accurate reproductions, for at least five years except that ordinances,
resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption
or replacement of public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least 11
years following the final maturity of the bonds or obligations.  Ordinances,
resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall be maintained
permanently.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])



   4.   Provide Copy.  Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a
copy of any record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when
it may be necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s
duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee
set by Council resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other
authorized officer, affix the seal of the City to those public documents or
instruments that by this Code of Ordinances are required to be attested by
the affixing of the seal.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7[5])



   5.   Filing of Communications.  Keep and file all communications
and petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally.  The Clerk
shall endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered
in such communications and petitions.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.09   ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.



   The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and, at
the direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees,
boards, and commissions.  The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct
record of the proceedings of such meetings.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.10   LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by
this Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued
which shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt
number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit, and purpose
for which issued.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.11   NOTIFICATION OF APPOINTMENTS.



   The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to
offices in the City government of their positions and the time at which they
shall assume the duties of their offices.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



18.12   ELECTIONS.



   The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance
with Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.



18.13   CITY SEAL.



   The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by
the Clerk to all transcripts, orders, and certificates that it may be
necessary or proper to authenticate.  The City seal is circular in form, in
the center of which are the words “CORPORATE SEAL” and around the margin
of which are the words “CITY OF HIAWATHA – HIWATHA, IOWA.”



CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER



 

19.01  Appointment
 
19.02  Duties of Treasurer



 



19.01   APPOINTMENT.



   The Director of Finance is the City Treasurer and performs all
functions required of the position of Treasurer.



19.02   DUTIES OF TREASURER.



   The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   Custody of Funds.  Be responsible for the safe custody of all
funds of the City in the manner provided by law and Council direction. 



   2.   Record of Fund.  Keep the record of each fund separate. 



   3.   Record Receipts.  Keep an accurate record of all money or
securities received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the
date, from whom, and for what purpose received. 



   4.   Record Disbursements.  Keep an accurate account of all
disbursements, money, or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what
fund paid. 



   5.   Special Assessments.  Keep a separate account of all money
received by the Treasurer from special assessments. 



   6.   Deposit Funds.  Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the
Treasurer’s custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in
depositories selected by the Council.



   7.   Reconciliation.  Reconcile depository statements with the
Treasurer’s books and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash
and investments of each fund and amounts received and disbursed.



   8.   Debt Service.  Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and
record all payments of interest and principal.



   9.   Other Duties.  Perform such other duties as specified by the
Council by resolution or ordinance. 



   10.   Reconciliation with Clerk.  Reconcile the Treasurer’s books
with the Clerk’s every month.



CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY



 

20.01  Appointment and Compensation
 
20.05  Review and Comment


20.02  Attorney for City
 
20.06  Provide Legal Opinion


20.03  Power of Attorney
 
20.07  Attendance at Council Meetings


20.04  Ordinance Preparation
 
20.08  Prepare Documents



 



20.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.



   The Mayor shall appoint, subject to approval by the Council, a City
Attorney.  The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as established
by resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.02   ATTORNEY FOR CITY.



   The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters
affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any
court, tribunal, commission, or board.  The City Attorney shall prosecute or
defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.03   POWER OF ATTORNEY.



   The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds
and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the
prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound
upon the same.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.04   ORDINANCE PREPARATION.



   The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances that the Council may
desire and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such
ordinances before their final passage by the Council and publication.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.05   REVIEW AND COMMENT.



   The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council
giving an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances
submitted to or coming under the City Attorney’s notice.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.06   PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.



   The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City
contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
Mayor or Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.07   ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request
of the Mayor or Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



20.08   PREPARE DOCUMENTS.



   The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts,
forms, and other writings that may be required for the use of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



Hiawatha, Iowa Code of Ordinances


CHAPTER 21
CITY ADMINISTRATOR



 

21.01  Purpose
 
21.05  Council - City Administrator Relations


21.02  Appointment and Term
 
21.06  Residence


21.03  Compensation
 
21.07  City Administrator’s Bond


21.04  Duties
 



 



21.01     PURPOSE.



   By virtue of the authority conferred by Chapter 372 of the Code of
Iowa, the office of City Administrator for the City is hereby created.



21.02     APPOINTMENT AND TERM.



   The City Administrator is appointed by a majority vote of the Council
at the regular meeting of such body.  The City Administrator shall hold
office at the pleasure of the Council and is subject to removal by a majority
vote of the Council.



21.03     COMPENSATION.



   The City Administrator shall receive such annual salary as the Council
shall, from time to time, determine by resolution, and the time of payment
shall be fixed in accordance with that for the other City employees.



21.04     DUTIES.



   The City Administrator is the chief administrative officer of the
City.  The City Administrator is directly responsible to the Council for the
administration of municipal affairs in the manner directed by the Council. 
The duties of the City Administrator include:



   1.   Law and Council Directives.  See that all resolutions,
ordinances, laws, Council and Mayor directives and approved operational
policies are either faithfully enforced and executed or referred to the
proper official for compliance thereof.



   2.   Council Meetings.  Attend all meetings of the Council unless
otherwise excused by the Mayor and Council.



   3.   Recommendations.  Recommend to the Mayor and Council such
measures as the City Administrator deems necessary or expedient for good,
efficient government and the general welfare of the City.



   4.   Supervision and Administration.  Have direct responsibility
for the supervision, direction and administration of all City departments,
offices, and all non-elected officials and be directly responsible to the
Mayor and City Council for the proper function of the same:



   5.   Contracts.  Be responsible for the supervision and performance
of all contracts for work and services to be done for the City except as
specified otherwise in said construction or service program involved.



   6.   Accounting.  Maintain an accounting of all obligations,
agreements, commitments and contractual franchises involving the City, and
report to the Mayor and Council any deviations from the exact terms as
specified therein.



   7.   Purchasing.  Be authorized to direct the purchasing of all
commodities, materials, supplies, capital outlay and services for all
departments of the City that have been budgeted and appropriated by
resolution of the Council, and enforce a program to determine that such
purchases are received and are of the quality and character called for in the
order.



      A.   The City Administrator shall require the taking of bids
on all matters he or she deems advisable as required by law, or as directed
by the Council.



      B.   The City Administrator may approve the purchase of
budgeted items costing less than $5,000.00, provided a budget amendment is
not required.  The City Administrator must first receive the approval by
majority vote of the Council before authorizing the purchase of budgeted
items costing in excess of $5,000.00.



   8.   Employment Applications.  Review and evaluate the applications
for department head positions and make recommendations to the Council for
approval.  Applications for other positions will be reviewed with specific
department heads.



   9.   Hiring, Promotion and Reclassification of Employees.  With the
Council’s consent, employ, hire, terminate, promote or reclassify any City
employee, within the limits established by the budget and relevant job
description, for departments or areas under the City Administrator’s
supervision.  The City Administrator shall immediately advise the Mayor and
the Council of any employee’s voluntary resignation or leave of absence. 
The City Administrator shall obtain a resolution from the Council for the
hiring of department heads.



   10.   Employee Discipline.  Subject to the requirements of State
law, this Code of Ordinances and City personnel policies, after consultation
with department head and with the consent of the Mayor, have the power to
reprimand or to suspend without pay any employee for a period not to exceed
three days, or to discharge any City employee who has not performed his or
her duties in a satisfactory manner and promptly report same to Council.



   11.   Buildings and Equipment.  Supervise the management of all
buildings, structures and land under the jurisdiction of the Council and be
charged with the care and preservation of all City-owned equipment, tools,
machinery, appliances, supplies and commodities over which the City
Administrator has specific authority.



   12.   Advise Mayor and Council.  Keep the Mayor and Council fully
advised of the financial and other conditions of the City.



   13.   Annual Budget.  Assist the Mayor, Council, City financial
officer and all department heads in preparing the annual budget in the manner
as prescribed by law.



   14.   Business Affairs.  See that all business affairs of the City
are conducted by approved methods and in an efficient manner.



   15.   Records.  Be responsible at all times for the maintenance of
accurate and current records of all affairs of the departments under the
jurisdiction of the City Administrator, and in a form acceptable to the
Council.  Copies of such records shall be available for public inspection
except as otherwise prohibited by law.



   16.   Mayor.  Provide administrative support and assistance to the
Mayor and perform duties in the coordination of all phases of municipal
activity as directed by the Mayor and Council.



   17.   Pay Plan.  Recommend to the governing body a standard
schedule of pay for each appointive office and position in the City service,
including minimum, intermediate and maximum rates.



   18.   Attorney and Engineer.  Coordinate the work of the City
Attorney and City Engineer.



   19.   Functions and Services.  Be responsible for the following
functions and services:



      A.   Budget control and finance;



      B.   Insurance and public bonds;



      C.   Capital Improvement and Planning;



      D.   Search for funds and grants.



   20.   Liaison.  Maintain liaison with citizens, businesses,
developers, builders, engineers and other governmental agencies.



   21.   Other Meetings.  Attend City, County, regional and any other
meetings as requested by the Mayor and/or Council.



   22.   Delegated Powers.  Perform duties and have direct authority
on all matters delegated by Council action.



   23.   Other Duties.  Perform such other duties as the Mayor or
Council may direct.



   24.   Study.  Continuously study the City government’s operating
procedures, organizations and facilities and recommend fiscal and other
policies to the Council whenever necessary.



21.05     COUNCIL - CITY ADMINISTRATOR RELATIONS.



   Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall
deal with the administrative service solely through the City Administrator or
Mayor.  Neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any
subordinates of the City Administrator, either publicly or privately.



21.06     RESIDENCE.



   The City Administrator shall, upon appointment and confirmation, reside
within the City limits unless a waiver of this provision is obtained by
Council resolution.



21.07     CITY ADMINISTRATOR’S BOND.



   The City Administrator shall execute and file a bond for the faithful
performance of duties, and in favor of the City, in a sum as determined by
the Council.  The City shall pay the cost of such bond.



CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES



 

22.01  Public Library
 
22.07  Nonresident Use


22.02  Library Trustees
 
22.08  Expenditures


22.03  Qualifications of Trustees
 
22.09  Annual Report


22.04  Organization of the Board
 
22.10  Injury to Books or Property


22.05  Powers and Duties
 
22.11  Theft


22.06  Contracting with Other Libraries
 
22.12  Notice Posted



 



22.01   PUBLIC LIBRARY.



   The public library for the City is known as the Hiawatha Public
Library.  It is referred to in this chapter as the Library.



22.02   LIBRARY TRUSTEES.



   The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the
Board, consists of seven resident members.  All members are to be appointed
by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. 



22.03   QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.



   All members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of
the City.



22.04   ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.



   The organization of the Board shall be as follows:



   1.   Term of Office.  All appointments to the Board shall be for
six years, except to fill vacancies.  Each term shall commence on July 1. 
Appointments shall be made every two years of one-third the total number or
as near as possible, to stagger the terms.



   2.   Vacancies.  The position of any Trustee shall be vacated if
such member moves permanently from the City and shall be deemed vacated if
such member is absent from six consecutive regular meetings of the Board,
except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the City. 
Vacancies in the Board shall be filled in the same manner as an original
appointment except that the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for
which the appointment is made. 



   3.   Compensation.  Trustees shall receive no compensation for
their services. 



22.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:



   1.   Officers.  To meet and elect from its members a President, a
Secretary, and such other officers as it deems necessary.  The City
Treasurer shall serve as Board Treasurer, but shall not be a member of the
Board.



   2.   Physical Plant.  To have charge, control and supervision of
the Library, its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.



   3.   Charge of Affairs.  To direct and control all affairs of the
Library.



   4.   Hiring of Personnel.  To employ a Library Director, and
authorize the Library Director to employ such assistants and employees as may
be necessary for the proper management of the Library, and fix their
compensation; provided, however, prior to such employment, the compensation
of the Library Director, assistants, and employees shall have been fixed and
approved by a majority of the members of the Board voting in favor thereof.



   5.   Removal of Personnel.  To remove the Library Director, by a
two-thirds vote of the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the
assistants or employees for misdemeanor, incompetence, or inattention to
duty, subject however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.



   6.   Purchases.  To select, or authorize the Library Director to
select, and make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals,
papers, maps, journals, other Library materials, furniture, fixtures,
stationery, and supplies for the Library within budgetary limits set by the
Board.



   7.   Use by Nonresidents.  To authorize the use of the Library by
nonresidents and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service
exists.



   8.   Rules and Regulations.  To make and adopt, amend, modify, or
repeal rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances
and the law, for the care, use, government and management of the Library and
the business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.



   9.   Expenditures.  To have exclusive control of the expenditure of
all funds allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys
available by gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of
all other moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals
collected under the rules of the Board.



   10.   Gifts.  To accept gifts of real property, personal property,
or mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take
the title to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and
bills of sale for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds
received by them from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.



   11.   Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts.  To enforce
the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests
accepted by the City by action against the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Ch. 661)



   12.   Record of Proceedings.  To keep a record of its proceedings.



   13.   County Historical Association.  To have authority to make
agreements with the local County historical association where such exists,
and to set apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come
into the possession of the association.  The Trustees are further authorized
to purchase necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and
protection of such articles as are in their judgment of a historical and
educational nature and pay for the same out of funds allocated for Library
purposes.



22.06   CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.



   The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with
the following:



   1.   Contracting.  The Board may contract with any other boards of
trustees of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation,
private or semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning,
township, or County, or with the trustees of any County library district for
the use of the Library by their respective residents. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 & Ch. 28E)



   2.   Termination.  Such a contract may be terminated at any time by
mutual consent of the contracting parties.  It also may be terminated by a
majority vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting
parties.  Such a termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors
by the governing body of a contracting party on a written petition of not
less than five percent in number of the electors who voted for governor in
the territory of the contracting party at the last general election.  The
petition must be presented to the governing body not less than 40 days before
the election.  The proposition may be submitted at any election provided by
law which is held in the territory of the party seeking to terminate the
contract. 



22.07   NONRESIDENT USE.



   The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents
of the City or County in any one or more of the following ways:



   1.   Lending.  By lending the books or other materials of the
Library to nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of
the City, or County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee. 



   2.   Depository.  By establishing depositories of Library books or
other materials to be loaned to nonresidents. 



   3.   Bookmobiles.  By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling
library so that books or other Library materials may be loaned to
nonresidents. 



   4.   Branch Library.  By establishing branch libraries for lending
books or other Library materials to nonresidents. 



22.08   EXPENDITURES.



   All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance
of the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. 
Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its
President and Secretary.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5)



22.09   ANNUAL REPORT.



   The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the
close of the fiscal year.  This report shall contain statements as to the
condition of the Library, the number of books added, the number circulated,
the amount of fines collected, and the amount of money expended in the
maintenance of the Library during the year, together with such further
information as may be required by the Council.



22.10   INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.



   It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear,
deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper,
periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging
to the Library or reading room.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



22.11   THEFT.



   No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library
with the intent to deprive the Library thereof.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)



22.12   NOTICE POSTED.



   There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices
informing the public of the following:



   1.   Failure to Return.  Failure to return Library materials for
two months or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library
materials, or failure to return Library equipment for one month or more after
the date the person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence of
intent to deprive the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the
mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that such material or
equipment is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been made to
reclaim the materials or equipment. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)



   2.   Detention and Search.  Persons concealing Library materials
may be detained and searched pursuant to law. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)



CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION



 

23.01  Planning and Zoning Commission
 
23.04  Compensation


23.02  Term of Office
 
23.05  Powers and Duties


23.03  Vacancies
 



 



23.01   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission, consists of seven members appointed by the Council.  The
Commission members shall be residents of the City and shall not hold any
elective office in the City government.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 & 392.1)



23.02   TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five
years.  The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in
any one year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



23.03   VACANCIES.



   If any vacancy exists on the Commission, caused by resignation or
otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the
same manner as the original appointee.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



23.04   COMPENSATION.



   All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except
their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



23.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:



   1.   Selection of Officers.  The Commission shall choose annually
at its first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and
another as Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the
Chairperson during the Chairperson’s absence or disability.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



   2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations.  The Commission shall adopt such
rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem
necessary.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



   3.   Zoning.  The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers
and duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and
other related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council
amendments, supplements, changes or modifications, all as provided by Chapter
414 of the Code of Iowa. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)



   4.   Recommendations on Improvements. The design and proposed
location of public improvements shall be submitted to the Commission for its
recommendations prior to any actions being taken by the City for the
construction or placement of such improvements. Such requirements and
recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement
if the Commission, after 30 days’ written notice requesting such
recommendations, has failed to file the same.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



   5.   Review and Comment on Plats.  All plans, plats, or re-plats of
subdivisions or re-subdivisions of land in the City or adjacent thereto, laid
out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same
intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted
to the Commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the
Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



   6.   Fiscal Responsibilities.  The Commission shall have full,
complete, and exclusive authority to expend, for and on behalf of the City,
all sums of money appropriated to it and to use and expend all gifts,
donations, or payments that are received by the City for City planning and
zoning purposes. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



   7.   Limitation on Entering Contracts.  The Commission shall have
no power to contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended
appropriation as approved by the Council for the present year.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



   8.   Annual Report.  The Commission shall each year make a report
to the Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its
receipts and disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding
fiscal year. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



CHAPTER 24
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION



 

24.01  Community Recreation District
 
24.05  Annual Report


24.02  Commission Created
 
24.06  Activities; Rules and Regulations


24.03  Organization
 
24.07  Suggestions to the Council


24.04  Powers and Duties
 



 



24.01     COMMUNITY RECREATION DISTRICT.



   There is hereby established a Community Recreation District, which
shall consist of all publicly owned facilities and publicly sponsored events
now forming a part of and lying within the City limits including all
recreation activities within it, the Community Center and all territory which
shall henceforth be annexed to and become a part of the City.



24.02     COMMISSION CREATED.



   The purpose of this chapter is to create a Hiawatha Parks and
Recreation Commission to advise the Council on needed facilities to provide
open spaces such as parks, playgrounds and community facilities for other
forms of recreation.



24.03     ORGANIZATION.



   The Mayor shall appoint, and the Council shall approve, from the
residents of said district, five persons specially fitted for and interested
in community recreation activities.  The members of the Commission shall
serve for a period of two years, two members appointed in odd numbered years
and three members appointed in even numbered years, and shall take office at
the first Commission meeting of January in the year in which they are
appointed.  Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointments.  Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation,
but may receive their actual expenses.  Expenses incurred in the maintenance
of the Community Recreation District will be paid out of the Parks and
Recreation operating budget but only after being allowed and ordered to be
paid by the Council.



24.04     POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall have charge of the Community
Recreation District, including any and all buildings or land allocated to its
use from time to time by the Council.  The Commission shall have the power
to adopt its own rules, not inconsistent with those promulgated by the
Council, but any rules adopted by the Commission which are in conflict with
rules adopted by the Council shall be superseded thereby.



24.05     ANNUAL REPORT. 



   The Commission shall make a written report to the Council during the
budget process each year as to the operation of the Community Recreation
District, including therein an account of the expenses of the Commission for
the preceding year.



24.06     ACTIVITIES, RULES AND REGULATIONS. 



   Subject to the approval of the Council, the Commission shall have
authority to determine the recreation character of the activities of the
Community District.  The Commission, at the request of the Council, shall
suggest rules and regulations to be adopted by the Council for the government
and operation of the Community Recreation District improvements.  Such rules
shall be either posted on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to
provide adequate notice to the using public.



24.07     SUGGESTIONS TO THE COUNCIL.



   The Council shall request suggestions from the Commission and from such
public spirited citizens as are interested in such development, and
particularly in the welfare of children of the City, and shall carefully
consider such suggestions, and shall thereafter determine and promulgate the
rules and regulations which shall govern in the operation and management of
the Community Recreation District.  Such rules and regulations may
thereafter be modified and changed from time to time by the Council.



CHAPTER 25
UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES



 

25.01  Purpose
 
25.06  Powers and Duties of the Board


25.02  Board Established
 
25.07  Control of Funds


25.03  Appointment of Trustees
 
25.08  Accounting


25.04  Compensation
 
25.09  Discriminatory Rates Illegal


25.05  Vacancies
 
25.10  Discontinuance of Board



 



25.01   PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation of the
municipally owned water utility by a board of trustees.



25.02   BOARD ESTABLISHED.



   Pursuant to an election held October 6, 1959, the management and
control of the municipally owned Water Utility were placed in the hands of a
Board of Trustees.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)



25.03   APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEES.



   The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Council, five
persons to serve as trustees for staggered six-year terms.  No public
officer or salaried employee of the City may serve on the utility board.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)



25.04   COMPENSATION.



   The Council shall by resolution set the compensation of Board members.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)



25.05   VACANCIES.



   An appointment to fill a vacancy on the Board of Trustees shall be made
in the same manner as an original appointment except that such appointment
shall be for the balance of the unexpired term.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)



25.06   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD.



   The Board of Trustees may exercise all powers of the City in relation
to the Water Utility, with the following exceptions:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4)



   1.   Taxes, Ordinances, and Bonds.  The Board may not certify taxes
to be levied, pass ordinances or amendments, or issue general obligation or
special assessment bonds. 



   Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[1])



   2.   Property.  Title to all property must be in the name of the
City but the Board has full control of such property subject to limitations
imposed by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[2])



   3.   Reports to Council.  The Board shall make a detailed annual
report to the Council, including a complete financial statement.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[3])



   4.   Proceedings Published.  Immediately following a regular or
special meeting, the Board Secretary shall prepare and cause to be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the City a condensed statement of
proceedings, including a list of all claims.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[4])



25.07   CONTROL OF FUNDS.



   The Board shall control tax revenues allocated to it as well as all
moneys derived from operations.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)



25.08   ACCOUNTING.



   Utility moneys are held in a separate utility fund.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)



25.09   DISCRIMINATORY RATES ILLEGAL.



   The utility may not provide use or service at a discriminatory rate,
except to the City or its agencies, as provided in Section 384.91, Code of
Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.6)



25.10   DISCONTINUANCE OF BOARD.



   A proposal, on motion of the Council or upon receipt of a valid
petition, to discontinue the utility board is subject to the approval of the
voters of the City, except that the Board may be discontinued by resolution
of the Council when the utility it administers is disposed of or leased for a
period of over five years.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)



CHAPTER 26
HISTORICAL COMMISSION



 

26.01  Purpose and Intent
 
26.03  Definitions


26.02  Mission Statement
 
26.04  Powers of the Commission



 



26.01     PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   By this act, the City of Hiawatha expresses its support for the
preservation and presentation of the history of the community as part of the
quality of life it seeks to create and maintain.  The Council acknowledges
the value of its history in creating civic pride and spirit and desires to
document and preserve the history of Hiawatha, Iowa.



26.02     MISSION STATEMENT.



   The mission of the Historical Commission is to collect and preserve
historical materials that are necessary for the writing and publishing of
works that reflect the past policies, programs and civic endeavors of its
government and citizenry.  Such material may include, but is not limited to,
selected official City records, photographs, reports, biographical and
autobiographical writings, oral histories and other vital records necessary
for documenting the course of the community over extended periods of time.



26.03     ORGANIZATION.



   1.   Commission. The Hiawatha Historical Commission, as established
by this chapter, will meet at least three times a year.  A simple majority
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The act of a
majority of a quorum is required for the Commission to take action. 
Meetings of the Commission shall be governed by the most recent publication
of Robert's Rules of Order.



   2.   Officers. These officers shall be appointed bi-annually by the
Commission members:  A Chairman who shall preside at all Commission
meetings; Vice Chairman, who shall act as Chairman when Chairman is absent,
and a Secretary, who shall be responsible for maintaining written records of
the Commission's proceedings which, once approved, will become part of the
permanent records of the City. The office of Treasurer shall automatically be
filled by the Finance Director of the City, unless the City Council appoints
someone else.



   3.   Commission Members. The Hiawatha Historical Commission shall be
made up of no fewer than five members who are appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the City Council. Members will demonstrate a positive interest in
local history, will serve without compensation, and may serve for more than
one term.



(Ord. 919 - Feb. 19 Supp.)



   4.   Appointments.  To assure continuity, all members will serve
staggered terms.  To make this possible, the original appointments to the
Commission shall be three members for one year, two members for two years and
two members for three years.  All terms of the Commission members thereafter
shall be for three years and each shall start on January 1 following the year
of such appointment.



   5.   Vacancies.  Vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion
of the term of the member replaced, which will be filled as provided in
subsection 3.



26.04     POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.



   1.   The Commission may conduct studies for documentation of
Hiawatha’s local history.  The Commission may proceed at its own
initiative or upon a petition approved by the Commission from any person,
group or association.  The Commission shall maintain records of all studies
and inventories for public use.



   2.   In addition to those duties and powers specified above, the
Commission may make recommendations to the City Council to:



      A.   Accept unconditional gifts and donations of real and
personal property, including money, for the purpose of historical
documentation.



      B.   Contract with the State or the federal government or
other organizations.



      C.   Cooperate with the federal, State and local government in
the pursuance of the objectives of historical records.



CHAPTER 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT



 

30.01  Department Established
 
30.06  Peace Officers Appointed


30.02  Organization
 
30.07  Powers and Duties of Police Chief


30.03  Peace Officer Qualifications
 
30.08  Summoning Aid


30.04  Required Training
 
30.09  Taking Weapons


30.05  Compensation
 
30.10  Police Chief Residency Requirement



 



30.01   DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   The Police Department of the City is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.



30.02   ORGANIZATION.



   The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law
enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be
authorized by the Council.



30.03   PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.



   In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law
enforcement officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification
standards established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)



30.04   REQUIRED TRAINING.



   All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by
law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of
employment.  Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training
as required by law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])



(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)



30.05   COMPENSATION.



   Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.



30.06   PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED.



   The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Police Chief subject to Council
approval.  The Mayor and Police Chief shall hire the other members of the
department. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)



30.07   POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.



   The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the
approval of the Council. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   General.  Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by
law or ordinance.



   2.   Enforce Laws.  Enforce all laws, ordinances, and regulations
and bring all persons committing any offense before the proper court.



   3.   Writs.  Execute and return all writs and other processes
directed to the Police Chief.



   4.   Accident Reports.  Report all motor vehicle accidents
investigated to the State Department of Transportation. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)



   5.   Prisoners.  Be responsible for the custody of prisoners,
including conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.



   6.   Assist Officials.  When requested, provide aid to other City
officers, boards, and commissions in the execution of their official duties.



   7.   Investigations.  Provide for such investigation as may be
necessary for the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law
or ordinance.



   8.   Record of Arrests.  Keep a record of all arrests made in the
City by showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law
or City ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest and the
disposition of the charge.



   9.   Reports.  Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an
annual report as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor
or Council.



   10.   Command.  Be in command of all officers appointed for police
work and be responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all vehicles,
equipment, and materials of the department.



30.08   SUMMONING AID.



   Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many
persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in
making the arrest.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)



30.09   TAKING WEAPONS.



   Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all
items that are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may
have within such person’s control, to be disposed of according to law. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)



30.10     POLICE CHIEF RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.



   The Police Chief shall reside no more than five miles from the
corporate limits of the City.



CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT



 



35.01  Establishment and Purpose
 
35.09  Obedience to Officers


35.02  Organization
 
35.10  Accidental Injury Insurance


35.03  Training
 
35.11  Liability Insurance


35.04  Compensation
 
35.12  Calls Outside City


35.05  Fire Chief and Deputy Chiefs
 
35.13  Mutual Aid


35.06  Firefighters Selected
 
35.14  Authority to Cite Violations


35.07  Duties of Fire Chief
 
35.15  Supplemental Responders


35.08  Duties of Deputy Fire Chiefs
 




 



35.01   ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.



   A volunteer fire department is hereby established to prevent and
extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote
fire prevention and fire safety.  The department also has the authority to
operate an ambulance service to respond to emergency medical calls and to
treat and assist citizens with medical emergencies.  The Fire Department
also has the authority to answer emergency calls for which there is no other
established agency.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)



35.02   ORGANIZATION.



   The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and
personnel as may be authorized by the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



35.03   TRAINING.



   All members of the department shall meet the minimum training standards
established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in
regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])



35.04   COMPENSATION.



   Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



35.05   FIRE CHIEF AND DEPUTY CHIEFS. 



The offices of Fire Chief and Deputy Chiefs are hereby created.  The Mayor
shall appoint, subject to Council approval, the Fire Chief.  The Fire Chief
shall appoint, subject to Council approval, the Deputy Chief’s.  Said
appointments may be made from within or outside the department provided such
appointment possess the qualifications as defined in the job descriptions of
the City Employment Policy, Benefits and Procedures manual.



35.06     FIREFIGHTERS SELECTED.



   The Fire Chief shall recommend, and the Council shall approve, not to
exceed 75 full-time, part time, or volunteer firefighters and emergency
medical only personnel.  The Fire Chief shall recommend for the City
Administrator’s approval company grade officers within the department in
accordance with the qualifications defined in the job descriptions of the
City Policy, Benefits and Procedures manual.  The Fire Chief may appoint up
to 10 reserve volunteer members in addition to those 75.



35.07   DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.



   The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by
law or ordinance, including (but not limited to) the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   Enforce Laws.  Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire
prevention and the investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of
fires.



   2.   Technical Assistance.  Upon request, give advice concerning
private fire alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and
exits, and development of fire emergency plans.



   3.   Authority at Fires.  When in charge of a fire scene, direct an
operation as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue
operation, investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas
leak, or other hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary
in the reasonable performance of the department’s duties.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)



   4.   Control of Scenes.  Prohibit an individual, vehicle, or vessel
from approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle,
vessel, or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the
Fire Department.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)



   5.   Authority to Barricade.  When in charge of a fire scene, place
or erect ropes, guards, barricades, or other obstructions across a street,
alley, right-of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or
emergency so as to prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting
efforts of the Fire Department, to control the scene until any required
investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the fire or
other emergency.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)



   6.   Command.  Be charged with the duty of maintaining the
efficiency, discipline, and control of the Fire Department.  The members of
the Fire Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the
Fire Chief.



   7.   Property.  Exercise and have full control over the disposition
of all fire apparatus, tools, equipment, and other property used by or
belonging to the Fire Department.



   8.   Notification.  Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or
property damage in excess of $200,000.00 has occurred as a result of a fire,
or if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division
immediately.  For all other fires causing an estimated damage of $50.00 or
more or emergency responses by the Fire Department, file a report with the
Fire Marshal’s Division within 10 days following the end of the month. 
The report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the name of
the owners and occupants of the property at the time of the fire, the value
of the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of the fire
as determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics, and
circumstances concerning the fire incidents. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)



   9.   Right of Entry.  Have the right, during reasonable hours, to
enter any building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the
purpose of making such investigation or inspection that under law or
ordinance may be necessary to be made and that is reasonably necessary to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)



   10.   Recommendation.  Make such recommendations to owners,
occupants, caretakers, or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire
hazards. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)



   11.   Assist State Fire Marshal.  At the request of the State Fire
Marshal, and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of
duties by investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.



   12.   Records.  Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department
personnel, firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and
apparatus, the number of responses to alarms, their cause, and location, and
an analysis of losses by value, type and location of buildings.



   13.   Reports.  Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an
annual report of the status and activities of the department as well as such
other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.



35.08     DUTIES OF DEPUTY FIRE CHIEFS.



   The Deputy Fire Chiefs shall perform such duties as shall be delegated
by the Fire Chief and shall perform all of the duties of the Fire Chief
during the absence or inability of the Fire Chief.



35.09   OBEDIENCE TO OFFICERS.



   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of the Fire Chief.



35.10   ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE.



   The Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for
worker’s compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of
hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention for volunteer firefighters
injured in the performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or
outside the corporate limits of the City.  All volunteer firefighters shall
be covered by the contract. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)



35.11   LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   The Council shall contract to insure against liability of the City or
members of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out
of and resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or
outside the corporate limits of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)



35.12   CALLS OUTSIDE CITY.



   The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies
outside the City limits if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency
exists and that such action will not endanger persons and property within the
City limits.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])



35.13   MUTUAL AID.



   Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department may
enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire
departments.  Copies of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])



35.14   AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.



   Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of
Iowa may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa,
for violations of State and/or local fire safety regulations. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)



35.15     SUPPLEMENTAL RESPONDERS.



   Up to three employees of other City departments may be appointed as
supplemental responders.  The Fire Chief, as provided in Section 35.06 of
this chapter, shall make all appointments of supplemental responders. 
Supplemental responders will operate under Medical Control, procedures,
guidelines and standing orders that are currently in place at the Fire
Department.



CHAPTER 36
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS



 

36.01  Purpose
 
36.05  Notifications


36.02  Definitions
 
36.06  Police Authority


36.03  Cleanup Required
 
36.07  Liability


36.04  Liability for Cleanup Costs
 



 



36.01   PURPOSE.



   In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety, and welfare
from the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are
promulgated to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal and
cleanup of hazardous substance spills within the City limits.



36.02   DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect,
control, identify, analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove, or dispose of
a hazardous substance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])



   2.   “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the
actual, imminent, or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous
substance onto the land, into a water of the State, or into the atmosphere
which creates an immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety
or to the environment.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])



   3.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of
substances that presents a danger to the public health or safety and
includes, but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or
flammable, or that is an irritant or that generates pressure through
decomposition, heat, or other means.  “Hazardous substance” may include
any hazardous waste identified or listed by the administrator of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as
amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic
pollutant listed under Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous substance designated under
Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January
1, 1977, or any hazardous material designated by the Secretary of
Transportation under the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])



   4.   “Responsible person” means a person who at any time
produces, handles, stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a
hazardous substance, the release of which creates a hazardous condition,
including bailees, carriers, and any other person in control of a hazardous
substance when a hazardous condition occurs, whether the person owns the
hazardous substance or is operating under a lease, contract, or other
agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous substance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])



36.03   CLEANUP REQUIRED.



   Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the
hazardous substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the
environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters,
including ground waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to
be remedied by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as
feasible to an acceptable, safe condition.  The costs of cleanup shall be
borne by the responsible person.  If the responsible person does not cause
the cleanup to begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and
circumstances of the incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give
reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition, said
notice setting a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the
City will proceed to procure cleanup services and bill the responsible person
for all costs associated with the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished
within the deadline.  In the event that it is determined that immediate
cleanup is necessary as a result of the present danger to the public health,
safety and welfare, then no notice shall be required and the City may proceed
to procure the cleanup and bill the responsible person for all costs
associated with the cleanup.  If the bill for those services is not paid
within 30 days, the City Attorney shall proceed to obtain payment by all
legal means.  If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the City
to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the Council and
immediately seek any State or federal funds available for said cleanup.



36.04   LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.



   The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City for all of
the following:



   1.   The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents
of the City as a result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up
a hazardous substance involved in a hazardous condition.



   2.   The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the
City to evacuate people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition
caused by the person.



   3.   The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to,
destruction of, or loss of City property, including parks and roads,
resulting from a hazardous condition caused by that person, including the
costs of assessing the injury, destruction or loss.



   4.   The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or
the agents of the City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous
condition caused by that person.



36.05   NOTIFICATIONS.



   1.   A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or
disposing of a hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of
Natural Resources and the Police Chief of the occurrence of a hazardous
condition as soon as possible but not later than six hours after the onset of
the hazardous condition or discovery of the hazardous condition.  The Police
Chief shall immediately notify the Department of Natural Resources. 



   2.   Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall
notify the Police Chief, which shall then notify the Department of Natural
Resources.



36.06   POLICE AUTHORITY.



   If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer
or an authorized representative may:



   1.   Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site
of a hazardous condition, and



   2.   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of
a hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.



   No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued
under this section.



36.07   LIABILITY.



   The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages,
injuries, or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City
is the responsible person as defined in Section 36.02(4).



CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE



 

40.01  Assault
 
40.04  Unlawful Assembly


40.02  Harassment
 
40.05  Failure to Disperse


40.03  Disorderly Conduct
 
40.06  Amateur Fighting and Boxing



 



40.01   ASSAULT.



   No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:



   1.   Pain or Injury.  Any act that is intended to cause pain or
injury to another or that is intended to result in physical contact that will
be insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to
execute the act.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])



   2.   Threat of Pain or Injury.  Any act that is intended to place
another in fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful,
injurious, insulting, or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to
execute the act.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])



   An act described in subsections 1 and 2 shall not be an assault under
the following circumstances:  (i) if the person doing any of the enumerated
acts, and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or
other activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably
foreseeable incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an
unreasonable risk of serious injury or breach of the peace; (ii) if the
person doing any of the enumerated acts is employed by a school district or
accredited nonpublic school, or is an area education agency staff member who
provides services to a school or school district, and intervenes in a fight
or physical struggle or other disruptive situation that takes place in the
presence of the employee or staff member performing employment duties in a
school building, on school grounds, or at an official school function,
regardless of the location, whether the fight or physical struggle or other
disruptive situation is between students or other individuals, if the degree
and the force of the intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order
and to protect the safety of those assembled.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)



40.02   HARASSMENT.



   No person shall commit harassment.



   1.   A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate,
annoy, or alarm another person, the person does any of the following:



      A.   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph,
writing, or via electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a
manner likely to cause the other person annoyance or harm.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)



      B.   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary
device in or near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or
railroad car, or boat occupied by the other person.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)



      C.   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or
to be delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or
consent.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)



      D.   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a
law enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity,
knowing that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a
criminal act, knowing the same did not occur.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)



   2.   A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and
without legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with
the intent to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person.  As used in
this section, unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact”
means an encounter in which two or more people are in visual or physical
proximity to each other.  “Personal contact” does not require a physical
touching or oral communication, although it may include these types of
contacts.



40.03   DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   No person shall do any of the following:



   1.   Fighting.  Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any
public place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that
participants in athletic contests may engage in such conduct that is
reasonably related to that sport.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1])



   2.   Noise.  Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any
residence or public building which causes unreasonable distress to the
occupants thereof. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[2])



   3.   Abusive Language.  Direct abusive epithets or make any
threatening gesture that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely
to provoke a violent reaction by another.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[3])



   4.   Disrupt Lawful Assembly.  Without lawful authority or color of
authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct
intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[4])



   5.   False Report of Catastrophe.  By words or action, initiate or
circulate a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe,
knowing such report to be false or such warning to be baseless.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[5])



   6.   Disrespect of Flag.  Knowingly and publicly use the flag of
the United States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a
symbol of the United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that
such use will provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. 
As used in this subsection:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[6])



      A.   “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external
appearance.



      B.   “Defile” means to intentionally make physically
unclean.



      C.   “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material
designed to be flown from a pole or mast.



      D.   “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so
as to make imperfect.



      E.   “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate,
or trample.



      F.   “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or
intentionally cause a machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.



   7.   Obstruct Use of Street.  Without authority or justification,
obstruct any street, sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent
to prevent or hinder its lawful use by others.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[7])



   8.   Funeral or Memorial Service.  Within 1,000 feet of the
building or other location where a funeral or memorial service is being
conducted, or within 1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial:



      A.   Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable
distress to the persons attending the funeral or memorial service or
participating in the funeral procession.



      B.   Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture
that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a
violent reaction by another.



      C.   Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral
procession, or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral,
memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.



   This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during,
and within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession,
or burial.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)



40.04   UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.



   It is unlawful for three or more persons to assemble together, with
them or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or
any of them will commit a public offense.  No person shall willingly join in
or remain part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds
to believe it is such.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2)



40.05   FAILURE TO DISPERSE.



   A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful
assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly
to disperse.  No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse
to obey.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3) 



40.06     AMATEUR FIGHTING AND BOXING.



   Except for professional matches or contests licensed by the labor
commissioner under Chapter 90A of the Code of Iowa and Rules 875-172 through
875-177 of the Iowa Administrative Code, no holder of a liquor control
license and/or wine or beer permit under Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa, nor
the holder’s agents or employees, shall allow any boxing, wrestling, mixed
martial arts fighting, extreme fighting, ultimate fighting, shoot fighting
matches or other similar contest, events or exhibitions to occur on the
premises covered by the license and/or permit.



CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



 

41.01  Distributing Dangerous Substances
 
41.08  Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators


41.02  False Reports to or Communications with Public Safety Entities
 
41.09  Antenna and Radio Wires


41.03  Providing False Identification Information
 
41.10  Barbed Wire and Electric Fences


41.04  Refusing to Assist Officer
 
41.11  Discharging Weapons and Firearms


41.05  Harassment of Public Officers and Employees
 
41.12  Throwing and Shooting


41.06  Interference with Official Acts
 
41.13  Urinating and Defecating


41.07  Removal of an Officer’s Communication or Control Device
 
41.14  Illegal Use of Fireworks



 



41.01   DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.



   No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any
corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person
delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes
reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or
animals from the place where the substance is deposited.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)



41.02   FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.



   No person shall do any of the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)



   1.   Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire
department, a law enforcement authority or other public safety entity,
knowing that the information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a
criminal act knowing the act did not occur.



   2.   Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that
he or she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency
information or assistance. 



   3.   Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement
officer who enters the information on a citation.



41.03   PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.



   No person shall knowingly provide false identification information to
anyone known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care
provider, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of
any act that is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that
officer, emergency medical care provider, or firefighter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)



41.04   REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.



   Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace
officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or
attempting to make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal
act, shall render assistance as required.  No person shall unreasonably and
without lawful cause, refuse or neglect to render assistance when so
requested.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)



41.05   HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public
officer or employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)



41.06   INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.



   No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person
to be a peace officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider under Chapter
147A of the Code of Iowa, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, or a
person performing bailiff duties pursuant to Section 602.1303[4] of the Code
of Iowa, in the performance of any act that is within the scope of the lawful
duty or authority of that officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider,
or firefighter, or person performing bailiff duties, or shall knowingly
resist or obstruct the service or execution by any authorized person of any
civil or criminal process or order of any court.  The terms “resist” and
“obstruct” as used in this section do not include verbal harassment
unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and apparent
intention to execute a verbal threat physically.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)



41.07   REMOVAL OF AN OFFICER’S COMMUNICATION OR CONTROL DEVICE.



   No person shall knowingly or intentionally remove or attempt to remove
a communication device or any device used for control from the possession of
a peace officer or correctional officer, when the officer is in the
performance of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or
authority of that officer and the person knew or should have known the
individual to be an officer.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.12)



41.08   ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.



   No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator,
ice box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such
refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings
on premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended
and so accessible to children.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)



41.09   ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.



   It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports,
radio wires, or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building without written
consent of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])



41.10   BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.



   It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to
enclose land within the City limits without the written consent of the
Council unless such land consists of 10 acres or more and is used as
agricultural land.



41.11   DISCHARGING WEAPONS AND FIREARMS.



   1.   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be
discharged any bow or cross bow which propels any arrow, or to discharge or
cause to be discharged any rifles, shotguns, revolvers, pistols, guns, BB
guns, pellet guns, sling shots, air rifles, paintball guns or other weapons
or firearms of any kind within the City limits, except by written consent of
the City Council and approved by the Hiawatha Police Chief.



   2.   This section shall not apply to any person discharging shotguns
with bird shot for target practice or for hunting purposes on private land of
at least three acres zoned A-Agriculture, provided the person has permission
from the property owner.



   3.   This section shall not apply to any person discharging any bow
or cross bow which propels any arrow for target practice or for hunting
purposes on private land zoned A-Agriculture, provided the person has
permission from the property owner.



   4.   Any hunting or use of any weapon or firearm shall in all other
respects be carried out in strict compliance with all rules and regulations
applicable to hunting as promulgated from time to time by the Iowa Department
of Natural Resources.



   5.   No person shall intentionally discharge or cause to be
discharged any weapon or firearm in a reckless manner.



41.12   THROWING AND SHOOTING.



   It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks, or missiles of any
kind or to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB
guns, or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley,
highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building, without
written consent of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])



41.13   URINATING AND DEFECATING.



   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk,
street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building,
including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway,
doorway, or window thereof, or onto any public or private land.



41.14   ILLEGAL USE OF FIREWORKS. † 3



   1.   A person, firm, partnership, or corporation who sells consumer
fireworks to a person who is less than 18 years of age commits a simple
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $250.00.  A person who is
less than 18 years of age who purchases consumer fireworks commits a simple
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $250.00.



   2.   A person age 18 or older may use or explode consumer fireworks
during the following designated times:



      A.   July 4 from 12:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.



      B.   December 31 from 6:00 p.m. to 12:30 a.m. on January 1.



   3.   A person who uses or explodes consumer fireworks or novelties
while the use of such devices is prohibited or limited by an ordinance
adopted by the City in which the fireworks are used commits a simple
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $250.00.



   4.   A person who uses or explodes consumer fireworks or novelties
while the use of such devices is suspended by an order of the State Fire
Marshal commits a simple misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than
$250.00.



 


Notes

3 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  See also Section 160.27 of this Code of Ordinances
(Fire Code).



CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY



 

42.01  Trespassing
 
42.05  Fraud


42.02  Criminal Mischief
 
42.06  Theft


42.03  Defacing Proclamations or Notices
 
42.07  Other Public Property Offenses


42.04  Unauthorized Entry
 



 



42.01   TRESPASSING.



   1.   Prohibited.  It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass
upon the property of another. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8)



   2.   Definitions.  For purposes of this section:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[1])



      A.   “Property” includes any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure, whether
publicly or privately owned. 



      B.   “Public utility” is a public utility as defined in
Section 476.1 of the Code of Iowa or an electric transmission line as
provided in Chapter 478 of the Code of Iowa.



      C.   “Public utility property” means any land, dwelling,
building, conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure
owned, leased, or operated by a public utility and that is completely
enclosed by a physical barrier of any kind.



      D.   “Railway corporation” means a corporation, company,
or person owning, leasing, or operating any railroad in whole or in part
within this State.



      E.   “Railway property” means all tangible real and
personal property owned, leased, or operated by a railway corporation, with
the exception of any administrative building or offices of the railway
corporation.



      F.   “Trespass” means one or more of the following acts:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])



         (1)   Entering upon or in property without the express
permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the
intent to commit a public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage,
harass, or place thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.



         (2)   Entering or remaining upon or in property without
justification after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or
to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful
possession, or the agent or employee of the owner, lessee, or person in
lawful possession, or by any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee
whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance of the property.



         (3)   Entering upon or in property for the purpose or
with the effect of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by
others.



         (4)   Being upon or in property and wrongfully using,
removing therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or
therein anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual
permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.



         (5)   Entering or remaining upon or in railway property
without lawful authority or without the consent of the railway corporation
which owns, leases, or operates the railway property.  This paragraph does
not apply to passage over a railroad right-of-way, other than a track,
railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge, trestle, or railroad yard, by an unarmed
person if the person has not been notified or requested to abstain from
entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the right-of-way and the passage
over the right-of-way does not interfere with the operation of the railroad.



         (6)   Entering or remaining upon or in public utility
property without lawful authority or without the consent of the public
utility that owns, leases, or operates the public utility property.  This
paragraph does not apply to passage over public utility right-of-way by a
person if the person has not been notified or requested by posted signage or
other means to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the
right-of-way.



   3.   Specific Exceptions.  “Trespass” does not mean either of
the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])



      A.   Entering upon the property of another for the sole
purpose of retrieving personal property which has accidentally or
inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of
another, provided that the person retrieving the property takes the most
direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits
the property as quickly as is possible, and does not unduly interfere with
the lawful use of the property.  This paragraph does not apply to public
utility property where the person has been notified or requested by posted
signage or other means to abstain from entering.



      B.   Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or
highway.



42.02   CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.



   It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to
intentionally damage, deface, alter, or destroy property.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



42.03   DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.



   It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear
down, or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of
any law of the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement
or notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law
or by order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set
up.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



42.04   UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY.



   No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public
building, premises, or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or
when said building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the
public.  When open to the public, a failure to pay any required admission
fee also constitutes an unauthorized entry.



42.05   FRAUD.



   It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as
defined in Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8) 



42.06   THEFT.



   It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section
714.1 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1) 



42.07   OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES.



   The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions that are also
deemed to be public property offenses:



   1.   Chapter 22 – Library



      A.   Section 22.10 – Injury to Books or Property



      B.   Section 22.11 – Theft of Library Property



   2.   Chapter 105 – Solid Waste Control and Recycling



      A.   Section 105.06 – Littering Prohibited



   3.   Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance



      A.   Section 135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices



      B.   Section 135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing



      C.   Section 135.03 – Placing Debris On



      D.   Section 135.04 – Playing In



      E.   Section 135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley



      F.   Section 135.08 – Burning Prohibited



      G.   Section 135.12 – Dumping of Snow



   4.   Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations



      A.   Section 136.11 – Interference with Sidewalk Improvements



      B.   Section 136.15 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks



      C.   Section 136.16 – Defacing



      D.   Section 136.17 – Debris on Sidewalks



      E.   Section 136.18 – Merchandise Display



      F.   Section 136.19 – Sales Stands



CHAPTER 43
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA AND SYNTHETIC DRUGS



 

43.01  Purpose
 
43.06  Manufacture, Delivery or Offering For Sale


43.02  Controlled Substance Defined
 
43.07  Synthetic Drugs Defined


43.03  Drug Paraphernalia Defined
 
43.08  Possession, Manufacture, Delivery or Offering for


43.04  Determining Factors
 
Sale of Synthetic Drugs


43.05  Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
 
43.09  Proof of Sale for Synthetic Drugs



 



43.01     PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with
intent to use, manufacture and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined
herein.



43.02     CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED.



   The term “controlled substance” as used in this chapter is defined
as the term “controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform Controlled
Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is
hereafter amended.



43.03     DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED.



   The term “drug paraphernalia” as used in this chapter means all
equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for
use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing,
containing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.  It includes, but is not
limited to:



   1.   Growing Kits.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for
use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any
species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.



   2.   Processing Kits.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for
use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or
preparing controlled substances.



   3.   Isomerization Devices.  Isomerization devices used, intended
for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance.



   4.   Testing Equipment.  Testing equipment used, intended for use,
or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength,
effectiveness or purity of controlled substances.



   5.   Scales.  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or
designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.



   6.   Diluents.  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose, used, intended for
use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances.



   7.   Separators - Sifters.  Separation gins and sifters used,
intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in
otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana.



   8.   Mixing Devices.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and
mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding
controlled substances.



   9.   Containers.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other
containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small
quantities of controlled substances.



   10.   Storage Containers.  Containers and other objects used,
intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled
substances.



   11.   Injecting Devices.  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other
objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting
controlled substances into the human body.



   12.   Ingesting-Inhaling Device.  Objects used, intended for use,
or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin,
marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:



      A.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic
pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured
metal bowls;



      B.   Water pipes;



      C.   Carburetion tubes and devices;



      D.   Smoking and carburetion masks;



      E.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning
materials, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand;



      F.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



      G.   Chamber pipes;



      H.   Carburetor pipes;



      I.   Electric pipes;



      J.   Air driven pipes;



      K.   Chillums;



      L.   Bongs;



      M.   Ice pipes or chillers.



43.04     DETERMINING FACTORS.



   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose
of enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be considered in
addition to all other logically relevant factors:



   1.   Statements.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of
the object concerning its use.



   2.   Prior Convictions.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or
of anyone in control of the object under any State or federal law relating to
any controlled substance.



   3.   Proximity To Violation.  The proximity of the object, in time
and space, to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.



   4.   Proximity to Substances.  The proximity of the object to
controlled substances.



   5.   Residue.  The existence of any residue of controlled
substances on the object.



   6.   Evidence of Intent.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the
intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to
persons whom he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the
object to facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.



   7.   Innocence of an Owner.  The innocence of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not
prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as
drug paraphernalia.



   8.   Instructions.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with
the object concerning its use.



   9.   Descriptive Materials.  Descriptive materials accompanying the
object which explain or depict its use.



   10.   Advertising.  National and local advertising concerning its
use.



   11.   Displayed.  The manner in which the object is displayed for
sale.



   12.   Licensed Distributor or Dealer.  Whether the owner, or anyone
in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items
to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco
products.



   13.   Sales Ratios.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio
of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.



   14.   Legitimate Uses.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses
for the object in the community.



   15.   Expert Testimony.  Expert testimony concerning its use.



43.05     POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use,
drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze,
pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the
Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.



43.06     MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY OR OFFERING FOR SALE.



   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to
deliver, manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug
paraphernalia, intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or
knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will
be used, or knowing that it is designed for use to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124
of the Code of Iowa.



43.07     SYNTHETIC DRUGS DEFINED.



As used in this section:



   1.   “Synthetic cannabinoids” and/or “synthetic marijuana”
means any herbal or plant material which has been soaked, sprayed, or
otherwise enhanced with a synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound
that enables the herbal or plant material, or the smoke emitted from its
burning, to mimic or simulate the effects of a controlled substance when
inhaled, ingested, or otherwise introduced into the human body.  Street
names for such products include, but are not limited to: Bliss, Black Mamba,
Bombay Blue, Fake Weed, Genie, Spice, Zohai, K2, K3, Smoke, Pot-Purri, Buzz,
Spice 99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery, Earthquake, Stinger, Ocean Blue,
Serenity, Chronic Spice, Spice Gold, Spice Silver, Skunk, Mr. Nice Guy, Mr.
Happy, K3 Legal, Sence, Smoke, Chill X, Earth Impact, Galaxy Gold, Space
Truckin, Solar Flare, Moon Rocks, Aroma, Scope, Sky High, Atomic, G-20,
Guerrilla, Warfare, Makes Scents, g-13, Tiger Matrix, Hypnotiq, AK47, Maui
Wowie, Cloud 9 Daylights, Joker, Dead man Walking, Brain Storm, Soul Sence,
Kush, Kush Mania, Dragons Fire, Lucid, Mad Hatter, Scooby Snax, D-ZL, OMG,
Demon, Barley In, Pineapple Express and Hayze. 



   2.   “Bath salts,” “synthetic cathinones” and/or
“synthetic stimulants” means any crystalline or powdered product in
crystalline, loose powder, block, tablet, or capsule form, or any
stimulant-type product which has been soaked, sprayed, or otherwise enhanced
with a synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound that enables the
product, or the smoke emitted from its burning, to mimic or simulate the
effects of a controlled substance when inhaled, ingested,  or otherwise
introduced into the human body.  Street names for these products include,
but are not limited to: Bliss, Blue Silk, Cloud Nine, Drone, Energy-1, Ivory
Wave, Lunar Wave, Meow Meow, Ocean Burst, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Red Dove,
Snow Leopard, Stardust, Vanilla Sky, White Dove, White Knight, White
Lightening, Blizzard, Bonzai Grow, Charge Plus, Charlie, Euphoria, Hurricane,
Lunar Wave, Ocean, Pixie Dust, Posh, Scarface, Lovely Dovey, Aura, MDPV,
MDPK, MTV, Maddie, Hurricane Charlie, Black Rob, Super coke, PV, Peeve, Meph,
Drone and MCAT.



   3.   “Drug” means an article that is intended to affect the
function of the body of humans.



   4.   “Misbranded drug” means a drug for which:  (i) the label
is in any way false or misleading; (ii) the label does not bear the name and
place of business of the manufacturer, repackager, or distributor of the
finished form of the drug; (iii) the label does not bear adequate directions
for use; or (iv) the label does not bear adequate warnings against use.



   5.   “Illicit street drugs” means drugs which are trafficked
and/or consumed illegally.



   6.   “Illicit synthetic drugs” means synthetic equivalents of
the substances contained in the Cannabis plant, or in the resinous
extractives of such plant, and synthetic substances, derivatives and their
isomers with similar chemical structure and pharmacological activity to those
substances contained in the plant.  “Illicit synthetic drugs” shall
include, but not necessarily limited to, synthetic cannabinoids, synthetic
marijuana, bath salts, synthetic cathinones, synthetic stimulants and
misbranded drugs.  The following factors, taken in the totality of the
circumstances, may be considered evidence a product, substance or other
material is an illicit synthetic drug:



      A.   Marketing.  A product routinely advertised as having a
purpose for which it is rarely, if ever, suitable to be used.  Such
advertised purposes include, but are not limited to, as incense, potpourri,
food additive, therapeutic bath crystals, plant food, insect repellant, iPod
cleaner or glass cleaner.



      B.   Sales Location.  Products displayed and sold in
businesses such as liquor stores, smoke shops, and gas/convenience stores
where such advertised products typically are not sold.



      C.   Labels and Packaging.



         (1)   Products labeled as common, non-consumable
products which contain warnings not normally found on such products, such as,
but not limited to, “not for human consumption” or “not for purchase by
minors.”



         (2)   Products containing notices on the package not
normally found on similar products such as, but not limited to, “does not
contain any chemical compounds prohibited by state law,” “contains no
prohibited chemicals,” “product is in accordance with State and Federal
laws,” “does not contain AM2201 or any DEA banned substance,” “legal
herbal substance,” “100% complaint guaranteed,” “100% chemical
free” and “100% synthetic free.”



         (3)   Products the package labeling of which suggests
the user will achieve a “high,” euphoria, relaxation, mood enhancement or
other effect on the body.



      D.   Price.  The price of the advertised product is
significantly more expensive than other products marketed in the Cedar Rapids
Metro area for the same or similar use.



      E.   Misleading Directions.  The product contains directions
for the product’s use, which are not consistent with the type of product
advertised.



      F.   Similarly to Illicit Street Drugs.



         (1)   Products designed to make the substance similar in
appearance to illicit street drugs; and/or



         (2)   Products advertised using brand names and
packaging designed to make the product similar in appearance to illicit
street drugs, or labeled with names similar to commonly used street slang for
illicit street drugs; which names or labeling have no relation to the
advertised use of the product being sold.



      G.   Ingredients.  A product which has been enhanced with a
synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound that has no legitimate
relation to the advertised use of the product but mimics the effects of a
controlled substance when the product, or the smoke from the burned product,
is introduced into the human body.



      H.   Verbal or Written Representations.  Verbal or written
representations made at the place of sale or display regarding the purpose,
methods, use, or effect of the product.



   7.   “Premises” includes all or part of any structure located on
a lot parcel of land, in addition to the lot or parcel of land surrounding
the structure.



   8.   “Synthetic chemical” or “synthetic chemical compound”
refers to a chemical or chemical compound whose molecular make up is similar
to those substances the intended primary use of which is to mimic the effects
of a controlled substance when introduced into the human body.



43.08     POSSESSION, MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY OR OFFERING FOR SALE OF
SYNTHETIC DRUGS.



   It is unlawful for any person to possess, distribute, provide, give
away, sell, offer or advertise for sale, or publicly display for sale any
illicit synthetic drug.  Any owner, property manager or lessee of any
premises where such unlawful activity takes place may be deemed to have
engaged in such unlawful activity, despite not actively participating in such
unlawful activity, if that owner, property manager or lessee knew, or
reasonable should have known, such unlawful activity was occurring on the
premises.



43.09     PROOF OF SALE FOR SYNTHETIC DRUGS.



   It is not necessary to prove payment in order to prove a sale within
the meaning and intent of this chapter.



CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION



 

45.01  Persons Under Legal Age
 
45.03  Open Containers in Motor Vehicles


45.02  Public Consumption or Intoxication
 
45.04  Social Host



 



45.01   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.



As used in this section, “legal age” means 21 years of age or more.



   1.   A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or
attempt to purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic
beverages in their possession or control; except in the case of any alcoholic
beverage given or dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home
and with the knowledge, presence and consent of the parent or guardian, for
beverage or medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a
physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a
person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages during the regular
course of the person’s employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or
beer permittee under State laws.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])



   2.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s
age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic
beverage from any liquor control licensee or wine or beer permittee.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])



45.02   PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.



   1.   As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:



      A.   “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5
of the Code of Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section
232.19 of the Code of Iowa.



      B.   “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood,
breath, or urine to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a
qualified person using devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of
Public Safety.



      C.   “Peace officer” means the same as defined in Section
801.4 of the Code of Iowa.



      D.   “School” means a public or private school or that
portion of a public or private school that provides teaching for any grade
from kindergarten through grade twelve.



   2.   A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or
beer upon the public streets or highways.  A person shall not use or consume
alcoholic liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor
control license.  A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors,
wine, or beer on public school property or while attending any public or
private school-related function.  A person shall not be intoxicated in a
public place. 



   3.   A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.



   4.   When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public
intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person
that the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own
expense.  If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for
testing a sample of a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood
alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be
offered the person arrested.  In a prosecution for public intoxication,
evidence of the results of a chemical test performed under this subsection is
admissible upon proof of a proper foundation.  The percentage of alcohol
present in a person’s blood, breath, or urine established by the results of
a chemical test performed within two hours after the person’s arrest on a
charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of alcohol
present at the time of arrest.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)



45.03   OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.



[See Section 62.01(50) and (51) of this Code of Ordinances.]



45.04   SOCIAL HOST.



   A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has control
over, property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any
person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under
the age of eighteen, to consume or possess on such property any alcoholic
beverage.  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a landlord
or manager of the property or to a person under legal age who consumes or
possesses any alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance,
ceremony, or rite.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47)



CHAPTER 46
MINORS



 

46.01  Curfew
 
46.03  Contributing to Delinquency


46.02  Cigarettes and Tobacco
 



 



46.01   CURFEW.



   The Council has determined that a curfew for minors is necessary to
promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City and
specifically to reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of adults
responsible for minors; to protect the public from the illegal acts of minors
committed after the curfew hour; and to protect minors from improper
influences and criminal activity that prevail in public places after the
curfew hour.



   1.   Definitions.  For use in this section, the following terms are
defined:



      A.   “Emergency errand” means, but is not limited to, an
errand relating to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any
other situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious illness, bodily
injury, or loss of life.



      B.   “Knowingly” means knowledge that a responsible adult
should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor
in that responsible adult’s custody.  It is intended to continue to hold
the neglectful or careless adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable
standard of adult responsibility through an objective test.  It is therefore
no defense that an adult responsible for a minor was completely indifferent
to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of the minor.



      C.   “Minor” means any unemancipated person under the age
of 18 years.



      D.   “Nonsecured custody” means custody in an unlocked
multipurpose area, such as a lobby, office or interrogation room that is not
designed, set aside, or used as a secure detention area, and the person
arrested is not physically secured during the period of custody in the area;
the person is physically accompanied by a law enforcement officer or a person
employed by the facility where the person arrested is being held; and the use
of the area is limited to providing nonsecured custody only while awaiting
transfer to an appropriate juvenile facility or to court, for contacting of
and release to the person’s parents or other responsible adult or for other
administrative purposes; but not for longer than six hours without the oral
or written order of a judge or magistrate authorizing the detention.  A
judge shall not extend the period of time in excess of six hours beyond the
initial six-hour period.



      E.   “Public place” includes stores, parking lots, parks,
playgrounds, streets, alleys, and sidewalks dedicated to public use and also
includes such parts of buildings and other premises, whether publicly or
privately owned, that are used by the general public or to which the general
public is invited commercially for a fee or otherwise; or in or on which the
general public is permitted without specific invitation; or to which the
general public has access.  For purposes of this section, a vehicle or other
conveyance is considered to be a public place when in the areas defined above.



      F.   “Responsible adult” means a parent, guardian or other
adult specifically authorized by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to
have custody or control of a minor.



   2.   Curfew Established.  It is unlawful for any minor to be or
remain upon any of the alleys, streets or public places or to be in places of
business and amusement in the City between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00
a.m. of the following day.



   3.   Exceptions.  The following are exceptions to the curfew:



      A.   The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.



      B.   The minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor
resides or on either side of the place where the minor resides and the adult
responsible for the minor has given permission for the minor to be there.



      C.   The minor is present at or is traveling between home and
one of the following:



         (1)   Minor’s place of employment in a business, trade
or occupation in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged or, if
traveling, within one hour after the end or before the beginning of work;



         (2)   Minor’s place of religious activity or, if
traveling, within one hour after the end or before the beginning of the
religious activity;



         (3)   Governmental or political activity or, if
traveling, within one hour after the end or before the beginning of the
activity;



         (4)   School activity or, if traveling, within one hour
after the end or before the beginning of the activity;



         (5)   Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration,
sit-in or meeting of an association for the advancement of economic,
political, religious or cultural matters, or for any other activity protected
by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution guarantees of free exercise
of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of assembly or, if traveling, within
one hour after the end or before the beginning of the activity.



      D.   The minor is on an emergency errand for a responsible
adult;



      E.   The minor is engaged in interstate travel through the
City beginning, ending or passing through the City when such travel is by
direct route.



   4.   Responsibility of Adults.  It is unlawful for any responsible
adult knowingly to permit or to allow a minor to be in any public place in
the City within the time periods prohibited by this section unless the
minor’s presence falls within one of the above exceptions.



   5.   Enforcement Procedures.



      A.   Determination of Age.  In determining the age of the
juvenile and in the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth
certificate or driver’s license, a law enforcement officer on the street
shall, in the first instance, use his or her best judgment in determining age.



      B.   Grounds for Arrest; Conditions of Custody.  Grounds for
arrest are that the person refuses to sign the citation without
qualification; persists in violating the ordinance; refuses to provide proper
identification or to identify himself or herself; or constitutes an immediate
threat to the person’s own safety or to the safety of the public.  A law
enforcement officer who arrests a minor for a curfew violation may keep the
minor in custody either in a shelter care facility or in any nonsecured
setting.  The officer shall not place bodily restraints, such as handcuffs,
on the minor unless the minor physically resists or threatens physical
violence when being taken into custody.  A minor shall not be placed in
detention following a curfew violation.



      C.   Notification of Responsible Adult.  After a minor is
taken into custody, the law enforcement officer shall notify the adult
responsible for the minor as soon as possible.  The minor shall be released
to the adult responsible for the minor upon the promise of such person to
produce the child in court at such time as the court may direct.



      D.   Minor Without Adult Supervision.  If a law enforcement
officer determines that a minor does not have adult supervision because the
law enforcement officer cannot locate the minor’s parent, guardian or other
person legally responsible for the care of the minor, within a reasonable
time, the law enforcement officer shall attempt to place the minor with an
adult relative of the minor, an adult person who cares for the child or
another adult person who is known to the child.



   6.   Penalties.



      A.   Responsible Adult’s First Violation.  In the case of a
first violation by a minor, the law enforcement officer shall, by certified
mail, send to the adult responsible for the minor, written notice of the
violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full
enforcement of the curfew ordinance against both the responsible adult and
minor, with applicable penalties.



      B.   Responsible Adult’s Second Violation.  Any responsible
adult as defined in this section who, following receipt of a warning,
knowingly allows the minor to violate any of the provisions of this section
is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.



      C.   Minor’s First Violation.  In the case of a first
violation by a minor, the law enforcement officer shall give the minor a
written warning, which states that any subsequent violation will result in
full enforcement of the curfew ordinance against the responsible adult and
the minor, with applicable penalties, or, at the law enforcement officer’s
discretion, may issue the minor a citation for a first violation.



      D.   Minor’s Second Violation.  For the minor’s second
and subsequent violations of any of the provisions of this section, the minor
is guilty of a municipal infraction. 



46.02   CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.



   It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to smoke, use,
possess, purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes.  Possession of
tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or
cigarettes by a person under 18 years of age shall not constitute a violation
of this section if said person possesses the tobacco, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part of the
person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a
valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers
for sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)



46.03   CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.



   It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under 18 years of
age to commit any act of delinquency.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)



CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS



 



47.01  Purpose
 
47.12  Nuisance


47.02  Definitions
 
47.13  Destruction of Plant Life


47.03  Hours
 
47.14  Sales Prohibited


47.04  Public Meetings
 
47.15  Sound Equipment


47.05  Littering
 
47.16  Reservations


47.06  Travel and Speed
 
47.17  Notices or Signs


47.07  Parking
 
47.18  Snowmobiles Prohibited


47.08  Hunting or Trapping
 
47.19  Golf


47.09  Dangerous Instruments
 
47.20  Animal Control


47.10  Fires
 
47.21  Alcoholic Beverages


47.11  Camping Areas
 
47.22  Posting Rules




 



47.01     PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park
facilities by the general public by establishing rules and regulations
governing the use of park facilities.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)



47.02     DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Park” means any ground owned or leased by the City and set
apart as parks and pleasure grounds or like purposes within or without the
City, and all buildings and fixtures on said grounds.



   2.   “Vehicle” means any motor driven apparatus or trailers of
any type.



47.03     HOURS.



   All public parks shall be closed from 10:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. each
day.  No person other than a municipal employee on duty, law enforcement
officer or person authorized by written permission from the Parks and
Recreation Commission shall be present on park grounds during those hours,
unless the use is limited to a particular recreational facility which is
posted for use after 10:30 p.m.



47.04     PUBLIC MEETINGS. 



   Public meetings, religious, political or otherwise, including picnic
parties and entertainment for charitable or religious purposes, may be held
in any public park upon first obtaining permission from the Director of Parks
and Recreation.  Such assemblages shall be conducted in a lawful and orderly
manner and shall occupy such ground or building as may be assigned to or
reserved for them.



47.05     LITTERING. 



   No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter or
foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that
purpose.



47.06     TRAVEL AND SPEED.



   No person shall ride or drive any motorized vehicle or animal of any
nature upon any sidewalks, walking paths, walkways, bikeways, cement areas or
grass areas within the confines of the City parks.  No person shall ride or
drive in any public park except upon established roadways except City
vehicles or private vehicles by written permission from the Parks and
Recreation Commission and shall not exceed 10 miles per hour at any time.



47.07     PARKING.



   No person shall park automobiles or other vehicles in any public park
except in places designated by the Parks Department.  No vehicle shall be
parked in such a manner as to obstruct any drive or roadway.  Overnight
parking of any vehicle is prohibited in any park except by written permission
of the Parks and Recreation Director.



47.08     HUNTING OR TRAPPING. 



   Hunting or trapping on park grounds is prohibited.



47.09     DANGEROUS INSTRUMENTS. 



   No person shall use firearms, BB guns, slingshots, javelins, bows and
arrows, firecrackers, fireworks, or explosives of any character and other
dangerous instruments or toys on park grounds except in areas designated by
the Parks and Recreation Commission and those carried by law enforcement
officers in the performance of their duties.



47.10     FIRES.  



   Fires are prohibited except in fireplaces, fireboxes or other
designated areas.



47.11     CAMPING AREAS. 



   No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in areas
prescribed or designated by the Parks and Recreation Commission or by written
permission of the Parks and Recreation Commission.



47.12     NUISANCE. 



   No person shall use any loud, violent, obscene or profane language
while in any park, or behave in a disorderly or obscene manner or commit any
nuisance upon the grounds.



47.13     DESTRUCTION OF PLANT LIFE.



   Cutting, digging or removal of any tree, bush or plant material
including wood, turf, soil, rock, sand or gravel except by City employees is
prohibited, except as authorized by written permission of the Parks and
Recreation Director.



47.14     SALES PROHIBITED.



   No services shall be rendered for a fee or merchandise sold or made
available or business of any kind transacted or entertainment given for a fee
in any park except by permission of the Parks and Recreation Commission.



47.15     SOUND EQUIPMENT. 



   Use of musical instruments with sound amplifiers or sound equipment
that includes sound amplifiers is prohibited in all public parks except as
authorized by a park pavilion rental form.



47.16     RESERVATIONS. 



   The park grounds, picnic areas, pavilions and sports areas are intended
for use by the citizens of the City on a first come, first served basis,
subject to the following:



   1.   Persons or organizations having reservations shall have
priority in that area of park grounds, picnic area, pavilions or sports area
during the times and dates stated on said permit or reservation.



   2.   Application for reservations shall be made to the Parks and
Recreation Department at Hiawatha City Hall.



   3.   Fees for reserving a pavilion are established by resolution of
the Council.



47.17   NOTICES OR SIGNS. 



   No person shall enter upon portions of the grounds in disregard of
signs or notices posted by the Parks and Recreation Commission forbidding the
same, except City employees in the performance of their duties. No person
shall post, paste, fasten, paint or affix any placard, bill, notice, or sign
upon any structure, tree, stone, fence or enclosure along or within any park,
except City employees in the performance of their duties.



47.18   SNOWMOBILES PROHIBITED. 



   Operation of snowmobiles is prohibited in any public park except in
designated areas or trails.



47.19   GOLF. 



   No person shall play, practice or otherwise hit a golf ball in any
manner in any park except in designated areas.



47.20   ANIMAL CONTROL.



   The following rules and regulations apply to animals in public parks:



   1.   No horses, ponies, mules or donkeys are permitted, except in
designated areas and trails or by permission by the Parks and Recreation
Commission.



   2.   No owner of any animal shall allow the animal to be in or
within 50 feet of any splash pad or recreation area in a City park, except
properly trained guide dogs are permitted in and within 50 feet of pavilions.



   3.   No animal shall be allowed in any public park unless it is
attached to a leash not more than six feet in length and having sufficient
strength to restrain the animal, and the leash must be held by a person
capable of restraining and controlling the animal.



   4.   All excrement or droppings from an animal in a public park
shall be immediately cleaned up by the person in charge of the animal and
deposited in a sanitary and enclosed litter bag and disposed of in a sanitary
manner.



47.21     ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. 



   No person shall bring, use, consume or have in his or her possession in
a City park, beer in a keg or any other container larger than one quart,
except beer permit holders and suppliers or vendors authorized by the
Council.  Permit holders vending beer in City parks must provide for
adequate law enforcement.  No person shall bring, use or consume beer in or
within any playing area, fields or courts.  All other types of alcoholic
beverages are prohibited in City parks.



47.22     POSTING RULES. 



   Printed copies of the rules set out in this chapter shall be posted in
conspicuous places in the public parks of the City.



CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE



 

50.01  Definition of Nuisance
 
50.06  Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice


50.02  Nuisances Enumerated
 
50.07  Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure


50.03  Other Conditions
 
50.08  Weed Control Procedure


50.04  Nuisances Prohibited
 
50.09  Keeping Disorderly House


50.05  Nuisance Abatement
 



 



50.01   DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.



   Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to
the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially
to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property
is a nuisance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)



50.02   NUISANCES ENUMERATED.



   The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions
that are deemed to be nuisances in the City:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)



   1.   Offensive Smells.  Erecting, continuing, or using any building
or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture
that, by occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or
other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or
property of individuals or the public.



   2.   Filth or Noisome Substance.  Causing or suffering any offal,
filth, or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the
prejudice of others.



   3.   Impeding Passage of Navigable River.  Obstructing or impeding
without legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or
collection of water.



   4.   Water Pollution.  Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or
impure the water of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the
same from its natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.



   5.   Blocking Public and Private Ways.  Obstructing or encumbering,
by fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places, or burying grounds.



   6.   Billboards.  Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs,
whether erected and constructed on public or private property, that so
obstruct and impair the view of any portion or part of a public street,
avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track
as to render dangerous the use thereof.  (See also Section 62.06)



   7.   Storing of Flammable Junk.  Depositing or storing of flammable
junk, such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in
such articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of
fireproof construction.  (See also Chapter 51)



   8.   Air Pollution.  Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly
ash.



   9.   Grass, Weeds, Brush.  Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush
or other vegetation in the City so as to constitute a health, safety or fire
hazard.  Each owner and each person in possession or control of any property
shall be responsible to keep said lot, along with parking adjacent thereto,
alleys, public ways or areas up to the centerline of said ways free of any
noxious weeds and to keep grasses and weeds on said lot mowed so that grass
and weeds are less than 8 inches in height.  However, grass and weeds
located on undeveloped and unplatted property located more than 100 feet from
developed or platted property shall be mowed so that grass and weeds are less
than 18 inches in height.



   10.   Dutch Elm Disease.  Trees infected with Dutch elm disease. 
(See also Chapter 151)



   11.   Airport Air Space.  Any object or structure hereafter erected
within 1,000 feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established
airport or landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation
including take-off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a
proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.



   12.   Houses of Ill Fame.  Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose
of prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the
Code of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as
defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or
houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are
carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.



   13.   Stagnant Water.  All ponds or pools of stagnant water.



   14.   Diseased Animals.  All diseased animals running at large.



   15.   Animal Carcasses.  Carcasses of animals not disposed of
within 24 hours after death, as provided by law.



   16.   Effluent from Septic Tank.  Effluent from septic tank or
drain field running or ponding on the ground in the open.



   17.   Obstructing Streets, Sidewalks, Parkings and Drains. 
Obstructing or impeding by placement of any article or substance upon or in
any street, alley, sidewalk, parking, gutter, drainage ditch, sewer or catch
basin.



   18.   Wires.  All wires which are strung less than 15 feet above
the surface of the ground.



   19.   Obscene Language.  The public use of profane or obscene
language.



   20.   Pollution.  The pollution of any public well or cistern,
stream or other body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or
other substances.



   21.   Unsecured Areas.  Failure to secure areas, buildings or
places against unauthorized access where such access threatens the health or
safety of individuals, or is an attractive nuisance to children.



   22.   Explosives.  All explosives, inflammable liquids and other
dangerous substances stored in any manner or in any amount other than that
provided by this Code of Ordinances.



   23.   Fireworks.  All use or display of fireworks, except as
provided in this Code of Ordinances.



   24.   Noise.  All unnecessary noise and annoying vibrations.



   25.   Slaughter Houses.  Slaughter houses which are kept in such a
condition as to be offensive or annoying to the public.



   26.   Communicable Diseases.  Exposure of any person to any
communicable disease by unlawful act or practice.



   27.   Drugs and Chemicals.  The unlawful manufacture, formulation,
sale, distribution and/or use of drugs, medication, devices, materials and/or
chemicals.



   28.   Privy Vaults.  Any privy, the vault of which is less than
five feet deep, unless it has connection with the public sewer; privies that
emit or cause an offensive or noxious or disagreeable smell or odor; privies
which do not conform in their construction with the rules of the County Board
of Health; privies which are not watertight and are located within 75 feet of
any well, spring or other source of water used for drinking or culinary
purposes; privies and septic tank systems on land abutting a sanitary sewer.



50.03   OTHER CONDITIONS.



   The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other conditions that are deemed to be nuisances:



   1.   Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51)



   2.   Dangerous Buildings (See Chapter 145)



   3.   Drug Paraphernalia (See Chapter 43)



   4.   Park Regulations (See Chapter 47)



   5.   Clandestine Laboratories/Grow Operations (See Chapter 52)



   6.   Noise Control (See Chapter 53)



   7.   Connection to Public Sewer and Drainage Systems (See Chapters
95 - 99)



   8.   Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)



   9.   Numbering of Buildings (See Chapter 150)



   10.   Trees (See Chapter 151)



   11.   Property Maintenance (See Chapter 164)



50.04   NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a
nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this
chapter or State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)



50.05   NUISANCE ABATEMENT.



   Whenever any authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists,
such officer has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether
to utilize the nuisance abatement procedure described in Section 50.06 of
this chapter or the municipal infraction procedure referred to in Section
50.07.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



50.06   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE.



   Any nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided
for in this section:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



   1.   Contents of Notice to Property Owner.  The notice to abate
shall contain: † 4



      A.   Description of Nuisance.  A description of what
constitutes the nuisance.



      B.   Location of Nuisance.  The location of the nuisance.



      C.   Acts Necessary to Abate.  A statement of the act or acts
necessary to abate the nuisance.



      D.   Reasonable Time.  A reasonable time within which to
complete the abatement.



      E.   Assessment of City Costs.  A statement that if the
nuisance or condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is
made within the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs
against the property owner.



   2.   Method of Service.  The notice may be in the form of an
ordinance or sent by certified mail to the property owner.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



   3.   Request for Hearing.  Any person ordered to abate a nuisance
may have a hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists.  A
request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk
within the time stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed
that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered.  The hearing will
be before the Council at a time and place fixed by the Council.  The
findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to
exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable time under the
circumstances.



   4.   Abatement in Emergency.  If it is determined that an emergency
exists by reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition,
the City may perform any action that may be required under this chapter
without prior notice.  The City shall assess the costs as provided in
subsection 6 of this section after notice to the property owner under the
applicable provisions of subsection 1 and 2, and the hearing as provided in
subsection 3.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



   5.   Abatement by City.  If the person notified to abate a nuisance
or condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the
required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense
incurred.  The itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk, who
shall pay such expenses on behalf of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



   6.   Collection of Costs.  The Clerk shall send a statement of the
total expense incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed
to abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has
not been paid within one month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the
County Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same
manner as, general property taxes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



   7.   Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement.  If the amount
expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds $500.00, the City may
permit the assessment to be paid in up to 10 annual installments, to be paid
in the same manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments
against benefited property under State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)



   8.   Failure to Abate.  Any person causing or maintaining a
nuisance who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the
reasonable time required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation
of this Code of Ordinances.



50.07   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.



   In lieu of the abatement procedures set forth in Section 50.06, the
requirements of this chapter may be enforced under the procedures applicable
to municipal infractions as set forth in Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.



50.08     WEED CONTROL PROCEDURE.



   The following special abatement procedure is applicable, in addition to
any other procedure, to the control of weeds.



   1.   Notice Provided.  The enactment and posting and annual posting
of this section on or before May 1 each year shall constitute notice of its
provisions to all property owners to comply with the terms thereof, and such
notification shall be construed as due notice as required by Section
364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa.



   2.   Removal by City.  In the event that any property owner fails
to comply with such notice by May 15 of any given year, then a person duly
designated by the Mayor or City Administrator shall destroy or remove any
such weeds as defined in subsection 50.02(9) of this chapter without further
notice.



   3.   Subsequent Deadline of Notice.  June 1, July 1, August 1 and
September 1 are subsequent deadlines for additional cutting of such weeds,
but said annual posting of this section shall be deemed due notice for all
subsequent deadlines.  The intent of this subsection is to require the
removal of weeds a minimum of every 30 days from May 1 through October 1.



   4.   Grading or Leveling.  In the event any such nuisance cannot be
cut, removed or destroyed by the usual and ordinary methods because of the
terrain or rough surface of the property, then the person designated to
remove or destroy the weeds may cause the property to be graded or otherwise
leveled sufficiently so that such cutting, removal or destruction can be
accomplished.



   5.   Additional Control Required.  In addition to the May 1, June
1, July 1, August 1 and September 1 deadlines, the Council or its duly
authorized representative may from time to time require the property owner to
cut, remove or destroy such public nuisances as described in subsection
50.02(9) at other times during any year, and for this purpose shall give the
property owner a notice in writing by ordinary or certified mail to the last
known mailing address of said property owner, and if the property owner fails
to abate the public nuisance by the date designated in said written notice,
then the person designated to remove or destroy the weeds shall abate the
nuisance and the cost thereof shall be assessed as provided in this
section.  Notice shall be by ordinary or certified mail at least five days
before the designated deadline, but notice may be waived by the property
owner.



   6.   Costs Assessed.  When the duly designated person has completed
the abatement of any such nuisance after any deadline as established herein
for the abatement of a public nuisance under the provisions of this section,
such person shall certify the costs and expenses thereof to the Clerk, who
shall notify the property owner of said costs by ordinary or certified
mail.  Any assessments unpaid 30 days after levy shall be certified to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as other special
assessments.



50.09     KEEPING DISORDERLY HOUSE.



   1.   Prohibited.  No person shall permit or suffer to continue,
without taking legal steps to prevent the same, any quarreling, fighting,
disorderly conduct, or any other conduct or condition that threatens injury
to persons or damage to property, or loud, raucous, disagreeable noises to
the disturbance of the neighborhood, or to the disturbance of the general
public, upon any premises owned by the person or in the person’s
possession.  For the purposes of this section, “to the disturbance of the
general public” includes the disturbance of persons beyond the subject
premises and/or to the disturbance of persons upon public places, including
peace officers.



   2.   Authority to Restore Order and Disperse; Failure to Disperse. 
Upon issuance of a citation for a violation of this section, any peace
officer of the City shall have authority to restore order upon the subject
premises, up to and including ordering the dispersal of persons from the
subject premises.  Any person who fails or refuses to obey and abide by such
an order shall be guilty of a violation of this section.



 


Notes

4 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  A suggested form of notice for the abatement of
nuisances is included in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances.  Caution
is urged in the use of this administrative abatement procedure, particularly
where cost of abatement is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to
whether or not a nuisance does in fact exist.  If compliance is not secured
following notice and hearings, we recommend you review the situation with
your attorney before proceeding with abatement and assessment of costs. 
Your attorney may recommend proceedings in court under Chapter 657 of the
Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.



CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES



 

51.01  Definitions
 
51.04  Exceptions


51.02  Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited
 
51.05  Notice to Abate


51.03  Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance
 



 



51.01   DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Hobby vehicle” means an unlicensed motor vehicle,
including (but not limited to) dragsters, stock cars, Indy-type racers,
midget racers, all-terrain vehicles, dune buggies, go-carts, or competition
pulling garden or farm tractors.  For the purpose of this chapter, golf
carts, boat trailers, common utility trailers, camping trailers or snowmobile
trailers are not considered hobby vehicles.



   2.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any
other non-ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper,
trash, rubber, debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled
vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or
appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or
discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or
hardware.  Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is
not considered junk.



   3.   “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage
with the County Treasurer or unlicensed and having any of the following
characteristics:



      A.   Broken Glass.  Any vehicle with a broken or cracked
windshield, window, headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken
glass.



      B.   Broken, Loose, or Missing Part.  Any vehicle with a
broken, loose, or missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel or trunk
lid.



      C.   Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects.  Any vehicle
that has become the habitat for rats, mice, snakes, or any other vermin or
insects.



      D.   Flammable Fuel.  Any vehicle that contains gasoline or
any other flammable fuel.



      E.   Inoperable.  Any motor vehicle that lacks an engine or
two or more wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle
totally inoperable, or that cannot be moved under its own power or has not
been used as an operating vehicle for a period of 30 days or more.



      F.   Defective or Obsolete Condition.  Any other vehicle
that, because of its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way
constitutes a threat to the public health and safety.



      G.   Tires.  Any vehicle not equipped with four inflated
tires.



      H.   Unlicensed.  Any vehicle not displaying a current year
license plate, one month after such license is required.



   Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the
finding that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.



   4.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street,
except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks, and includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile,
truck, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination
thereof.



51.02   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain
on any private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or
junk vehicle.



51.03   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.



   It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon
private property, unless excepted by Section 51.04, constitutes a threat to
the health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of
Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa.  If any junk or junk vehicle is kept upon
private property in violation hereof, the owner of or person occupying the
property upon which it is located shall be prima facie liable for said
violation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])



51.04     EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk, hobby vehicle,
or junk vehicle stored:



   1.   Structure.  Within a garage or other enclosed structure; or



   2.   Salvage Yard.  Within an auto salvage yard or junk yard
lawfully operated within the City; or



   3.   Repair or Restoration.  On premises owned or occupied by the
owners of vehicles which are inoperable solely by reason of repair or
restoration being done thereon, provided the following conditions are met:



      A.   The period of repair of a vehicle or restoration of an
automobile does not exceed 30 days.



      B.   Such activity does not become offensive to the adjacent
property occupants.



51.05   NOTICE TO ABATE.



   Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private
property in violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five days
initiate abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of
Ordinances.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])



CHAPTER 52
CLANDESTINE LABORATORIES/GROW OPERATIONS



 

52.01  Definitions
 
52.04  Public Records


52.02  Cleanup and Nuisance Abatement Required
 
52.05  Police Authority


52.03  Removal of Placards and/orRelease From Impound
 
52.06  Penalties



 



52.01     DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Building or structure” includes apartments, single-family
homes, garages, hotel/motel rooms, mobile homes, rooms for rent, duplex
dwellings, or any other building or structure.



   2.   “Clandestine laboratory/grow operation” means a location or
operation, including (but not limited to) buildings, structures, vehicles,
trailers, or mobile homes, equipped with glassware, heating devices,
hardware, containers, lighting, heating devices, humidity control devices,
and fertilizers, precursors or related reagents and solvents needed to
unlawfully prepare or manufacture controlled substances as defined in Chapter
124 of the Code of Iowa.



   3.   “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect,
control, identify, analyze, disassemble, treat, remove, or otherwise disperse
all substances and materials, including but not limited to those found to be
hazardous as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa and controlled
substances as defined in Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, including
contamination caused by those chemicals or substances.



   4.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of
substances that presents a danger to the public health or safety and
includes, but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or
flammable, and other substances as defined in Chapter 124 and sections
455B.11 and 455B.381 of the Code of Iowa.



52.02     CLEANUP AND NUISANCE ABATEMENT REQUIRED.



   1.   Whenever any portion of a building, structure, vehicle or home
has been used as part of a clandestine laboratory/grow operation as in the
making, manufacturing or “cooking” of methamphetamine or any other
controlled substance as defined within Code of Iowa Chapter 124, as
determined by the Hiawatha Police Department, other State or federal law
enforcement agency and/or certified peace officer having jurisdiction within
the Hiawatha City limits, those portions of buildings or structures shall be
deemed a nuisance.



      A.   If the entire building or structure is declared to be a
nuisance under this chapter, it shall be vacated, placarded, and remain
abandoned until the following conditions are met:



         (1)   The owner or landlord shall apply to the City
Building Department for a permit to abate the nuisance.  No abatement work
on the property shall begin until such permit is issued by the City.  Permit
applications will be given priority by City Officials to expedite abatement,
and any delays caused solely by the City will not be held against the
property owner.



         (2)   The owner or landlord, at his or her own expense,
shall provide certification from an American Board of Industrial Hygiene
(ABIH) Certified Industrial Hygienist that the known hazardous substances
associated with a clandestine laboratory/grow operation process have been
eliminated or reduced to the point that it is again safe to occupy the
structure prior to the issuance of a new certificate of occupancy.



      B.   If a portion of a building or structure is declared to be
a nuisance under this chapter, that portion will be placarded, vacated and
remain abandoned until the conditions of paragraph 52.02(1)(A) are met. 
Those portions of the building or structure shall be tested by an American
Board of Industrial Hygiene (ABIH) Certified Industrial Hygienist as set
forth in subsections 52.02(2–4).  All other portions of the building or
structure where other residents, tenants, and/or businesses or individuals
are located will be placarded with the following notice:



   YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED:



   The City of Hiawatha has identified and declared a portion of this
building or structure to be a nuisance pursuant to Hiawatha Code Chapter 52,
Clandestine Laboratory/Grow Operation.  The Owner/Landlord has 72 hours to
test the portions of the building or structure declared to be a nuisance for
the presence of hazardous substances.  Portions of the building or structure
that share common walls, floors, ceilings, and heating and/or cooling systems
are also required to be tested.  The Owner/Landlord will have 30 days to
abate the nuisance from all portions of the building so affected. 



   If you have questions or concerns, please contact your landlord, the
Hiawatha Police Department at (319) 393-1212, or the Hiawatha City Building
Department at (319) 393-1515.



      C.   If a vehicle is declared to be a nuisance under this
chapter, it will be vacated, placarded, and impounded at the owner’s
expense, leaving the contents of the vehicle intact, except for items
collected as evidence, or items identified by law enforcement as being a
hazardous substance in need of immediate removal.  The vehicle shall remain
vacated and placarded until the owner, at his or her own expense, shall
provide certification from an ABIH Certified Industrial Hygienist that the
known hazardous substances associated with a clandestine laboratory/grow
operation process have been eliminated or reduced to the point that it is
again safe to occupy the vehicle.



   2.   The amount of methamphetamine residue, including the residue of
precursor chemicals, present in the building, structure, or vehicle shall be
no more than 0.1 micrograms per 100 square centimeters or less prior to the
issuance of a new certificate of occupancy.



      A.   Inspection and testing shall be done in each room of a
single dwelling unit and shall include basement, attic areas, attached garage
and heat and cooling duct systems.



      B.   Inspection and testing shall be done in the passenger
compartment, enclosed trunk area, and heat and cooling system of vehicles.



      C.   Inspection and testing of structures other than dwelling
units and exterior property areas shall be determined case by case based on
the locations of hazardous substance storage, use, or disposal.



      D.   Test sampling shall be performed in accordance with EPA
Standard Operating Procedures 2001 and 2011.



      E.   Cleanup and disposal of properties, items, materials, or
chemicals shall be done in compliance with all applicable State and federal
standards and procedures, including personnel safety procedures.



   3.   Any time a garage that is attached to and/or shares a common
access point to living quarters is used from a clandestine laboratory/grow
operation, the making, manufacturing, or cooking of methamphetamine or any
other controlled substance as defined within Code of Iowa Chapter 124, the
garage and living quarters will be deemed abandoned and unsafe until such
time as the requirements of paragraph 52.02(1)(A) are met.



   4.   Any time a clandestine laboratory/grow operation is found in a
multi-unit building or structure, including a motel/hotel, inspection and
testing shall take place in the adjacent units that share a common wall or
floor/ceiling with the clandestine laboratory/grow operation.  Additionally,
testing will take place in any/all units sharing a common heating or cooling
system with the clandestine laboratory/grow operation.  Testing shall be
completed within 72 hours of the posting of the original placard.  Abatement
shall be completed within 30 days of the posting of the original placard.



      A.   Inspection and testing of adjacent units will be confined
to rooms sharing the common wall or floor/ceiling unless test results show
the presence of a hazardous substance.  Inspection and testing will continue
to expand to adjacent rooms, buildings or structures until such time that
adjacent buildings and structures are in compliance with paragraph
52.02(1)(A).



      B.   If the inspection and test results indicate that an
adjacent unit is contaminated by hazardous substances, it too shall be
placarded to preclude occupancy until it can be brought into compliance.



   5.   A placard shall contain a nuisance abatement notice directed to
the owner of the building, structure, or vehicle to which it is attached. 
The notice shall state:



   The City of Hiawatha has identified and declared [this building or
structure] [portions of this building or structure] [this vehicle] to be a
nuisance pursuant to Hiawatha Code Chapter 52, Clandestine Laboratory/Grow
Operation.  You have 72 hours to test for the presence of hazardous
substances.  Any portions of the building or structure that share common
walls, floors, ceilings, and heating and/or cooling systems with the affected
areas are also required to be tested.  You have 30 days to abate the
nuisance from [this building or structure] [all portions of the building or
structure] [the vehicle] so affected. 



   If you have questions or concerns, please contact the Hiawatha Police
Department at (319) 393-1212, or the Hiawatha City Building Department at
(319) 393-1515.



52.03     REMOVAL OF PLACARDS AND/OR RELEASE FROM IMPOUND.



   1.   All buildings and structures, or portions of buildings and
structures, shall remain placarded for no occupancy until such time that test
results are provided to the City of Hiawatha showing compliance with the
standards as set forth in paragraph 52.02(1)(A).



   2.   All vehicles shall remain placarded for no occupancy and shall
remain impounded at the owner’s expense until such time that test results
are provided to the  City of Hiawatha showing compliance with the standards
as set for in paragraph 52.02(1)(C).



   3.   The prohibition of entrance into a placarded building,
structure, or vehicle does not apply to City, County, State, and federal law
enforcement officers, firefighters, members of the city or county building
departments, members of City, County, and State health departments, or those
actively involved in the cleanup of the buildings, structures, or vehicles.



   4.   All vehicles meeting the criteria for disposal as an abandoned
vehicle as described in Code of Iowa Section 321.89, can and shall be
disposed of following the guidelines set forth within the Code of Iowa.



52.04     PUBLIC RECORDS.



   The Police Department shall maintain a list, as a public record
available for inspection by the public, of the addresses of all buildings,
structures, or vehicles that have been deemed a nuisance pursuant to this
chapter.  All entries will include the date the building, structure, or
vehicle was declared a nuisance pursuant to this chapter and the date the
building, structure, or vehicle was certified as safe to occupy.  All
entries shall remain on this list for not less than three years after being
certified as safe to occupy, or in the case of methamphetamine manufacturing,
below 0.1 micrograms per 100 square centimeters.



52.05     POLICE AUTHORITY.



   If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer
or an authorized representative may:



   1.   Placard the buildings and/or structures deemed to be a nuisance.



   2.   Placard and impound vehicles deemed to be a nuisance.



   3.   Evacuate persons from buildings and/or structures where
clandestine laboratories/grow operations are located.



   4.   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of
a clandestine laboratory/grow operation and limit access to cleanup personnel.



52.06     PENALTIES.



   1.   No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer
issued under this section.  Violation of an order by a law enforcement
official pursuant this chapter shall constitute a simple misdemeanor.



   2.   Violation of this chapter is a municipal infraction and may be
prosecuted pursuant to Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.



CHAPTER 53
NOISE CONTROL



 

53.01  Definitions
 
53.04  Measurement of Sound


53.02  Maximum Permissible Sound Levels
 
53.05  Enforcement


53.03  Noise Prohibitions and Limited Sound Sources
 



 



53.01     DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “A-weighted sound level” means the sound pressure level in
decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. 
The level so read is designated dBA.



   2.   “Commercial” or “commercial district” means any
property which is zoned for any commercial use as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance, and on which there is no commercial use or residential use.



   3.   “Decibels” means a unit for measuring the volume of sound,
equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure
of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20
micronewtons per square meter).



   4.   “Exhaust system” means the device or combination of devices
that collects the exhaust from the engine or motor, delivers the exhaust to
the atmosphere, and reduces the noise emissions.  “Exhaust system”
includes manifold or headers, exhaust pipe, muffler, and tail pipe.



   5.   “Gross vehicle weight rating” means the value specified by
the manufacturer as the recommended maximum weighted load of a single motor
vehicle.  When trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination
weight rating is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended
maximum loaded weight of the combined vehicle.



   6.   “Industrial” or “industrial district” means any
property zoned for any industrial use as defined in the Zoning Ordinance, and
on which there is no commercial use or residential use.



   7.   “Motor vehicle” means every vehicle which is self-propelled.



   8.   “Noise disturbance” means any transmission of sound across
a real property boundary from a source specifically limited by this chapter,
which exceeds the sound level limits set forth in Table 1 entitled “Maximum
Permissible Sound Levels from Limited Sources by Receiving Land Use.”



   9.   “Real property boundary” means an imaginary line along the
ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property
owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including
intra-building real property divisions.



   10.   “Receiving land use” means the use or occupancy of the
property which receives the transmission of sound.



   11.   “Residential” or “residential district” means any
property on which is located a building or structure used wholly or partially
for living or sleeping purposes.  This definition does not include park
custodial residences or school or college dormitories.



   12.   “Sound” means an oscillation in pressure, particle
displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with
internal forces which cause compression and rarefaction of that medium.  The
description of sound may include any characteristic of sound, including
duration, density, and frequency.



   13.   “Sound level” means the weighted sound pressure level
contained by the use of the sound level meter and A-weighting network, such
as a, b, or c as specified in American National Standards Institute
Specification for Sound Level Meters, ANSI S1, 4-1971.  If the frequency
weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.



   14.   “Sound level meter” means an instrument used to measure
sound pressure.



   15.   “Sound pressure” means the instantaneous difference
between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given
point in space, as produced by sound energy.



   16.   “Sound pressure level” means twenty times the logarithm to
the base 10 of the ratio of the root mean squared sound pressure to the
reference pressure of 20 micropascals.



   17.   “Used” or “occupied,” where either word appears, shall
be deemed to include the words “intended, designed, or arranged to be used
or occupied.”



53.02     MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS.



 

TABLE 1


Maximum Permissible Sound Levels From Limited Sources by Receiving Land Use


Zoning Category
of Receiving Land Use
 
Legal Time
 
Sound Level Limit (dBA)


Residence District
 
7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
 
60


Residence District
 
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
 
50


Commercial District
 
At all times
 
65


Industrial District
 
At all times
 
75 (20-83)



 



53.03     NOISE PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITED SOUND SOURCES.



   The following sound sources are limited by this chapter:



   1.   Radios and Other Devices in Motor Vehicles.  No person shall
perform, create, cause, or permit a radio, television set, musical
instrument, or any other device to produce, reproduce, or amplify sound to
create a noise in excess of 86 dBA at 25 feet from such device when operated
on a motor vehicle.



   2.   Muffler Cutouts.  No person shall use a muffler cutout,
bypass, or similar device on a motor vehicle on a public highway.



   3.   Vehicle Exhaust System.  Every motor vehicle shall be at all
times equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant
operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke.  (The
intent of this provision is that it is necessary to prevent both noise and
smoke, and either one constitutes a violation.)  Noise which is measured at
a distance of at least 25 feet from the near side of the nearest lane being
monitored at a height of at least 4 feet above the immediate surrounding
surface as follows is excessive or unusual noise:



 

Motor Vehicle Designation
 
Speed of 35 MPH or Less
 
Speed Over
35 MPH


Motor vehicles or a combination of vehicles towed by a motor vehicle with a
manufacturer’s gross vehicle rating or gross combination weight rating of
10,000 pounds or more
 
90 dBA or more
 
94 dBA or more


Any other motor vehicle or any combination of vehicles towed by any motor
vehicle
 
80 dBA or more
 
84 dBA or more



 



   4.   Animals and Birds.  No person shall own, possess or harbor any
animal or bird which frequently or for continued duration emits sounds native
to the species which are a noise disturbance.  Excepted from the provisions
of this subsection are guide dogs for the blind and the deaf.



   5.   Radios, Television, Phonographs, etc. No person shall operate,
play or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph,
drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or similar device which produces,
reproduces or amplifies sound at a sound level which creates a noise
disturbance.  Church or clock carillons, bells or chimes; parades or
processions, provided the conditions of the permit are met; mobile radio or
telephone signal devices; and sanctioned racing events, are all excepted from
the provisions of this subsection.



   6.   Lawn-mowing Equipment.  No person shall use or operate or
permit the use or operation of a power lawn mower, power trimmer or other
gasoline or electric powered device intended for mowing or trimming a lawn
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following morning if such
use or operation creates a noise disturbance as defined in this chapter.  No
person shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of a gasoline
powered lawn mower which does not have a muffler if such use or operation
creates a noise disturbance as defined by this chapter.



   7.   Chain Saws.  No person shall use or operate or permit the use
or operation of a power chain saw between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. the following morning if such use or operation creates a noise
disturbance as defined in this chapter.



   8.   Solid Waste Collection and/or Hauling Equipment.  No person
shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of any solid waste
collection and/or hauling equipment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.



   Governmental fire department equipment, and devices used by emergency
vehicles or by governmental officials or organizations for authorized public
purposes, are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.



53.04     MEASUREMENT OF SOUND.



   Sound level measurement from limited sound sources, for purposes of
this chapter, shall be measured using a sound level meter at the real
property boundary of the receiving property, or at a point reasonably
proximate to the real property boundary and shall be measured at a height of
four feet above the immediate ground surface.



53.05     ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of this chapter which prohibit the making, continuing,
or causing the making or continuance of a noise disturbance shall be enforced
only upon receipt of a complaint made or filed with City officials by a
person disturbed by such noise disturbance.  Certification by an official
charged with enforcement of provisions of this chapter that such complaint
was made shall be sufficient to establish the fact of complaint.  However,
peace officers may enforce violations of this section without the necessity
of such complaint.



CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL



 



55.01  Definitions
 
55.12  Golf Courses


55.02  Animal Neglect
 
55.13  Molesting Animals


55.03  Livestock Neglect
 
55.14  Rabies Vaccination


55.04  Abandonment of Cats and Dogs
 
55.15  Owner’s Duty


55.05  Livestock
 
55.16  Confinement


55.06  At Large Prohibited
 
55.17  At Large: Impoundment


55.07  Damage or Interference
 
55.18  Disposition of Animals


55.08  Annoyance or Disturbance
 
55.19  Contract with Humane Society


55.09  Sanitation
 
55.20  Hold Harmless


55.10  Female Dogs or Cats
 
55.21  Pet Awards Prohibited


55.11  Releasing Animals
 




 



55.01   DEFINITIONS.



   The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.



   1.   “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any
medium including but not limited to print, radio, television, sign, display,
label, tag or articulation.



   2.   “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)



   3.   “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not
under the control of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle,
or housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel.



   4.   “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the
following:



      A.   The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.



      B.   A recruitment for employment or membership in an
organization.



      C.   A solicitation to make an investment.



      D.   An amusement or entertainment activity.



   5.   “Fair” means any of the following:



      A.   The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State
Fair Board pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event
conducted by a fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.



      B.   An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.



      C.   An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or
concession booths.



   6.   “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill”
as defined in Section 99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.



   7.   “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine,
caprine, equine, ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas and emus; farm
deer as defined in Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa; or poultry.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)



   8.   “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or
harboring an animal.



   9.   “Pet” means a living dog, cat, or an animal normally
maintained in a small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not
limited to a rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch,
tropical fish, goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko, or iguana.



55.02   ANIMAL NEGLECT.



   It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines, in any place, an
animal, excluding livestock, to fail to supply the animal during confinement
with a sufficient quantity of food or water, or to fail to provide a confined
dog or cat with adequate shelter, or to torture, deprive of necessary
sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by any means that causes
unjustified pain, distress or suffering.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)



55.03   LIVESTOCK NEGLECT.



   It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any
place to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary
animal husbandry practices or to deprive the livestock of necessary
sustenance or to injure or destroy livestock by any means that causes pain or
suffering in a manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)



55.04   ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.



   A person who has ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon
the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another
person who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the
cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)



55.05   LIVESTOCK.



   It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except by
written consent of the Council or except in compliance with the City’s
zoning regulations.



55.06   AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at large within
the corporate limits of the City.



55.07   DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.



   It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such
animal to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or
interference with, the premises.



55.08   ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.



   It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow or permit such dog to
cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person by frequent and habitual
howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise, or by running after or chasing
persons, bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles.



55.09     SANITATION.



   It is the duty of every person owning or having custody or control of
an animal to clean up, remove and dispose of the feces deposited by such
animal upon public property, park property, public right-of-way or the
property of another person.



55.10     FEMALE DOGS OR CATS.



   A female dog or cat while in season shall be confined in an enclosure
or building and not be permitted off the premises of its owner except while
such animal is being transported.



55.11     RELEASING ANIMALS.



   No person except the owner shall willfully open any door or gate on any
private premises for the purpose of enticing or enabling any animal to leave
such private premises and to be at large.



55.12     GOLF COURSES.



   No animal is allowed on any golf course operated by the City.



55.13     MOLESTING ANIMALS.



   No person shall willfully molest, tease, provoke or mistreat any animal
while confined on its owner's premises.



55.14   RABIES VACCINATION.



   Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such
animal.  It is unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in said
person’s possession, six months of age or over, which has not been
vaccinated against rabies.  Dogs kept in State or federally licensed kennels
and not allowed to run at large are not subject to these vaccination
requirements.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)



55.15   OWNER’S DUTY.



   It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or other animal that has
bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or
attack to report this act to a local health or law enforcement official.  It
is the duty of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of
health the existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from
rabies.  In addition, every owner of an animal which is known or suspected
to be suffering from rabies or which has been bitten by an animal infected
with rabies shall also immediately report such fact to the local board of
health.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)



55.16   CONFINEMENT.



   If a local board of health receives information that an animal has
bitten a person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the
board shall order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it
directs.  If the owner fails to confine such animal in the manner directed,
the animal shall be apprehended and impounded by such board, and after 10
days the board may humanely destroy the animal.  If such animal is returned
to its owner, the owner shall pay the cost of impoundment.  This section
does not apply if a police service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement
agency and acting in the performance of its duties has bitten a person.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)



55.17   AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT.



   Animals found at large in violation of this chapter shall be seized and
impounded, or at the discretion of the peace officer, the owner may be served
a summons to appear before a proper court to answer charges made thereunder.



55.18   DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.



   When an animal has been apprehended and impounded, written notice shall
be provided to the owner within two days after impoundment, if the owner’s
name and current address can reasonably be determined by accessing a tag or
other device that is on or part of the animal.  Impounded animals may be
recovered by the owner upon payment of impounding costs, and if an
unvaccinated dog, by having it immediately vaccinated.  If the owner fails
to redeem the animal within seven days from the date that the notice is
mailed, or if the owner cannot be located within seven days, the animal shall
be disposed of in accordance with law or destroyed by euthanasia.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37, 351.41)



55.19     CONTRACT WITH HUMANE SOCIETY.



   The City may enter into a contract with the Humane Society, or similar
incorporated society organized for the express purpose of prevention of
cruelty to animals, for the use of its facilities for the restraining and
impounding of animals.  Any such contract shall provide for the maintenance
of suitable impounding quarters for the humane care of animals impounded
therein, and for the destruction or disposition of animals.



55.20     HOLD HARMLESS.



   Absent a showing of reckless conduct, no person granted authority to
enforce the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for damage to or
destruction of any animal occurring during the course of enforcement of this
chapter.



55.21   PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.



(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717E)



   1.   Prohibition.  It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or
advertise that a pet may be awarded as any of the following:



      A.   A prize for participating in a game.



      B.   A prize for participating in a fair.



      C.   An inducement or condition for visiting a place of
business or attending an event sponsored by a business.



      D.   An inducement or condition for executing a contract that
includes provisions unrelated to the ownership, care or disposition of the
pet.



   2.   Exceptions.  This section does not apply to any of the
following:



      A.   A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code
of Iowa if the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a
pet on the premises of the pet shop.



      B.   Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers
of America; the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated
with outdoor recreation, hunting or fishing, including but not limited to the
Iowa Sportsmen’s Federation.



CHAPTER 56
DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS



 

56.01  Definitions
 
56.03  Keeping of Vicious Animals Prohibited


56.02  Keeping of Dangerous Animals Prohibited
 
56.04  Seizure, Impoundment and Disposition



 



56.01   DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Dangerous animal” means the following animals: † 5



      A.   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunk and mink.



      B.   Raccoons.



      C.   Bats.



      D.   Scorpions.



      E.   Opossums.



      F.   Piranhas.



   2.   “Vicious animal” means any animal, except for a dangerous
animal as listed above, that has attacked, bitten or clawed a person while
running at large and the attack was unprovoked, or any animal that has
exhibited vicious tendencies in present or past conduct, including such that
said animal:  (i) has bitten or clawed a person or persons on two separate
occasions within a 12-month period; or (ii) did bite or claw once causing
injuries above the shoulders of a person; or (iii) could not be controlled or
restrained by the owner at the time of the attack to prevent the occurrence;
or (iv) has attacked any domestic animal or fowl on three separate occasions
within a 12-month period.



56.02   KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet,
or act as a temporary custodian for such animal, or keep, shelter or harbor
such animal for any purpose or in any capacity within the City.



56.03   KEEPING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor for any reason within the City
a vicious animal except in the following circumstances:



   1.   Animals under the control of a law enforcement or military
agency.



   2.   The keeping of guard dogs; however, guard dogs must be kept
within a structure or fixed enclosure at all times, and any guard dog found
at large may be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.  Any premises guarded by a guard dog shall be prominently
posted with a sign containing the wording “Guard Dog,” “Vicious Dog”
or words of similar import, and the owner of such premises shall inform the
Mayor or peace officer that a guard dog is on duty at said premises.



56.04   SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION.



   1.   In the event that a dangerous animal or vicious animal is found
at large and unattended upon public property, park property, public
right-of-way or the property of someone other than its owner, thereby
creating a hazard to persons or property, such animal may, in the discretion
of the Mayor or peace officer, be destroyed if it cannot be confined or
captured.  The City shall be under no duty to attempt the confinement or
capture of a dangerous animal or vicious animal found at large, nor shall it
have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its destruction.



   2.   Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping,
sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal or vicious animal on premises in
the City, the Mayor or peace officer shall cause the matter to be
investigated and if after investigation, the facts indicate that the person
named in the complaint is keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous or
vicious animal in the City, the Mayor or peace officer shall order the person
named in the complaint to safely remove such animal from the City or destroy
the animal within three days of the receipt of such an order.  Such order
shall be contained in a notice to remove the dangerous or vicious animal,
which notice shall be given in writing to the person keeping, sheltering, or
harboring the dangerous animal or vicious animal, and shall be served
personally or by certified mail.  Such order and notice to remove the
dangerous animal or vicious animal shall not be required where such animal
has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any person, in which
case the Mayor or peace officer shall cause the animal to be immediately
seized and impounded or killed if seizure and impoundment are not possible
without risk of serious physical harm or death to any person.



   3.   The order to remove a dangerous animal or vicious animal issued
by the Mayor or peace officer may be appealed to the Council.  In order to
appeal such order, written notice of appeal must be filed with the Clerk
within three days after receipt of the order contained in the notice to
remove the dangerous or vicious animal.  Failure to file such written notice
of appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal the order of the
Mayor or peace officer.



   4.   The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal
and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail to the Clerk.  The
hearing of such appeal shall be scheduled within seven days of the receipt of
the notice of appeal.  The hearing may be continued for good cause.  After
such hearing, the Council may affirm or reverse the order of the Mayor or
peace officer.  Such determination shall be contained in a written decision
and shall be filed with the Clerk within three days after the hearing or any
continued session thereof.



   5.   If the Council affirms the action of the Mayor or peace
officer, the Council shall order in its written decision that the person
owning, sheltering, harboring or keeping such dangerous or vicious animal
remove such animal from the City or destroy it.  The decision and order
shall immediately be served upon the person against whom rendered in the same
manner as the notice of removal.  If the original order of the Mayor or
peace officer is not appealed and is not complied with within three days or
the order of the Council after appeal is not complied with within three days
of its issuance, the Mayor or peace officer is authorized to seize, impound
or destroy such dangerous or vicious animal.  Failure to comply with an
order of the Mayor or peace officer issued pursuant to this chapter and not
appealed (or of the Council after appeal) constitutes a simple misdemeanor.



 


Notes

5 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  Certain other dangerous animals, listed in Chapter
717F.1, paragraph 5a, of the Code of Iowa, are specifically prohibited and
regulated by the Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship. 



CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE



 

60.01  Title
 
60.05  Reports of Traffic Accidents


60.02  Definitions
 
60.06  Peace Officer’s Authority


60.03  Administration and Enforcement
 
60.07  Obedience to Peace Officers


60.04  Power to Direct Traffic
 
60.08  Parades Regulated



 



60.01   TITLE.



   Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and
cited as the “Hiawatha Traffic Code” (and are referred to herein as the
“Traffic Code.”)



60.02   DEFINITIONS.



   Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State
law, such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted
by reference.  Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or
are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)



   1.   “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and
including a highway when 50 percent or more of the frontage thereon for a
distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.



   2.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.



   3.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or
regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.



   4.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and
including a highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district,
where 40 percent or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in
use for business.



   5.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to and
including a highway for a distance of 200 feet in either direction from a
schoolhouse.



   6.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.



   7.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of
movement.



   8.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting
of a vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a peace officer or traffic control sign or signal.



   9.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not
included in the business, school, or residence districts.



   10.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals,
markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or
erected for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.



   11.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any
person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway,
street, or alley.



60.03   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor
vehicles and law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



60.04   POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.



   A peace officer or, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of
the Fire Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws.  In the
event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])



60.05   REPORTS OF TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS.



   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of
the City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation.  A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)



60.06   PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.



   A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition
of the driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of
traffic violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the
vehicle with reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or
other manifest of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the
registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or
permit of such vehicle.  A peace officer having probable cause to stop a
vehicle may require exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage
card issued for the vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)



60.07   OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.



   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to
direct, control or regulate traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)



60.08   PARADES REGULATED.



   No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as
provided herein:



   1.   Definition.  “Parade” means any march or procession of
persons or vehicles organized for marching or moving on the streets in an
organized fashion or manner or any march or procession of persons or vehicles
represented or advertised to the public as a parade.



   2.   Permit Required.  No parade shall be conducted without first
obtaining a written permit from the Mayor or Police Chief.  Such permit
shall state the time and date for the parade to be held and the streets or
general route therefor.  Such written permit granted to the person
organizing or sponsoring the parade shall be permission for all participants
therein to parade when such participants have been invited by the permittee
to participate therein.  No fee shall be required for such permit.



   3.   Parade Not a Street Obstruction.  Any parade for which a
permit has been issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully
participating therein, shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets
notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.



   4.   Control by Police and Firefighters.  Persons participating in
any parade shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions
in the performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members
of the Fire Department.



CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES



 

61.01  Installation
 
61.04  Standards


61.02  Crosswalks
 
61.05  Compliance


61.03  Traffic Lanes
 



 



61.01   INSTALLATION.



   The Police Chief or Mayor shall cause to be placed and maintained
traffic control devices when and as required under this Traffic Code or under
State law or emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the duration
of an emergency or temporary condition as traffic conditions may require to
regulate, guide or warn traffic.  The Police Chief shall keep a record of
all such traffic control devices.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)



61.02   CROSSWALKS.



   The Police Chief is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the
Council by resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate
traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions,
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and
at such other places as traffic conditions require.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)



61.03   TRAFFIC LANES.



   The Police Chief is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on
street pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent
with this Traffic Code.  Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such
vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing
another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)



61.04   STANDARDS.



   Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)



61.05   COMPLIANCE.



   No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to
the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under
Section 321.231 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)



CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



 

62.01  Violation of Regulations
 
62.05  Quiet Zones


62.02  Play Streets Designated
 
62.06  Unlawful Use of Certain Braking Devices


62.03  Vehicles on Sidewalks
 
62.07  Obstructing View at Intersections


62.04  Clinging to Vehicle
 
62.08  Administrative Fee for Towing



 



62.01   VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.



   Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful
order of a peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a
fire, or who fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following
Iowa statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the
road is in violation of this section.  These sections of the Code of Iowa
are adopted by reference and are as follows:



   1.   Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration
provisions.



   2.   (Repealed by Ordinance No. 925 - May 19 Supp.)



   3.   Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited;
exception.



   4.   Section 321.37 – Display of plates.



   5.   Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations
prohibited.



   6.   Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.



   7.   Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.



   8.   Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.



   9.   Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.



   10.   Section 321.91 – Penalty for abandonment.



   11.   Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.



   12.   Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.



   13.   Section 321.104 – Penal offenses against title law.



   14.   Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates
permitted.



   15.   Section 321.174 – Operators licensed.



   16.   Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired
license.



   17.   Section 321.180 – Instruction permits.



   18.   Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons
aged fourteen through seventeen.



   19.   Section 321.193 – Restricted licenses.



   20.   Section 321.194 – Special minor’s licenses.



   21.   Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service
order.



   22.   Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and
nonoperator’s identification card.



   23.   Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or
nonoperator’s identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.



   24.   Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or
nonoperator’s identification card by underage person to obtain cigarettes
or tobacco products.



   25.   Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license
or when disqualified.



   26.   Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.



   27.   Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.



   28.   Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.



   29.   Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.



   30.   Section 321.223 – License inspected.



   31.   Section 321.224 – Record kept.



   32.   Section 321.232 – Speed detection jamming devices; penalty.



   33.   Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles.



   34.   Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility
devices.



   35.   Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.



   36.   Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.



   37.   Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.



   38.   Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs or
signals; unlawful possession.



   39.   Section 321.262 – Leaving scene of traffic accident
prohibited; vehicle damage only; removal of vehicles.



   40.   Section 321.263 – Information and aid.



   41.   Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.



   42.   Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.



   43.   Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.



   44.   Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized
bicycles.



   45.   Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device
while driving; text-messaging.



   46.   Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.



   47.   Section 321.277A – Careless driving.



   48.   Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.



   49.   Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.



   50.   Section 321.284 – Open container; drivers.



   51.   Section 321.284A – Open container; passengers.



   52.   Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.



   53.   Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated
structures.



   54.   Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways;
exceptions.



   55.   Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.



   56.   Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.



   57.   Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.



   58.   Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.



   59.   Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.



   60.   Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.



   61.   Section 321.307 – Following too closely.



   62.   Section 321.308 – Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance
requirements.



   63.   Section 321.309 – Towing; convoys; drawbars.



   64.   Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.



   65.   Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.



   66.   Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.



   67.   Section 321.314 – When signal required.



   68.   Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.



   69.   Section 321.316 – Stopping.



   70.   Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.



   71.   Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.



   72.   Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different
highways.



   73.   Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.



   74.   Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.



   75.   Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield
intersection.



   76.   Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.



   77.   Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.



   78.   Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency
vehicles.



   79.   Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.



   80.   Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or
working on highways.



   81.   Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.



   82.   Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.



   83.   Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers approaching blind persons.



   84.   Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.



   85.   Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal indicating approach of
railroad train or railroad track equipment.



   86.   Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings;
posting warning.



   87.   Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.



   88.   Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.



   89.   Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.



   90.   Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.



   91.   Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.



   92.   Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.



   93.   Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.



   94.   Section 321.364 – Vehicles shipping food; preventing
contamination by hazardous material.



   95.   Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.



   96.   Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.



   97.   Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.



   98.   Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.



   99.   Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.



   100.   Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.



   101.   Section 321.372 – School buses.



   102.   Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped
vehicles.



   103.   Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.



   104.   Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.



   105.   Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.



   106.   Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.



   107.   Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.



   108.   Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized
bicycles.



   109.   Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.



   110.   Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.



   111.   Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.



   112.   Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.



   113.   Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.



   114.   Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.



   115.   Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.



   116.   Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.



   117.   Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.



   118.   Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.



   119.   Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.



   120.   Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.



   121.   Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.



   122.   Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.



   123.   Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.



   124.   Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.



   125.   Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.



   126.   Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.



   127.   Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.



   128.   Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or
permitted.



   129.   Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.



   130.   Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.



   131.   Section 321.422 – Red light in front.



   132.   Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.



   133.   Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.



   134.   Section 321.431 – Performance ability.



   135.   Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.



   136.   Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, and bells prohibited.



   137.   Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.



   138.   Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.



   139.   Section 321.437 – Mirrors.



   140.   Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.



   141.   Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.



   142.   Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.



   143.   Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.



   144.   Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.



   145.   Section 321.444 – Safety glass.



   146.   Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use
required.



   147.   Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.



   148.   Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety regulations.



   149.   Section 321.449A – Rail crew transport drivers.



   150.   Section 321.449B – Texting or using a mobile telephone
while operating a commercial motor vehicle.



   151.   Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation.



   152.   Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.



   153.   Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.



   154.   Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles; permits.



   155.   Section 321.457 – Maximum length.



   156.   Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.



   157.   Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.



   158.   Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.



   159.   Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.



   160.   Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight.



   161.   Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.



   162.   Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity;
reregistration.



62.02   PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED.



   The Council shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof
a play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the
roadway indicating and helping to protect the same.  Whenever authorized
signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no
person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except
drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such
closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in
driving upon any such street or portion thereof.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)



62.03   VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk
area except at a driveway.



62.04   CLINGING TO VEHICLE.



   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless
all passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended
for their accommodation.  No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, in-line skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself
or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.



62.05   QUIET ZONES.



   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no
person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or
other warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.



62.06   UNLAWFUL USE OF CERTAIN BRAKING DEVICES.



   Except for emergency braking, it is unlawful for the driver of any
vehicle to operate or permit the operation of the engine of a motor vehicle
so as to assist in braking or slowing the vehicle through the use of any
engine brake or engine retarding device upon any public right-of-way.



62.07   OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.



   It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to
obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a
clear view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets.  Any
such obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty
may be abated in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.



62.08     ADMINISTRATIVE FEE FOR TOWING.



   In addition to any penalty provided by law, the City may impose an
administrative fee for each instance of towing pursuant to this section. 
The fee imposed shall be in an amount set by the City Council and must be
paid prior to the vehicle being released from the City’s custody.



CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS



 

63.01  General
 
63.04  Cemeteries and Parking Lots


63.02  State Code Speed Limits
 
63.05  Special Speed Zones


63.03  Commercial/Industrial District
 
63.06  Minimum Speed



 



63.01   GENERAL.



   Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a
careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and
proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and
of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on
any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a
stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)



63.02   STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.



   The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the
Code of Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically
designated otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.



   1.   Business District – 20 miles per hour.



   2.   Residence or School District – 25 miles per hour.



   3.   Suburban District – 45 miles per hour.



63.03   COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   A speed in excess of 30 miles per hour in any commercial/industrial
district, unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is
unlawful.



63.04   CEMETERIES AND PARKING LOTS.



   A speed in excess of 15 miles per hour in any public cemetery or
parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is
unlawful.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])



63.05   SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.



   In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of
Transportation, or whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section
63.02 is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions
found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the
City street system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such
higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such
location.  The following special speed zones have been established:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)



   1.   Special 25 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of 25 miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.



      A.   Stonegate Court from Robins Road to the end of the court.



      B.   N 12th Avenue Court from Boyson Road to Court.



      C.   Center Point Road from Willman Street north to Emmons
Street.



      D.   N Center Point Road from Emmons Street to Parsons Drive.



   2.   Special 30 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of 30 miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.



      A.   Robins Road from Center Point Road to north entrance to
Bali Hai.



      B.   East Boyson Road from Robins Road to east City limits.



      C.   Boyson Road from N Center Point Road to Robins Road.



   3.   Special 35 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of 35 miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.



      A.   Blairs Ferry Road from east City limits to west City
limits.



      B.   Center Point Road from south City limits to Willman
Street.



      C.   N Center Point Road from Parsons Drive to north City
limits.



      D.   Boyson Road from N Center Point Road to Miller Road.



      E.   Tower Terrace Road from N Center Point Road to west line
of Section 29-84-7.



      F.   Miller Road from Blairs Ferry Road to north City limits.



      G.   Edgewood Road from County Home Road to south City limits.



      H.   Robins Road from the north entrance of Bali Hai to north
City limits.



(Ord. 917 - Feb. 19 Supp.)



   4.   Special 45 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of 45 miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.



      A.   Robins Road from north entrance into Bali Hai to the
north City limits.



      B.   Tower Terrace Road from west City limits to beginning of
35 MPH zone.



      C.   Tower Terrace Road from north Center Point Road to Robins
Road.



   5.   Special 60 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of 60 miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.



      A.   I-380 northbound and southbound between 26 mile marker
and the south City limits.



   6.   Special 70 MPH Speed Zones.  A speed in excess of 70 miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.



      A.   Northbound I-380 from 26 mile marker to north City limits.



      B.   Southbound I-380 from north City limits to 26 mile marker.



63.06   MINIMUM SPEED.



   A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to
impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when
reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)



CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS



 

64.01  Turning at Intersections
 
64.02  U-Turns



 



64.01   TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.



   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do
so as follows:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)



   1.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be
made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.



   2.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering
the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the
intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.



   3.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way
street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest
the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where
it enters the intersection.  A left turn from a one-way street into a
two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the
street being entered upon leaving the intersection.



   The Police Chief may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed
within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as
traffic conditions require, that a different course from that specified above
be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons
or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an
intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or
signs.



64.02   U-TURNS.



   It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection;
however, U-turns are prohibited within the business district, at the
following designated intersections and at intersections where there are
automatic traffic signals.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])



CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED



 

65.01  Through Streets
 
65.05  School Stops


65.02  Stop Required
 
65.06  Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk


65.03  Four-Way Stop Intersections
 
65.07  Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed


65.04  Yield Required
 
65.08  Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks



 



65.01   THROUGH STREETS.



   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop, unless a yield is permitted by
this chapter, before entering an intersection with the following designated
through streets.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)



   1.   Center Point Road from Blairs Ferry Road to Robins Road and
Emmons Street.



   2.   N Center Point Road from Robins Road and Emmons Street to North
City Limits.



   3.   Robins Road from Center Point Road to North City Limits.



   4.   Blairs Ferry Road from East City Limits to West City Limits.



   5.   Emmons Street from Center Point Road to West City Limits.



   6.   Boyson Road from East City Limits to West City Limits.



   7.   12th Avenue from Blairs Ferry Road to Emmons Street.



   8.   N 12th Avenue from Emmons Street to Boyson Road.



   9.   Miller Road from Blairs Ferry Road to North City Limits.



   10.   10th Avenue from Blairs Ferry Road to Emmons Street.



   11.   N 10th Avenue from Emmons Street to Milstead Drive.



   12.   Stamy Road from N Center Point Road to the southern boundary
of Tower Terrace Road.



   13.   Tower Terrace Road from East City Limits to West City Limits.



   14.   Edgewood Road North of Tower Terrace Road from South City
Limits to the North City Limits.



   15.   Hunt Road within the City Limits.



   16.   Todd Hills Road from East City Limits to West City Limits.



65.02   STOP REQUIRED.



   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)



   1.   9th Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on 9th Avenue shall stop at W
Willman Street.



   2.   Eisenhower Road.  Vehicles traveling on Eisenhower Road shall
stop at 9th Avenue.



   3.   Lyndhurst Drive.  Vehicles traveling on Lyndhurst Drive shall
stop at N 15th Avenue.



   4.   Progress Drive.  Vehicles traveling on Progress Drive shall
stop at N 18th Avenue.



   5.   Emmons Street.  Vehicles traveling on Emmons Street shall stop
at N 18th Avenue.



   6.   Litchfield Drive.  Vehicles traveling on Litchfield Drive
shall stop at N 18th Avenue.



   7.   1st Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on 1st Avenue shall stop at W
Willman Street.



   8.   2nd Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on 2nd Avenue shall stop at W
Willman Street.



   9.   W Willman Street.  Vehicles traveling on W Willman Street
shall stop at 6th Avenue.



   10.   Deer Crest.  Vehicles traveling on Deer Crest shall stop at
Wolf Creek Trail.



   11.   Longfellow Drive.  Vehicles traveling south on Longfellow
Drive shall stop at Dina Court.



   12.   Kacena Road.  Vehicles traveling on Kacena Road shall stop at
Hawkeye Drive.



   13.   Nixon Drive.  Vehicles traveling on Nixon Drive shall stop at
Northwood Drive.



   14.   Tower Terrace Road.  Vehicles traveling on Tower Terrace Road
shall stop at N Center Point Road.



   15.   Tower Terrace Road.  Vehicles traveling on Tower Terrace Road
shall stop at Robins Road.



   16.   N 12th Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on N 12th Avenue shall
stop at Boyson Road.



   17.   Woodland Court.  Vehicles traveling on Woodland Court shall
stop at Litchfield Drive.



   18.   Litchfield Drive.  Vehicles traveling on Litchfield Drive
shall stop at N 15th Avenue.



   19.   N 16th Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on N 16th Avenue shall
stop at Litchfield Drive.



   20.   N 17th Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on N 17th Avenue shall
stop at Litchfield Drive.



   21.   N 16th Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on N 16th Avenue shall
stop at Lyndhurst Drive.



   22.   N 17th Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on N 17th Avenue shall
stop at Lyndhurst Drive.



   23.   Emmons Street.  Vehicles traveling on Emmons Street shall
stop at Nemiah Aquilla Miller Road.



   24.   Metzger Drive.  Vehicles traveling on Metzger Drive shall
stop at Hawkeye Drive.



   25.   Commerce Drive.  Vehicles traveling on Commerce Drive shall
stop at Metzger Drive.



   26.   Willowood Drive.  Vehicles traveling east on Willowood Drive
shall stop at S Blairs Ferry Crossing.



   27.   Ryan Avenue.  Vehicles traveling south on Ryan Avenue shall
stop at Pirie Drive.



   28.   Brandon Avenue.  Vehicles traveling south on Brandon Avenue
shall stop at Pirie Drive.



   29.   Sherman Road.  Vehicles traveling on Sherman Road shall stop
at the intersection of Kacena Road.



   30.   Forrest Meadow Lane.  Vehicles traveling on Forrest Meadow
Lane shall stop at Fitzroy Road. 



   31.   Ridgewood Drive.  Vehicles traveling on Ridgewood Drive shall
stop at Blairs Ferry Crossing.



   32.   Ridgewood Drive.  Vehicles traveling on Ridgewood Drive shall
stop at Heritage Green Drive.



   33.   Worthington Court.  Vehicles traveling on Worthington Court
shall stop at Heritage Green Drive.



   34.   A Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on A Avenue shall stop at E
Clark Street and E Willman Street.



   35.   Oak Street.  Vehicles traveling on Oak Street shall stop at A
Avenue.



65.03   FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following
designated four-way stop intersections:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)



   1.   10th Avenue and Emmons Street.



   2.   N 12th Avenue and Emmons Street.



   3.   N12th Avenue and Lyndhurst Drive.



   4.   N 18th Avenue and Lyndhurst Drive.



   5.   S Blairs Ferry Crossing and Heritage Green Drive.



65.04   YIELD REQUIRED.



   Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in accordance with the following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)




   1.   Marion Street.  Vehicles traveling east on Marion Street shall
yield at Second Avenue.





   2.   3rd Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on 3rd Avenue shall yield at
West Clark Street.





   3.   3rd Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on 3rd Avenue shall yield at
Willman Street.





   4.   E Willman Street.  Vehicles traveling on E Willman Street
shall yield at B Avenue.





   5.   Tucker Street.  Vehicles traveling on Tucker Street shall
yield at C Avenue.





   6.   Martha’s Way.  Vehicles traveling on Martha’s Way shall
yield at Progress Drive.





   7.   N 15th Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on N 15th Avenue shall
yield at Progress Drive.





   8.   N Compton Drive.  Vehicles traveling on N Compton Drive shall
yield at Progress Drive.





   9.   N 20th Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on N 20th Avenue shall
yield at Progress Drive.





   10.   N 14th Avenue.  Vehicles traveling on N 14th Avenue shall
yield at Lyndhurst Drive.





   11.   Wolf Ridge Road.  Vehicles traveling on Wolf Ridge Road shall
yield at Wolf Creek Trail.




   12.   Creekside Drive.  Vehicles traveling on Creekside Drive shall
yield at Wolf Ridge Road.



   13.   Grey Wolf.  Vehicles traveling on Grey Wolf shall yield at
Wolf Ridge Road.



65.05   SCHOOL STOPS.



   Every driver of a vehicle approaching a school crossing zone, as
established by resolution of the Council, shall bring the vehicle to a full
stop at a point 10 feet from the approach side of the crosswalk marked by an
authorized school stop sign and thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent
manner until the vehicle shall have passed through such school crossing zone.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)



65.06   STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley,
driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving
onto the sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area
only when able to do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield
the right-of-way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which the
vehicle is entering.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)



65.07   STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.



   Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no
driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle.



65.08   YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS.



   Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping,
if need be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked
crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)



CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS



 

66.01  Temporary Embargo
 
66.04  Load Limits on Bridges


66.02  Permits for Excess Size and Weight
 
66.05  Truck Routes


66.03  Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
 
66.06  Weighing Vehicles



 



66.01   TEMPORARY EMBARGO.



   If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of
deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets
will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an
amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets
so designated by such signs.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472)



66.02   PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.



   The Police Chief may, upon application and good cause being shown,
issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or
move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load
exceeding the maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets
or bridges named in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City
and for which the City is responsible for maintenance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E)



66.03   LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.



   The Council may, when deemed necessary, by resolution, impose
limitations on the weight of trucks or other commercial vehicles on
designated streets or highways under the Council’s jurisdiction, and such
limitations shall be designated by appropriate signs placed on such streets
or highways.  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall
operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on
such signs at any time.



66.04   LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.



   Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less
than the maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street
serving the bridge, the Mayor or Police Chief may cause to be posted and
maintained signs on said bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the
entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limits.  No person
shall drive upon said bridge any vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, in
excess of such posted limit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)



66.05   TRUCK ROUTES.



   Truck route regulations are established as follows:



   1.   Truck Routes Designated.  Every motor vehicle weighing 10 tons
or more, when loaded or empty, and every semi-truck having no fixed terminal
within the City or making no scheduled or definite stops within the City for
the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel only upon or over the
designated freeways, expressways, and U.S. and State highways within the City
and no other streets in the City except as hereinafter provided.



   2.   Deliveries Off Truck Route.  Every motor vehicle weighing 10
tons or more, when loaded or empty, and every semi-truck having a fixed
terminal or making a scheduled or definite stop within the City for the
purpose of loading or unloading, shall proceed over or upon the designated
routes set out in this section to the nearest point of its scheduled or
definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or unload and return, by the
most direct route to its point of departure from said designated route except
as hereinafter provided.  Nothing contained herein, however, shall prohibit
the parking of a motor vehicle on any other street for the purpose of making
emergency repairs.  The maximum time allowed for parking for the purpose of
making emergency repairs shall not exceed 24 hours.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)



   3.   Employer’s Responsibility.  No person shall drive or move
and no owner or any other person employing or otherwise directing the driver
of any vehicle shall cause or permit the operation of a vehicle upon a street
in any manner contrary to this section.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)



66.06     WEIGHING VEHICLES.



   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a
vehicle and load is unlawful is authorized to require the driver to stop and
submit to a weighing either by means of portable or stationary scales and/or
may require that such vehicle may be driven to the nearest public scales or
to a scale designated by the Police Department.  A driver of a vehicle who
fails or refuses to stop and submit the vehicle and load to a weighing, is
guilty of a violation of this section.



CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS



 

67.01  Walking in Street
 
67.03  Pedestrian Crossing


67.02  Hitchhiking
 
67.04  Use of Sidewalks



 



67.01   WALKING IN STREET.



   Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk
on the left side of the street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)



67.02   HITCHHIKING.



   No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the
purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)



67.03   PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.



   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)



67.04   USE OF SIDEWALKS.



   Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk
along and upon an adjacent street.



CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC



68.01   ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.



   Upon the following streets and alleys, vehicular traffic, other than
permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction when
appropriate signs are in place.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[4])



CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS



 

69.01  Park Adjacent to Curb
 
69.08  No Parking Zones


69.02  Parking on One-Way Streets
 
69.09  Truck, Unattached Trailer, Camper, Motor Home and Boat Parking Limited


69.03  Angle Parking
 
69.10  Limited Parking


69.04  Manner of Angle Parking
 
69.11  Snow Removal


69.05  Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal
 
69.12  Snow Routes


69.06  Parking Prohibited
 
69.13  Fire Lanes


69.07  Persons with Disabilities Parking
 
69.14  Residential Permit Parking



 



69.01   PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18
inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in
the case of angle parking and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of
one-way streets.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



69.02   PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a
one-way street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the
direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the
vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as
hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



69.03   ANGLE PARKING.



   Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)




   1.   Emmons Street on the north side from Center Point Road to
I.C.G. Railroad.





   2.   B Avenue on the east side from Tucker Street to E. Willman
Street.





   3.   E. Clark Street, Lot 28, Hartles First Addition, only, north
and east sides.




69.04   MANNER OF ANGLE PARKING.



   Upon those streets or portions of streets that have been signed or
marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than
at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the
roadway as indicated by such signs and markings.  No part of any vehicle or
the load thereon, when said vehicle is parked within a diagonal parking
district, shall extend into the roadway more than a distance of 16 feet when
measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)



69.05   PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.



   No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than 48
hours, unless otherwise limited under the provisions of this chapter, or for
any of the following principal purposes:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   1.   Sale.  Displaying such vehicle for sale.



   2.   Repairing.  For lubricating, repairing or for commercial
washing of such vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an
emergency.



   3.   Advertising.  Displaying advertising.



   4.   Merchandise Sales.  Selling merchandise from such vehicle
except in a duly established market place or when so authorized or licensed
under this Code of Ordinances.



69.06   PARKING PROHIBITED.



   No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:



   1.   Crosswalk.  On a crosswalk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])



   2.   Center Parkway.  On the center parkway or dividing area of any
divided street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   3.   Mailboxes.  Within 20 feet on either side of a mailbox that is
so placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles
on the roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   4.   Sidewalks.  On or across a sidewalk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])



   5.   Driveway.  In front of a public or private driveway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])



   6.   Intersection.  Within an intersection or within 10 feet of an
intersection of any street or alley.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])



   7.   Fire Hydrant.  Within five feet of a fire hydrant.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])



   8.   Stop Sign or Signal.  Within 10 feet upon the approach to any
flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the
side of a roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])



   9.   Railroad Crossing.  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a
railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not
exhibiting a red light.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])



   10.   Fire Station.  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any
fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire
station within 75 feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.  Parking
in any part of the parking lot of any fire station shall be limited to
vehicles of the Fire Department personnel on official Fire Department
business, vehicles of visitors who are conducting official Fire Department
business and vehicles of person attending Fire department sponsored events. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])



   11.   Excavations.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])



   12.   Double Parking.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped
or parked at the edge or curb of a street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])



   13.   Hazardous Locations.  When, because of restricted visibility
or when standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving
traffic, or when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause
curbs to be painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing
signs.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])



   14.   Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings.  A space of 50
feet is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre,
auditorium, hotel having more than 25 sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home,
taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages
of people are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no
motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on
or discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time
as is necessary for such purpose.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)



   15.   Alleys.  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10
feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic,
and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a
position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.  The
provisions of this subsection do not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley
that is 18 feet wide or less, provided that said vehicle is parked to deliver
goods or services.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   16.   Ramps.  In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on
public or private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or
ramp.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])



   17.   Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line.  That area of the public
way not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line,
where curbing has been installed.



   18.   In More Than One Space.  In any designated parking space so
that any part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes
beyond the markings designating such space.



   19.   City-Owned Lots.  In any City-owned lot when parking space is
clearly marked as “No Parking” or “Reserved’ (and who reserved
for).  Such spaces shall be considered as “No Parking” spaces for any
vehicle not owned by the City.  The following shall be specifically reserved
for City-owned vehicles:



      A.   All concrete parking area at 999 Boyson Road (Pumphouse
#5).



      B.   Northwest corner of City Park (Pumphouse #4).



      C.   Limited parking to City Hall business or events during
normal business hours for both the east and west parking lots.



69.07   PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.



   The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of
persons with disabilities parking spaces:



   1.   Establishment.  Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall
be established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of
Iowa and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18.  No unauthorized person shall
establish any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first
obtaining Council approval.



   2.   Improper Use.  The following uses of a persons with
disabilities parking space, located on either public or private property,
constitute improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit, which
is a violation of this Code of Ordinances:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])



      A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons
with disabilities parking permit.



      B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or
being transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa.



      C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under
Section 321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.



   3.   Wheelchair Parking Cones.  No person shall use or interfere
with a wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:



      A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking
permit must comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of
Iowa when utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.



      B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking
cone that is properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A[1] of
the Code of Iowa.



69.08   NO PARKING ZONES.



   No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following
specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace
officer or traffic control signal.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   1.   Robins Road, within the City limits.



   2.   Boyson Road, within the City limits.



   3.   Nixon Drive, the west side, from Northwood Drive to Pirie Drive.



   4.   Northwood Drive, on the south side, from Robins Road to City
limits.



   5.   Chaffee Drive, on both sides, from Robins Road to City limits.



   6.   B Avenue, on the west side, from Tucker Street to East Clark
Street.



   7.   Tucker Street, on the south side, from B Avenue to C Avenue.



   8.   C Avenue, on both sides, from Blairs Ferry Road to Tucker
Street.



   9.   Center Point Road, within the City limits.



   10.   Blairs Ferry Road, within the City limits.



   11.   Emmons Street, on the south side, from Center Point Road to
Miller Road.



   12.   Emmons Street, on the north side, from 6th Avenue to 10th
Avenue.



   13.   Emmons Street, on the north side, from 15th Avenue to 16th
Avenue.



   14.   N 8th Avenue, on both sides, from Independence Street to Park
Court.



   15.   9th Avenue, on the west side, from Emmons Street to W Willman
Street.



   16.   10th Avenue, on the east side, from Blairs Ferry Road to
Heefner Street.



   17.   Independence Street, on both sides, from Park Street to
Guthridge Park entrance.



   18.   Industrial Avenue, on both sides, from Boyson Road to dead end.



   19.   Boyson Court, on the west side, from Boyson Road to south end
of Boyson Court.



   20.   Lyndhurst Drive, on the north side, from N 12th Avenue to N
15th Avenue.



   21.   Litchfield Drive, on the south side, from N 12th Avenue to N
15th Avenue.



   22.   N 15th Avenue, on the east side, from Lyndhurst Drive to
Litchfield Drive.



   23.   N 15th Avenue, on both sides, from Boyson Road to Progress
Drive.



   24.   N 12th Avenue, on the east side, from Lyndhurst Drive to
Boyson Road.



   25.   N 12th Avenue, on the west side, from 395 N 12th Avenue.



   26.   18th Avenue, on the east side, from Blairs Ferry Road to
Emmons Street.



   27.   Center Point Road, on both sides, from Boyson Road, thence
southward for 500 feet.



   28.   Boyson Road, on both sides, from N Center Point Road west to
Miller Road.



   29.   Tower Terrace Road within the City limits.



   30.   N 18th Avenue, on the east side, from Emmons Street to the
north City limits.



   31.   Miller Road from south City limits to north City limits.



   32.   N 20th Avenue, on both sides, from Boyson Road north to
Progress Drive.



   33.   Progress Drive, within the City limits.



   34.   12th Avenue, on both sides, 120 feet away south of Bowler
Street to Blairs Ferry Road intersection.



   35.   11th Avenue, on both sides, from Bowler Street to Raney Street.



   36.   Litchfield Drive and North Eighteenth Avenue intersection back
50 feet on all four sides of the intersection.



   37.   Emmons Street and 18th Avenue intersection back 50 feet on all
four sides of the intersection.



   38.   Oak Street north side from December 1 to April 1.



   39.   4th Avenue east side between Emmons Street and West Clark
Street.



   40.   Clark Street north side from the intersection of 4th Avenue
270 feet to the east and only allow for City vehicle parking.



   41.   9th Avenue east side from the north side of the intersection
with Eisenhower Road extending south to 50 feet beyond the intersection.



   42.   Blairs Ferry Crossing, on both sides, from Miller Road to the
east side of Ridgewood Drive.



   43.   Heritage Boulevard, on both sides, from Miller Road to the
east side of Ridgewood Drive.



   44.   Heritage Green Boulevard, on both sides, from Miller Road to
the east side of Ridgewood Drive.



   45.   Stamy Road, west side of the street from Tower Terrace Road to
Kacena Road.



   46.   Hawkeye Drive, within the City limits.



   47.   Ketelsen Drive, within the City limits.



   48.   Metzger Drive, within the City limits.



   49.   Commerce Boulevard, within the City limits.



   50.   Stamy Road, on the east side of the street, from Kacena Road
to Tower Terrace Road.



   51.   Stamy Road, on both sides of the street, from Kacena Road to N
Center Point Road.



   52.   Kacena Road, within the City limits.



   53.   Sherman Road, on both sides of the street, from Kacena Road to
N Center Point Road.



   54.   Longfellow Drive, on both sides of the street, from Stamy Road
to Dina Court.



   55.   Dina Court, on both sides of the street, from N Center Point
Road to Industrial Drive.



   56.   N Compton Drive, on both sides of the street, from Boyson Road
to Progress Drive.



   57.   Martha’s Way, on both sides of the street, from Boyson Road
to Progress Drive.



   58.   N 18th Avenue, on the west side of the street, from Boyson
Road to Progress Drive.



   59.   Parsons Drive, on the west side of the street, from N Center
Point Road to the end of the street.



   60.   Heefner Street, on the north side of the street, from 9th
Avenue to 10th Avenue.



   61.   Savannah Drive, on the east side of the street, from Hunt Road
to south end.



   62.   Savannah Court, on the south side of the street, from Savannah
Drive to 600 feet west.



   63.   Diamondback Road, on the east side of the street from Reed
Road to Todd Hills Road.



   64.   Forrest Meadow Lane, on the east side of the street from
Fitzroy Road to Dell Ridge Lane.



   65.   Wolf Creek Trail, from the intersection of Edgewood Road
extending 150 feet west.



   66.   N 10th Avenue, on the west side, from Emmons Street to the end
of the street.



   67.   East side of 1st Avenue from Willman Street, south to the
first Zion Church parking lot entrance.



(Ord. 928 - May 19 Supp.)



69.09     TRUCK, UNATTACHED TRAILER, CAMPER, MOTOR HOME, AND BOAT PARKING
LIMITED.



   No one shall park a motor truck, semi-trailer, motor vehicle with
trailer attached, unattached trailer, camper, motor home, or boat in
violation of the following regulations.  The provisions of this section
shall not apply to pick-up, light delivery or panel delivery trucks.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])



   1.   All Night.  No such vehicle shall be left unattended or parked
upon any street or alley within or abutting residential zones for a period of
time longer than one hour, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. of
any day.



   2.   Noise.  No such vehicle shall be left standing or parked upon
any street, alley, public or private parking lot, or drive of any service
station between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. with the engine,
auxiliary engine, air compressor, refrigerating equipment or other device in
operation giving off audible sounds excepting only the drive of a service
station when actually being serviced, and then in no event for more than 30
minutes.



   3.   Livestock.  No such vehicle containing livestock shall be
parked on any street, alley, or highway for a period of time of more than 30
minutes.



69.10     LIMITED PARKING.



   It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period upon the
following designated streets and/or parking lot spaces at the limited time so
designated:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   1.   Limited Parking to One Hour.  East Clark Street, on the south
side, from Center Point Road to A Avenue.



   2.   Limited Parking to Four Hours, April through October,
Wednesdays 3:00 a.m. – 7:00 p.m. and Sundays 11:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. 
Guthridge Park 10th Avenue Parking Lot, all spaces in first two rows adjacent
to 10th Avenue between extended Lyndhurst Drive and extended Milstead Drive
within the parking lot.



69.11     SNOW REMOVAL.



   No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any
public street, or City-owned off-street parking area during snow removal
operations for 48 hours; or the snow has been removed or plowed from said
street or parking area and the snow has ceased to fall.  The parking ban is
in effect when three inches or more of snow or ice has fallen or is predicted
by the National Weather Service.  Failure to remove vehicles from the public
street or City-owned off-street parking will result in a no parking fine of
$25.00 with additional cost resulting from a towing fee.



(Code of Iowa, 321.236[1])



69.12     SNOW ROUTES.



   1.   Designation.  The following streets and avenues are hereby
designated as snow routes:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[12])



      A.   North-South Routes.



         (1)   Center Point Road from Blairs Ferry Road to end of
City limits.



         (2)   Robins Road from Center Point Road north to end of
City limits.



         (3)   6th Avenue from Blairs Ferry Road north to Emmons
Street.



         (4)   10th Avenue from Blairs Ferry Road north to end of
North 10th Avenue (north of Milstead Dr.).



         (5)   12th Avenue from Blairs Ferry Road north to Boyson
Road.



         (6)   North 15th Avenue from Emmons Street to end of
North 15th Avenue (north of Progress Dr.).



         (7)   18th Avenue from Blairs Ferry Road to end of North
18th Avenue (north of Progress Dr.).



         (8)   Nemiah Aquilla Miller Road from Blairs Ferry Road
north to end of City limits.



      B.   East-West Routes.



         (1)   West Clark Street from 4th Avenue east to Center
Point Road.



         (2)   Emmons Street from Miller Road east to Center
Point Road.



         (3)   Northwood Drive from west end to Nixon Drive.



         (4)   Boyson Road from Nemiah Aquilla Miller Road east
to end of City limits (east of Dry Run Creek Court).



         (5)   Tower Terrace Road from western City limits to
Robins Road.



         (6)   Litchfield from 12th Avenue to Fifteenth Avenue.



   2.   Snow Route Signs Required.  All streets and avenues designated
as snow routes shall be identified by signs as being “Emergency Snow
Routes”.  Said signs shall be no fewer than one sign for every two City
blocks on both sides of each designated street or avenue.



   3.   Authority to Impound Vehicles.  The Hiawatha Police Department
is authorized to cause to be removed any vehicles from any street or avenue
under the following circumstances:



      A.   When any vehicle is parked in violation of a ban on
parking as set forth in this section; and



      B.   When any vehicle is left parked upon a public street and
has caused snow removal to be hindered.



   In addition to any penalties imposed for violation of this section, the
owner of any vehicle that has been impounded shall be required to pay the
cost of towing charges and storage.



   4.   Declaration of Snow Emergencies.  Snow emergencies shall be
declared by either the Mayor or City Administrator when either of them
believes that weather conditions have created or are likely to create
hazardous road conditions or road conditions that impede the free movement of
emergency or other vehicular traffic.  The parking restrictions set forth in
this section shall take effect one hour after the snow emergency has been
declared and shall remain in effect until snow removal has been completed or
the snow emergency is terminated by announcement of the Mayor or City
Administrator.  The declaration of a snow emergency and the announcement of
its termination shall be provided by means of public service broadcasts or
telecasts from stations with a normal operating range covering the City.



69.13     FIRE LANES.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a fire lane as
provided herein.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236)



   1.   Fire Lanes Established.  The Fire Chief, subject to the
approval of the Council, may designate fire lanes on any private road or
driveway where deemed necessary to assure access to property or premises by
authorized emergency vehicles.



   2.   Signs and Markings.  Wherever a fire lane has been designated,
the Mayor shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be placed identifying
such fire lanes and the parking prohibition established by this section.



   3.   Exception.  The provisions of this section do not apply to
authorized emergency vehicles.



69.14     RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING.



   1.   Parking Prohibited.  From April 1 to June 30 each year, no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on the street without a parking
permit in the following locations:



      A.   On either side of Lyndhurst Drive from N 16th Avenue to N
15th Avenue.



      B.   On the south side of Lyndhurst Drive from N 15th Avenue
east up to and including 1265 Lyndhurst Drive.



      C.   On the west side of N 15th Avenue from Litchfield Drive
to Emmons Street.



      D.   On the east side of N 15th Avenue from Lyndhurst Drive to
Emmons Street.



      E.   On either side of N 14th Avenue from Lyndhurst Drive to
Emmons Street.



   Vehicles parked on the street in these locations without the displayed
parking permit will be ticketed and/or towed at the owner’s expense.



   2.   Permit Issued.  Residential parking permits shall be issued to
each dwelling unit in the permit area.  No residential parking permit shall
be issued for a vehicle whose owner or principal operator is not a resident
in the parking permit area.  The principal permit holder may request
additional permits for guest parking.  No residential or guest permit shall
be transferred or sold to another property.



   3.   Display.  A residential or guest parking permit shall be
displayed by hanging from the rear view mirror inside the motor vehicle. 
Failure to display the permit will result in the vehicle being ticketed
and/or towed at the owner’s expense.



   4.   Violations.  It is a violation of this chapter for any person
to:



      A.   Park or stand a vehicle in the permit parking area during
the restricted times without displaying the proper permit.



      B.   Represent in any manner or form that a vehicle is
entitled to a parking permit authorized by this chapter when it is not so
entitled.  The display of a parking permit on a vehicle not entitled to such
a parking permit shall constitute such a representation.



      C.   Duplicate, or attempt to duplicate, by any means, a
parking permit authorized by this chapter.  It is also a violation of this
chapter to display upon any vehicle such a duplicate parking permit.



   All persons found in violation of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of $10.00 for the first offense, a fine of $25.00 for the second
offense, and a fine of $25.00 for every offense thereafter within the same
calendar year.



   5.   Healthcare Exception.  The City may issue upon application a
special parking permit to a business providing home healthcare services to a
resident located within the permit area.  Such permit shall only be valid
while a home healthcare provider is at a residence within the permit area and
is engaged in providing care to a resident of the area.  The permit may be
revoked by the City for failure to comply with the requirements of this
section.



CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES



 

70.01  Arrest or Citation
 
70.04  Parking Violations:  Vehicle Unattended


70.02  Scheduled Violations
 
70.05  Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking


70.03  Parking Violations:  Alternate
 
70.06  Impounding Vehicles



 



70.01   ARREST OR CITATION.



   Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person
has violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:



   1.   Immediate Arrest.  Immediately arrest such person and take
such person before a local magistrate; or



   2.   Issue Citation.  Without arresting the person, prepare in
quintuplicate a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the
Iowa Commissioner of Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint
utilizing a State-approved computerized device.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 & 321.485)



70.02   SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.



   For violations of the Traffic Code that are designated by Section
805.8A of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for
each of those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code
of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 & 805.8A)



70.03   PARKING VIOLATIONS:  ALTERNATE.



   Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of
Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the
office of the City Clerk.  The fine for each violation charged under a
simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of $10.00 for all violations
except snow route parking violations† 6 and improper use of a persons with
disabilities parking permit.  If such fine is not paid within 30 days, it
shall be increased by $5.00.  The fine for snow route parking violations is
$25.00 and the fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities parking
permit is $100.00. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1b] & 321L.4[2])



70.04   PARKING VIOLATIONS:  VEHICLE UNATTENDED.



   When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic
Code, and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein
provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.



70.05   PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.



   In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima
facie presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or
placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such
violation occurred shall be raised by proof that:



   1.   Described Vehicle.  The particular vehicle described in the
information was parked in violation of the Traffic Code; and



   2.   Registered Owner.  The defendant named in the information was
the registered owner at the time in question.



70.06   IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.



   A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed,
a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:



   1.   Disabled Vehicle.  When a vehicle is so disabled as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of
the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent
as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   2.   Illegally Parked Vehicle.  When any vehicle is left unattended
and is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   3.   Snow Removal.  When any vehicle is left parked in violation of
a ban on parking during snow removal operations.



   4.   Parked Over Limited Time Period.  When any vehicle is left
parked for a continuous period in violation of any limited parking time.  If
the owner can be located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove
the vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



   5.   Costs.  In addition to the standard penalties provided, the
owner or driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of
towing and storage.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])



 


Notes

6 
†EDITOR’S NOTE.  A snow route parking violation occurs when the driver
of a vehicle impedes or blocks traffic on a designated snow route. (See
Section 69.12.)



CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES



 

75.01  Purpose
 
75.05  Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles


75.02  Definitions
 
75.06  Negligence


75.03  General Regulations
 
75.07  Accident Reports


75.04  Operation of Snowmobiles
 



 



75.01   PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.



75.02   DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized
vehicle, with not less than three and not more than six non-highway tires,
that is limited in engine displacement to less than 1,000 cubic centimeters
and in total dry weight to less than 1,200 pounds and that has a seat or
saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering
control. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)



   2.   “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle
that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and
handlebars for steering control and that is intended by the manufacturer for
use on natural terrain.  “Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle
that was originally issued a certificate of title and registered for highway
use under Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa, but which contains design features
that enable operation over natural terrain.  An operator of an off-road
motorcycle is also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the
operation of all-terrain vehicles.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)



   3.   “Off-road utility vehicle” means a motorized vehicle, with
not less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized
tracks, that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be
straddled by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for
control.  “Off-road utility vehicle” includes the following vehicles:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)



      A.   “Off-road utility vehicle – type 1” includes
vehicles with a total dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50
inches or less.



      B.   “Off-road utility vehicle – type 2” includes
vehicles, other than type 1 vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds
or less and a width of 65 inches or less.



      C.   “Off-road utility vehicle – type 3” includes
vehicles with a total dry weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more
than 65 inches, or both.



   An operator of an off-road utility vehicle is also subject to the
provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.



   4.   “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less
than 1,000 pounds, that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type
tread with a width of 48 inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis,
or tread, and is designed for travel on snow or ice.  “Snowmobile” does
not include an all-terrain vehicle that has been altered or equipped with
runners, skis, belt-type tracks, or treads.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)



75.03   GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle or off-road utility
vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a
snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of
the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource
Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their
registration, equipment and manner of operation.



(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G & Ch. 321I)



75.04   OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.



   The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following
restrictions as to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:



   1.   Streets.  Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets that
have not been plowed during the snow season and on such other streets as may
be designated by resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])



   2.   Exceptions.  Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets
only under the following circumstances:



      A.   Emergencies.  Snowmobiles may be operated on any street
in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow
upon the roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])



      B.   Direct Crossing.  Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing
of a prohibited street provided all of the following occur:



         (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately
90 degrees to the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing;



         (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop
before crossing the street;



         (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all
on-coming traffic that constitutes an immediate hazard; and



         (4)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made
only at an intersection of such street with another street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])



   3.   Railroad Right-of-Way.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated on
an operating railroad right-of-way.  A snowmobile may be driven directly
across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and
notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the
improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming
traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])



   4.   Trails.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain
vehicle trails except where so designated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f])



   5.   Parks and Other City Land.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated
in any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the
express permission of the City.  A snowmobile shall not be operated on any
City land without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.



   6.   Sidewalk or Parking.  Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon
the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb
line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the
“parking” except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street
upon which operation is authorized by this chapter.



75.05   OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.



   The operators of ATVs shall comply with the following restrictions as
to where ATVs may be operated within the City:



   1.   Streets.  ATVs and off-road utility vehicles may be operated
on streets only in accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa or on
such streets as may be designated by resolution of the Council for the
operation of registered ATVs or registered off-road utility vehicles.  In
designating such streets, the Council may authorize ATVs and off-road utility
vehicles to stop at service stations or convenience stores along a designated
street.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 & 3])



   2.   Trails.  ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails
except where designated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])



   3.   Railroad Right-of-Way.  ATVs shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way.  An ATV may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])



   4.   Parks and Other City Land.  ATVs shall not be operated in any
park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City. 



   5.   Sidewalk or Parking.  ATVs shall not be operated upon the
public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line
and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”



   6.   Direct Crossing.  An all-terrain vehicle or off-road utility
vehicle may make a direct crossing of a highway provided all of the following
occur:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[5])



      A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety
degrees to the direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing.



      B.   The all-terrain vehicle or off-road utility vehicle is
brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main traveled way
of the highway.



      C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming
traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard.



      D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only
at an intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.



      E.   The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or highway
designated as an all-terrain vehicle trail by a state agency, county, or city
to a street, roadway, or highway designated as an all-terrain vehicle trail
by a state agency, county, or city.



75.06   NEGLIGENCE.



   The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any
injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or
snowmobile.  The owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such
injury or damage only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile
at the time the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the
owner’s consent to operate the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or
damage occurred.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 & 321I.19)



75.07   ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in
injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or more,
either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately
notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in
accordance with State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 & 321I.11)



CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS



 

76.01  Scope of Regulations
 
76.08  Riding on Sidewalks


76.02  Traffic Code Applies
 
76.09  Towing


76.03  Double Riding Restricted
 
76.10  Improper Riding


76.04  Two Abreast Limit
 
76.11  Parking


76.05  Speed
 
76.12  Equipment Requirements


76.06  Emerging from Alley or Driveway
 
76.13  Special Penalty


76.07  Carrying Articles
 
76.14  Authorized Police Bicycle



 



76.01   SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.



   These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any
street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
subject to those exceptions stated herein.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.02   TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable
to vehicles or by the Traffic Code of the City applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except as to those provisions that by their nature can have no
application.  Whenever such person dismounts from a bicycle, the person
shall be subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)



76.03   DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED.



   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.  No bicycle shall be used to
carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234[3 and 4])



76.04   TWO ABREAST LIMIT.



   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles.  All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right
and shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the
roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.05   SPEED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.06   EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.



   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.07   CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article that prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.08   RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   The following provisions apply to riding bicycles on sidewalks:



   1.   Business District.  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a
sidewalk within the Business District, as defined in Section 60.02(1) of this
Code of Ordinances.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



   2.   Other Locations.  When signs are erected on any sidewalk or
roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person
shall disobey the signs.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



   3.   Yield Right-of-Way.  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle
upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.09   TOWING.



   It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow
any other vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is
manufactured for such use.



76.10   IMPROPER RIDING.



   No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless manner such
as zigzagging, stunting, speeding, or otherwise so as to disregard the safety
of the operator or others.



76.11   PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford
the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.12   EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible for providing and
using equipment as provided herein:



   1.   Lamps Required.  Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall
be equipped with a lamp on the front emitting a white light visible from a
distance of at least 300 feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear,
except that a red reflector on the rear, of a type that is visible from all
distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a
rear light.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)



   2.   Brakes Required.  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake
that will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level,
clean pavement.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])



76.13   SPECIAL PENALTY.



   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the
scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for violations of
this Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by the
City for not less than five days for the first offense, 10 days for a second
offense and 30 days for a third offense.



76.14   AUTHORIZED POLICE BICYCLE.



   An on-duty police officer operating a duly authorized Police Department
bicycle may, when necessary in the performance of his/her official duties,
operate or park such bicycle contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
The foregoing provision shall not relieve the operator of an authorized
bicycle of the duty of operating with due regard for the safety of all
persons nor shall such provision protect the operator from the consequences
of his/her reckless disregard for the safety of others.



CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES



 

80.01  Definitions
 
80.05  Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles


80.02  Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles
 
80.06  Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles


80.03  Notice by Mail
 
80.07  Proceeds from Sales


80.04  Notification in Newspaper
 
80.08  Duties of Demolisher



 



80.01   DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1] & Sec. 321.90)



   1.   “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:



      A.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public
property for more than 24 hours and lacks current registration plates or two
or more wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.



      B.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property
for more than 24 hours.



      C.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on
private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the
property for more than 24 hours.



      D.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a
police authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of 10 days. 
However, a police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the
10-day period by commencing the notification process.



      E.   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police
authority to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.



      F.   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section
321J.4B of the Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not
paid the impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency
responsible for carrying out the impoundment order.



   2.   “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of
the Code of Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed
scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.



   3.   “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or
establishment, motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the
servicing, repair, or maintenance of motor vehicles.



   4.   “Police authority” means the Iowa State Patrol or any law
enforcement agency of a county or city.



80.02   AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the
request of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or
traffic, shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and
may take into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property.  The police
authority may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a
private entity, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing,
preserving, storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles.  A property owner
or other person in control of private property may employ a private entity
that is a garage keeper to dispose of an abandoned vehicle, and the private
entity may take into custody the abandoned vehicle without a police
authority’s initiative.  If a police authority employs a private entity to
dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall provide the private
entity with the names and addresses of the registered owners, all lienholders
of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or the personal
property found in the vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])



80.03   NOTICE BY MAIL.



   The police authority or private entity that takes into custody an
abandoned vehicle shall notify, within 20 days, by certified mail, the last
known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any
other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in the
vehicle, addressed to the parties’ last known addresses of record, that the
abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody.  Notice shall be deemed given
when mailed.  The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle
identification number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in
the vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is
being held, and inform the persons receiving the notice of their right to
reclaim the vehicle and personal property within 10 days after the effective
date of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage
charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the
costs of the notice.  The notice shall also state that the failure of the
owner, lienholders or claimants to exercise their right to reclaim the
vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall be deemed a
waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants of all right, title, claim and
interest in the vehicle or personal property and that failure to reclaim the
vehicle or personal property is deemed consent to the sale of the vehicle at
a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher and to disposal
of the personal property by sale or destruction.  If the abandoned vehicle
was taken into custody by a private entity without a police authority’s
initiative, the notice shall state that the private entity may claim a garage
keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90 of the Code of Iowa, and may
proceed to sell or dispose of the vehicle.  If the abandoned vehicle was
taken into custody by a police authority or by a private entity hired by a
police authority, the notice shall state that any person claiming rightful
possession of the vehicle or personal property who disputes the planned
disposition of the vehicle or property by the police authority or private
entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this section may
ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to contest those
matters.  If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the
10-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or claimants shall no longer
have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the
personal property.  A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize
any right, title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders or claimants
after the expiration of the 10-day reclaiming period.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])



80.04   NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER.



   If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity
and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders, notice by one
publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice
under Section 80.03.  The published notice may contain multiple listings of
abandoned vehicles and personal property but shall be published within the
same time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for
mailed notice in Section 80.03.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])



80.05   DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the
police authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether
or not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall
dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])



80.06   DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.



   The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is
found any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor
vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of
such motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without
notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more
wheels or other structural part which renders the vehicle totally
inoperable.  The police authority shall give the applicant a certificate of
authority.  The applicant shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a
junking certificate and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu
of the certificate of title.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])



80.07   PROCEEDS FROM SALES.



   Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the
expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification
required, in accordance with State law.  Any balance shall be held for the
owner of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days, and then shall
be deposited in the State Road Use Tax Fund.  Where the sale of any vehicle
fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the police authority
shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])



80.08   DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.



   Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor
vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise demolish
such motor vehicle.  A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle,
or demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking
certificate issued for the vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])



CHAPTER 81
RAILROAD REGULATIONS



 

81.01  Definitions
 
81.03  Crossing Maintenance


81.02  Obstructing Streets
 



 



81.01   DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation
or other association that owns, operates, drives, or controls a railroad
train.



   2.   “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)



81.02   OBSTRUCTING STREETS.



   Operators shall not operate any train in such a manner as to prevent
vehicular use of any highway, street or alley for a period of time in excess
of 10 minutes except:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)



   1.   Comply with Signals.  When necessary to comply with signals
affecting the safety of the movement of trains.



   2.   Avoid Striking.  When necessary to avoid striking any object
or person on the track.



   3.   Disabled.  When the train is disabled.



   4.   Safety Regulations.  When necessary to comply with
governmental safety regulations including, but not limited to, speed
ordinances and speed regulations.



   5.   In Motion.  When the train is in motion except while engaged
in switching operations.



   6.   No Traffic.  When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use
the crossing. 



   An employee is not guilty of a violation of this section if the
employee’s action was necessary to comply with the direct order or
instructions of a railroad corporation or its supervisors.  Guilt is then
with the railroad corporation.



81.03   CROSSING MAINTENANCE.



   Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient, and safe
crossings over any street traversed by their rails.



(Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943])



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)



CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM



 

90.01  Purpose
 
90.05  Existing Wells


90.02  Board of Trustees
 
90.06  Violation


90.03  Wells Prohibited
 
90.07  Obedience to Rules and Regulations


90.04  Special Exceptions
 



 



90.01     PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare and assure an adequate and safe water supply to the residents of
the City by prohibiting the construction of private wells within the
corporate limits, which wells could become possible points of entry of
pollutants into the City’s water supply or otherwise interfere with the
municipal water system maintained and controlled by the Hiawatha Water
Department.



90.02     BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   The management of the City’s Waterworks Utility is the responsibility
of the Utility Board of Trustees established and operated as described in
Chapter 25 of this Code of Ordinances.



90.03     WELLS PROHIBITED. 



   No person shall construct a well to be used as a potable water supply
(drinking water wells) within the corporate City limits.  For the purpose of
this chapter, “person” means private citizen, corporation or any other
entity, excluding the City of Hiawatha and Hiawatha Water Department.  Wells
constructed for purposes other than potable water supply (non-drinking) shall
not be connected directly or indirectly to City water supply.



90.04     SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS. 



   Hiawatha Water Department may, upon written application to the Water
Superintendent of the Water Department, grant a special exception to the
prohibition set forth in Section 36 of the Rules and Regulations of the
Hiawatha Water Department upon such conditions and limitations as the Water
Department/Board of Trustees, in sole discretion, may prescribe.  The Water
Department is under no obligation to grant any special exceptions whatsoever,
and the authority to grant such special exceptions includes the authority to
set appropriate fees for administration, oversight and monitoring as the
Water Board of Trustees shall deem appropriate.



90.05     EXISTING WELLS. 



   Any private wells that exist within the corporate City limits at the
time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter are deemed
exempt from this chapter.



90.06     VIOLATION. 



   Any person who constructs, operates, maintains or uses a private well
within the corporate City limits is in violation of this chapter and upon
conviction shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 4 of the
Code of Ordinance.  Each day in which any such violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.  The City may seek alternate relief, which may
include, but is not limited to, abatement, injunctive relief, or collection
for correction costs.



90.07     OBEDIENCE TO RULES AND REGULATIONS. 



   It is unlawful for any person to fail to obey any rule or regulation
promulgated by the Board of Trustees.



CHAPTER 91
WELLHEAD PROTECTION



 



91.01  Purpose
 
91.11  Activities Relating to Toxic and Hazardous Substances


91.02  Definitions
 
91.12  Permit Procedures


91.03  Substances Regulated
 
91.13  Wellhead Protection Officer Designated


91.04  Wellhead Protection Zone Maps and Listing
 
91.14  Inspections


91.05  Primary and Secondary Protection Zones
 
91.15  Transfer of Property


91.06  Determination of Location of Properties within Zones
 
91.16  Building Permit Issuance


91.07  Regulations Governing Primary Protection Zones
 
91.17  Underground Tank Restrictions


91.08  Regulations Governing Secondary Protection Zones
 
91.18  City Action for Injunctive Relief


91.09  Exempt Activities
 
91.19  Notice of Violation


91.10  Existing Uses
 
91.20  Appeals Process




 



91.01     PURPOSE. 



   The purpose of this chapter is to institute land use regulations and
restrictions to protect the City’s water supply and well fields, restrict
the location of potential sources of contamination in close proximity to a
public water supply, and to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the City.



91.02     DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   1.   “Aquifer” means a rock formation, group of rock formations
or part of a rock formation that contains enough saturated permeable material
to yield significant quantities of water.



   2.   “Contamination” means the presence of any harmful or
deleterious substances in the water supply.



   3.   “Groundwater” means subsurface water in the saturated zone
from which wells, springs and groundwater runoff are supplied.



   4.   “Geothermal protection zone” means that major geothermal
systems shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a water supply well.  And
minor geothermal systems shall not be located within 200 feet of a water
supply well.  Geothermal Systems are defined in Chapter 152 of this Code of
Ordinances.



   5.   “Hazardous substances” means those materials specified in
Section 91.03.



   6.   “Labeled quantities” means the maximum quantity of chemical
as recommended on the label, for specific applications.



   7.   “May” means desirable characteristics.  Characteristics
identified by ‘may’ can be implemented at the discretion of the design
team.



   8.   “Person” means any natural person, individual, public or
private corporation, firm, association, joint venture, partnership,
municipality, governmental agency, political subdivision, public officer, or
any other entity whatsoever or any combination of such, jointly or severally.



   9.   “Petroleum product” means fuels (gasoline, diesel fuels,
kerosene, and mixtures of these products), lubricating oils, motor oils,
hydraulic fluids, and other similar products.



   10.   “Pollution” means the presence of any substance (organic,
inorganic, radiological or biological) or condition (temperature, pH,
turbidity) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a
hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.



   11.   “Potable water” means water that is satisfactory for
drinking, culinary and domestic purposes, meeting current drinking water
standards.



   12.   “Primary containment” means the first level of
product-tight containment, i.e., the inside portion of that container which
comes into immediate contact on its inner surface with the hazardous material
being contained.



   13.   “Public utility” means any utility (gas, water, sewer,
electrical, telephone, cable television, etc.) whether publicly owned or
privately owned.



   14.   “Regulated substance” means substances included under
Section 91.03.



   15.   “Secondary containment” means the level of product-tight
containment external to and separate from the primary containment. 
Secondary containment shall consist of leak proof trays under containers,
floor curbing or other containment systems and shall be of adequate size and
design to handle all spills, leaks, overflows and precipitation until
appropriate action can be taken.  The specific design and selection of
materials shall be sufficient to preclude any substance loss.  Containment
systems shall be sheltered so that the intrusion of precipitation is
effectively prevented.



   16.   “Shall” means an absolute requirement.  Any sentence
containing the word ‘shall’ represents a firm requirement.



   17.   “Should” means a highly desirable characteristic.  Any
sentence containing the word ‘should’ represents a design goal.



   18.   “Toxic substance” means any substance that has the
capacity to produce personal injury or illness to humans through ingestion,
inhalation or absorption into the body.



   19.   “Water pollution” means the introduction in any surface or
underground water of any organic or inorganic deleterious substance in such
quantities, proportions and accumulations which is injurious to human, plant,
animal, fish and other aquatic life or property or which unreasonably
interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life of property or the conduct
of business.



   20.   “Water supply well” means a well that supplies water that
is potable.



   21.   “Well” means a pit or hole sunk into the earth to reach a
resource supply such as water.



   22.   “Well field” means a tract of land that contains a number
of wells for supplying water.



   23.   A “deep well” means a well that is constructed in such a
manner that there is a continuous layer of low permeability rock or soil at
least five feet thick located at least 25 feet below the normal ground
surface and above the aquifer from which the water is to be drawn. 



   24.   “Shallow well” means a well located and constructed in
such a manner that there is not a continuous five-foot layer of low
permeability soil or rock between the aquifer from which the water supply is
drawn and a point 25 feet below the normal ground surface.



   25.   “Wellhead protection zone” means zones delineated by fixed
radius around wellheads, within which toxic substances will be regulated to
protect the quality of the underground resource.



   26.   “Will” means an intended characteristic.  Characteristics
identified by ‘will’ describe an intent of what is implemented or the
intent of the external world. 



91.03     SUBSTANCES REGULATED.



   The materials regulated by this chapter consist of the following:



   1.   Petroleum products as defined in Section 91.02.



   2.   Substances listed in 40 CFR part 261, subparts C and D, of the
Federal Hazardous Waste List.



   3.   Substances listed by the Iowa Labor Commissioner pursuant to
Section 898.12 of the Code of Iowa (Hazardous Chemicals Risks—Right to
Know).



91.04     WELLHEAD PROTECTION ZONE MAPS AND LISTING.



   Wellhead protection zone maps and listing of locations and any
amendments thereto are incorporated by reference and made a part of this
chapter.  These maps shall be on file at City Hall.  At the time of
adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the location of all wells
in Hiawatha supplying potable water to the City water system shall be located
on the official wellhead protection map with primary and secondary protection
zones indicated.  Such maps shall be provided to the City Clerk, Building
Official, County Health Department, and any other agency requesting the
maps.  The wellhead protection zone maps may be updated on an annual
basis.  The basis for such an update may include, but is not limited to, the
following:



   1.   Changes in the technical knowledge concerning the aquifer.



   2.   Changes in permitted pumping capacity of City well fields.



   3.   Addition or deletion of wells.



   4.   Designation of new well fields.



91.05     PRIMARY AND SECONDARY PROTECTION ZONES. 



   The zones of protection indicated on the wellhead protection maps are
as follows:



   1.   Primary Protection Zone (Zone A).  An area extending 200 feet
radially from any well supplying potable water to the City water system.



   2.   Secondary Protection Zone (Zone B).  An area extending between
200 and 2,500 feet radially from any well supplying potable water to the City
water system.



   3.   Tertiary Protection Zone (Zone C).  An area known as the
Geothermal Protection Zone.  Major Geothermal Systems extending 1,000 feet
radially of a water supply well.  Minor geothermal systems within 200 feet
radially of a water supply well.



91.06     DETERMINATION OF LOCATION OF PROPERTIES WITHIN ZONES.



   In determining the location of properties within the zones depicted on
the wellhead protection zone maps, the following rules shall apply:



   1.   Properties located wholly within one zone reflected on the
applicable wellhead protection zone map shall be governed by the restrictions
applicable to that zone.



   2.   For properties having parts lying within more than one zone as
reflected on the applicable wellhead protection zone map, each part shall be
governed by the restrictions applicable to the zone in which it is located.



91.07     REGULATIONS GOVERNING PRIMARY PROTECTION ZONES.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted uses within
the primary protection zone (Zone A):



      A.   Parks, provided there is no on-site waste disposal or
fuel storage tank facilities associated within this use, and the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) Separation Distances From Wells for
sources of contamination is complied with.



      B.   Playgrounds.



      C.   Wildlife areas.



      D.   Nonmotorized trails, such as biking, skiing, nature and
fitness trails.



      E.   Lawns and gardens.



   2.   Prohibited Uses.  The following uses are prohibited uses
within the primary protection zone (Zone A).  Uses not listed are not
considered permitted uses unless specifically listed under subsection 1 of
this section, subsection 3 of this section, or issued a permit under Section
91.12:



      A.   Wastewater treatment facilities.



      B.   Septage and/or sludge spreading.



      C.   Agricultural activities.



      D.   Animal waste facilities.



      E.   Animal confinement facilities.



      F.   Animal waste landscaping.



      G.   Gas stations.



      H.   Asphalt products manufacturing.



      I.   Electroplating facilities.



      J.   Landfills or waste disposal facilities.



      K.   Spray wastewater facilities.



      L.   Junkyards or auto salvage yards.



      M.   Pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer use, storage, mixing,
handling, or manufacturing facilities (excluding residential uses consistent
with labeled quantities).



      N.   Hazardous and toxic materials storage and use.



      O.   Hazardous and toxic waste facilities.



      P.   Radioactive waste facilities.



      Q.   Paint and/or coating manufacturing.



      R.   Salt storage.



      S.   On-site private sewage systems.



      T.   Underground storage tanks.



      U.   Vehicle repair establishments, including auto body repair.



      V.   Printing and duplicating businesses.



      W.   Bus or truck terminals.



      X.   Dry cleaning businesses.



      Y.   Exterminating businesses.



      Z.   Basement storage tanks.



      AA.   Repair shops for items other than vehicles.



      BB.   All commercial or industrial businesses not specifically
listed elsewhere in this chapter.



   3.   Discharge of Hazardous Substances Prohibited.  No person shall
discharge or cause or permit the discharge of a hazardous substance, in
excess of labeled quantities, to the soils, groundwater, or surface water
within the primary protection zone (Zone A). Any person knowing or having
evidence of a discharge shall report such information to the Water
Superintendent.



91.08     REGULATIONS GOVERNING SECONDARY PROTECTION ZONES.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses are permitted in the
secondary protection zone (Zone B):



      A.   All uses listed as permitted in the primary protection
zone (Zone A).



      B.   Sewered residential, commercial and/or industrial uses
not prohibited under subsection 2 of this section.



      C.   Aboveground storage tanks of 660 gallons or less.



      D.   Basement storage tanks.



   2.   Prohibited Uses.  The following uses are prohibited uses
within the secondary protection zone (Zone B).  Uses not listed are not
considered permitted uses unless they are specifically listed under
subsection 1 of this section, specifically listed under subsection 3, or
issued a permit under Section 91.12:



      A.   Landfills or waste disposal facilities.



      B.   Spray wastewater facilities.



      C.   Junkyards or auto salvage yards.



      D.   Hazardous and toxic materials storage and use.



      E.   Hazardous and toxic waste facilities.



      F.   Radioactive waste facilities.



   3.   Uses Requiring Permits.  The following uses are prohibited
within the secondary protection zone (Zone B) unless a permit is issued for
such use by the City Council as under Section 91.12.  Uses not listed are
not to be considered permitted uses unless specifically listed under
subsection 1 of this section or issued a permit under Section 91.12:



      A.   Underground storage tanks of any size.



      B.   Private sewage systems.



      C.   Agricultural activities.



      D.   Septage and/or sludge spreading.



      E.   Animal waste landspreading.



      F.   Animal waste facilities.



      G.   Animal confinement facilities.



      H.   Gas stations.



      I.   Pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer use, storage, mixing,
handling or manufacturing facilities (excluding residential uses consistent
with labeled quantities).



      J.   Asphalt products manufacturing.



      K.   Dry cleaning facilities.



      L.   Electroplating facilities.



      M.   Geothermal vertical closed loop wells (see Chapter 152).



   4.   Discharge of Hazardous Substances Prohibited.  No person shall
discharge or cause or permit the discharge of a hazardous substance, in
excess of labeled quantities, to the soils, groundwater or surface water
within the secondary protection zone (Zone B).  Any person knowing or having
evidence of a discharge shall report such information to the wellhead
protection officer.



91.09     EXEMPT ACTIVITIES.



   The following activities or uses are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:



   1.   The transportation of any hazardous substance through the well
field protection zones, provided the transporting vehicle is in transit.



   2.   Mosquito-control spraying, providing that such uses shall
comply with the Iowa Commercial and Public Pesticide Applicators and Dealers
Licensing through the Iowa Department of Agriculture.



   3.   The use of any hazardous substance solely as fuel in a vehicle
fuel tank or as lubricant in a vehicle.



   4.   Fire, police, emergency medical services, emergency management
center facilities or public utility transmission facilities.



   5.   Retail sales establishments that store and handle hazardous
substances for resale in their original unopened containers.



   6.   Consumer products limited to use at a facility solely for
janitorial or minor maintenance purposes.



   7.   Consumer products located in the home which are used for
personal, family or household purposes.



   8.   The storage and use of hazardous substances as a fuel or
lubricant to provide auxiliary power for emergency use to the well field,
provided an enclosed secondary containment system is provided for the
hazardous substance.



   9.   The use of water treatment chemicals connected with the
operation of the well.



91.10     EXISTING USES.



   The use of structures or facilities existing at the time of the
adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be continued even
though such use may not conform with the regulations of this chapter. 
However, such structure of facility may not be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed or substituted subsequent to adoption of said ordinance unless
an exemption is granted by the City Council.



91.11     ACTIVITIES RELATING TO TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES.



   Any person who engages in nonresidential activities relatingto the
storage, handling, use and/or production of any toxic or hazardoussubstances
who is exempt from this chapter by law shall not be subject to the
restrictions contained herein.



91.12     PERMIT PROCEDURES. 



   All written requests for permits allowed under subsections 2 and 3 of
Sections 91.07 and 91.08 of this chapter will be made in writing to the City
Council.  Any permits granted will be made conditional and may include
environmental and safety monitoring and/or a bond posted for future
monitoring and cleanup costs.  The permit will be made void if environmental
and/or safety monitoring indicate the facility is emitting any releases of
harmful contaminates to the soils, groundwater, or surface water.  The
facility will be held financially responsible for all environmental cleanup
costs as under Section 36.04 of this Code of Ordinances.  The construction
of new structures or the structural modification or expansion of existing
structures within the primary protection zone (Zone A) requires Council
approval conditional upon the City Engineer’s approval of the site plan. 
Site plan review costs will be the responsibility of the owner.



91.13     WELLHEAD PROTECTION OFFICER DESIGNATED. 



   The Water Superintendent is designated as the wellhead protection
officer unless another person is specifically designated by the Water
Superintendent to supervise the implementation and enforcement of this
chapter.



91.14     INSPECTIONS.



   1.   The wellhead protection officer or inspector shall have the
power and authority to enter and inspect all buildings, structures and land
within all wellhead protection zones for the purpose of making an
inspection.  Failure of a person having common authority over a property to
permit an inspection shall be sufficient grounds and probable cause for a
court of competent jurisdiction to issue a search warrant to the protection
officer to inspect such premises.



   2.   In the event a building or structure appears to be vacant or
abandoned, and the owner cannot be readily contacted in order to obtain
consent for an inspection, the officer or inspector may enter into or upon
any open or unsecured portion of the premises in order to conduct an
inspection thereof.



   3.   The wellhead protection officer or inspector may inspect each
well field annually and shall maintain an inventory, if applicable, of all
hazardous substances which exist in each primary zone.  An emergency plan
shall be prepared and filed with the County Emergency Management Agency
indicating the procedures which will be followed in the event of spillage of
a regulated substance so as to control and collect all such spilled materials.



   4.   It shall be the duty of all law enforcement officers to assist
in making inspection when such assistance is requested by the officer or
inspector.



   5.   Hiawatha Water Department may provide nitrate and bacteria
testing yearly for active private wells to residents within the City limits.



91.15     TRANSFER OF PROPERTY.



   The City requires that all abandoned wells and cisterns be properly
sealed prior to finalization of property sales or transfers within the
corporate limits of the City.



91.16     BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   No building permits shall be issued which are a violation of this
chapter or a source of contamination for a City well, and no commercial or
industrial building permits shall be issued which are violations of the Iowa
DNR Separation Distances From Wells.



91.17     UNDERGROUND TANK RESTRICTIONS.



   No new underground tanks will be allowed for auxiliary fuel storage in
the primary zone.



91.18     CITY ACTION FOR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   If any person who engages in nonresidential activities stores, handles,
uses and/or produces toxic substances within the wellhead protection zones as
indicated on the wellhead protection zone maps, continues to operate in
violation of the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to provisions
and penalties provided in Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.  The City
may file an action for injunctive relief in the court of jurisdiction.



91.19     NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Whenever an officer or an inspector determines that there is a
violation of this chapter, said officer or inspector shall give notice
thereof, which notice shall:



   1.   Be in writing.



   2.   Be dated and signed by the officer or inspector.



   3.   Specify the violation or violations.



   4.   State that the violations shall be corrected within a specified
period of time as issued in writing by the inspector.



91.20     APPEALS PROCESS.



   For prohibited uses denied by the Water Superintendent the applicant
may appeal to the Hiawatha City Council.



CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM



 

95.01  Purpose
 
95.07  Right of Entry


95.02  Definitions
 
95.08  Use of Easements


95.03  Superintendent
 
95.09  Special Penalties


95.04  Prohibited Acts
 
95.10  Sewer Emergencies


95.05  Sewer Connection Required
 
95.11  Sewer Emergencies Fee


95.06  Service Outside the City
 



 



95.01   PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to
Sanitary Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment
and disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare.



95.02   DEFINITIONS.



   For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees C, expressed
in milligrams per liter or parts per million.



   2.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil,
waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys
it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters)
outside the inner face of the building wall.



   3.   “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping
from the building wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary
treatment portion of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system
conveying the drainage of one building site.



   4.   “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface
run-off and sewage.



   5.   “Customer” means any person responsible for the production
of domestic, commercial, or industrial waste that is directly or indirectly
discharged into the public sewer system.



   6.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and
commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the
handling, storage, and sale of produce.



   7.   “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary
sewage. 



   8.   “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council
to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers and their
connections to the public sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be
discharged therefrom. 



   9.   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 



   10.   “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means
all equipment and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection,
storage, treatment, and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling
units or other facilities serving the equivalent of 15 persons (1,500 gpd) or
less.



   11.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight
of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 



   12.   “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of
abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.



   13.   “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the
sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels),
office buildings, factories, or institutions, and free from storm, surface
water, and industrial waste.



   14.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries sewage and to
which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 



   15.   “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes
from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial
establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may
be present. 



   16.   “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices
and structures used for treating sewage. 



   17.   “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities
for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 



   18.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 



   19.   “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates
or fees levied against and payable by customers, as consideration for the
servicing of said customers by said sewer system.



   20.   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial
waste that in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow
exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five
times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 



   21.   “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer that
carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.



   22.   “Superintendent” means the Superintendent of sewage works
and/or of water pollution control of the City or any authorized deputy,
agent, or representative. 



   23.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the
surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and that
are removable by laboratory filtering. 



   24.   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water
occurs, either continuously or intermittently.



95.03   SUPERINTENDENT.



   The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and duties:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])



   1.   Operation and Maintenance.  Operate and maintain the City
sewage system.



   2.   Inspection and Tests.  Conduct necessary inspections and tests
to assure compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters. 



   3.   Records.  Maintain a complete and accurate record of all
sewers, sewage connections and manholes constructed showing the location and
grades thereof.



95.04   PROHIBITED ACTS.



   No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:



   1.   Damage Sewer System.  Maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment that is a part of the sewer system.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



   2.   Surface Run-Off or Groundwater.  Connect a roof downspout,
sump pump, exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of
surface run-off or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 



   3.   Manholes.  Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system,
except by authority of the Superintendent. 



   4.   Objectionable Wastes.  Place or deposit in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the City, or in any area under
the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or
other objectionable waste.



   5.   Septic Tanks.  Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage except as provided in these chapters. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])



   6.   Untreated Discharge.  Discharge to any natural outlet within
the City, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of these
chapters. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])



95.05   SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined
sewer, are hereby required to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable
toilet facilities therein and a building sewer connecting such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer, and to maintain the same all in
accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters, such
compliance to be completed within 60 days after date of official notice from
the City to do so provided that said public sewer is located within 200 feet
of the property line of such owner and is of such design as to receive and
convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to it.  Billing for
sanitary sewer service will begin the date of official notice to connect to
the public sewer.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])



(IAC, 567-69.1[3])



95.06   SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.



   The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so
situated that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the
Council for permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and
conditions stipulated by resolution of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])



95.07   RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer
chapters.  The Superintendent or representatives shall have no authority to
inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining,
ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing
on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities
for waste treatment.



95.08   USE OF EASEMENTS.



   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within said easement.  All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



95.09   SPECIAL PENALTIES.



   The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of
these Sanitary Sewer chapters: 



   1.   Notice of Violation.  Any person found to be violating any
provision of these chapters except subsections 1, 3, and 4 of Section 95.04,
shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof.  The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations. 



   2.   Continuing Violations.  Any person who shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall be
in violation of this Code of Ordinances.  Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



   3.   Liability Imposed.  Any person violating any of the provisions
of these chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or
damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation. 



95.10     SEWER EMERGENCIES.



   The City’s Public Works Department is available seven days a week, 24
hours a day, to assist City property owners in the event that a sanitary
sewer emergency occurs.  In the event a property owner contacts the City to
report a sanitary sewer emergency, including the backup up of sewer lines,
line breaks, sewage odors and overflowing manholes or drains, and a Public
Works employee goes out to the property to investigate or perform maintenance
work in relation to the sanitary sewer emergency, and if after investigation
by the Public Works employee, the sanitary sewer emergency is determined to
be caused by the privately owned sewer main, labor and equipment fees can be
assessed property owner as outlined in Section 95.11.  The City will only
maintain and repair City-owned infrastructure.



95.11     SEWER EMERGENCIES FEES. 



   All fees associated with Section 95.10 of this chapter will be mailed
to the property owner as an invoice and said fees shall be paid to the City
by the due date listed on the invoice for payment.



   1.   Fees associated with activities as provided in Section 95.10 of
this chapter shall be adopted by resolution passed by City Council.



   2.   Fees charged in connection with activities provided in Section
95.10 of this chapter shall cover only the City’s costs, including but not
limited to, City employee labor and the use of City equipment.



CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



 

96.01  Permit
 
96.05  Inspection Required


96.02  Permit Fee and Connection Charge
 
96.06  Property Owner’s Responsibility


96.03  Connection Requirements
 
96.07  Abatement of Violations


96.04  Sewer Tap
 



 



96.01   PERMIT.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the City.  The application for
the permit shall set forth the location and description of the property to be
connected with the sewer system and the purpose for which the sewer is to be
used, and shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent.  The permit shall require the owner to
complete construction and connection of the building sewer to the public
sewer within 60 days after the issuance of the permit, except that when a
property owner makes sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond the
owner’s control or peculiar hardship, such time period is inequitable or
unfair, an extension of time within which to comply with the provisions
herein may be granted.  Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at any
time for a violation of these chapters.



96.02     PERMIT FEE AND CONNECTION CHARGE.



   The person who makes the application shall pay a fee in the amount set
by resolution of the City Council.  There shall be a sewer connection
service charge for every sewer permit, in addition to the permit and
inspection fee, where such a connection is made to a sanitary sewer
constructed and financed by the City, and where the property has not
contributed to the cost of constructing or otherwise obtaining a sanitary
sewer by sewer service charges and/or special assessments.  A sewer
connection service charge of $2,000.00 shall be due and payable at the time
the building sewer permit application is filed, and is applicable to all such
properties within 150 feet of said City sewer.  At the discretion of the
Council, properties more than 150 feet from the City sewer may be served
under special agreements as to the connection service charge, but said
agreements shall not provide for service for such properties at a cost less
than the cost of extending the sewer main to the property to be served less
any part of the said cost which has been previously assessed to the property
under Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa.



96.03     CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.



   The installation of the building sewer and its connection to the public
sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Plumbing Code adopted by the
City, the laws of the State and other applicable rules and regulations of the
City.



96.04     SEWER TAP.



   Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at
the “Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location.  If
no properly located “Y” branch is available, a “Y” saddle shall be
installed at the location specified by the Superintendent.  The public sewer
shall be tapped with a tapping machine and a saddle appropriate to the type
of public sewer shall be glued and attached with stainless steel clamps to
the sewer.  At no time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter
a manhole unless special written permission is received from the
Superintendent and in accordance with the Superintendent’s direction if
such connection is approved.



96.05     INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   No building sewer shall be covered, concealed or put into use until it
has been tested, inspected and accepted as prescribed in the Plumbing Code.



96.06     PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.



   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.  The owner
shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



96.07     ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.



   Building sewers, whether located upon the private property of any owner
or in the public right-of-way, which are constructed or maintained in
violation of any of the requirements of this chapter shall be deemed a
nuisance and the same shall be abated by the City in the manner provided for
the abatement of nuisances.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])



CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS



 

97.01  Storm Water
 
97.05  Restricted Discharges; Powers of Superintendent


97.02  Storm Sewer Connections
 
97.06  Special Facilities


97.03  Prohibited Discharges
 
97.07  Control Manholes


97.04  Restricted Discharges
 
97.08  Testing of Wastes



 



97.01   STORM WATER.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.  Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers that are specifically designated as combined sewers
or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. 
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on
approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural
outlet.



97.02     STORM SEWER CONNECTIONS.



   Storm water, sub-soil drains, springs or surface water shall be drained
into public storm sewers wherever storm sewers are provided in adjacent
rights-of-way in accordance with the following:



   1.   The installation and connection of drains from buildings and
private properties to a storm sewer shall conform to the applicable plumbing
and excavation standards of the City.



   2.   Each sub-soil sump pump shall be fitted with an approved
discharge pipe of a minimum diameter of one and one-half inches, which shall
discharge into the storm sewer or other location approved by the City
Engineer.



   3.   Where a public storm sewer is not available, the sub-soil
drainage shall not discharge over a public sidewalk or onto a public street,
nor shall it return to the building or cause a nuisance to adjacent property.



   Exception:  Roof drains for one- and two-family dwellings and their
accessory structures shall not discharge directly into the City storm sewer
system unless approved by the City Engineer.



97.03   PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



   1.   Flammable or Explosive Material.  Any gasoline, benzene,
naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 



   2.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials.  Any waters or wastes containing
toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a
public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two
milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 



   3.   Corrosive Wastes.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than
5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 



   4.   Solid or Viscous Substances.  Solid or viscous substances in
quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works
such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 



   5.   Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow. 



      A.   Any waters or wastes:  (i) having a five-day biochemical
oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or (ii)
containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or
(iii) having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average
sewage flow of the City, shall be subject to the review of the
Superintendent. 



      B.   Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the
owner shall provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as
may be necessary to:  (i) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts
per million by weight; or (ii) reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per
million by weight; or (iii) control the quantities and rates of discharge of
such waters or wastes.  Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be
submitted for the approval of the Superintendent and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. 



97.04   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in
the opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance.  In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of
these wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as
the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent
factors.  The substances restricted are:



   1.   High Temperature.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature
higher than 150 degrees F (65 degrees C).



   2.   Fat, Oil, Grease.  Any water or waste containing fats, wax,
grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per
liter or 600 milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble matter. 



   3.   Viscous Substances.  Water or wastes containing substances
that may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees F and
150 degrees F (0 degrees to 65 degrees C).



   4.   Garbage.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded,
that is, to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the
flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle
greater than one-half inch in any dimension.



   5.   Acids.  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron
pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or
not. 



   6.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes.  Any waters or wastes
containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic
substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such
degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such
materials. 



   7.   Odor or Taste.  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or
other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding
limits that may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State,
federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.



   8.   Radioactive Wastes.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
Superintendent in compliance with applicable State or federal regulations. 



   9.   Excess Alkalinity.  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess
of 9.5. 



   10.   Unusual Wastes.  Materials that exert or cause:



      A.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such
as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or
of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).



      B.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).



      C.   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works.



      D.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting “slugs” as defined herein. 



   11.   Noxious or Malodorous Gases.  Any noxious or malodorous gas
or other substance that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing
entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair. 



   12.   Damaging Substances.  Any waters, wastes, materials, or
substances that react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release
noxious gases, develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids
in objectionable concentration or create any other condition deleterious to
structures and treatment processes. 



   13.   Untreatable Wastes.  Waters or wastes containing substances
that are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment
processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



97.05   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES; POWERS OF SUPERINTENDENT.



   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section 97.04 and which in the judgment of the
Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard
to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:



   1.   Rejection.  Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from
the public sewage system;



   2.   Pretreatment.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition
for discharge to the public sewers;



   3.   Controls Imposed.  Require control over the quantities and
rates of discharge; and/or



   4.   Special Charges.  Require payment to cover the added cost of
handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges under the provisions of Chapter 99.



97.06   SPECIAL FACILITIES.



   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.  Where
preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.



97.07   CONTROL MANHOLES.



   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances
in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of
the wastes.  Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent.  The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the
owner’s expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.



97.08   TESTING OF WASTES.



   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association,
and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable
samples taken at said control manhole.  In the event that no special manhole
has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected.  Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.  (The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of
all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken.  Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s
are determined from periodic grab samples).



CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS



 

98.01  When Prohibited
 
98.06  Maintenance of System


98.02  When Required
 
98.07  Systems Abandoned


98.03  Compliance with Regulations
 
98.08  Disposal of Septage


98.04  Permit Required
 
98.09  Minimum Lot Area


98.05  Discharge Restrictions
 



 



98.01   WHEN PROHIBITED.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to
construct or maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])



98.02   WHEN REQUIRED.



   When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
Section 95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are
employed shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.



(IAC, 567-69.1[3])



98.03   COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.



   The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private on-site
wastewater treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications
and requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69,
and with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of
the County Board of Health.



(IAC, 567-69.1[3 & 4])



98.04   PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of
Health.



98.05   DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.



   It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch,
stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the
surface of the ground.



(IAC, 567-69.1[3]) 



98.06   MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.



   The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall
operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no
expense to the City.



98.07   SYSTEMS ABANDONED.



   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in
Section 95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in
compliance with these Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])



98.08   DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.



   No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at
any location except an approved disposal site.



98.09   MINIMUM LOT AREA.



   No permit shall be issued for any on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system employing sub-surface soil absorption facilities where the
area of the lot is less than one acre.



CHAPTER 99
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES



 

99.01  Sewer Service Charges Required
 
99.05  Lien for Nonpayment


99.02  Special Rates
 
99.06  Lien Exemption


99.03  Private Water Systems
 
99.07  Lien Notice


99.04  Payment of Bills
 
99.08  Special Agreements Permitted



 



99.01   SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED.



   Every customer shall pay to the City sewer service charges in the
amount of 107 percent of the bill for water and water service attributable to
the customer for the property served.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



99.02   SPECIAL RATES.



   Where, in the judgment of the Mayor and the Council, special conditions
exist to the extent that the application of the sewer charges provided in
Section 99.01 would be inequitable or unfair to either the City or the
customer, a special rate shall be proposed by the Mayor and submitted to the
Council for approval by resolution.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



99.03   PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS.



   Customers whose premises are served by a private water system shall pay
sewer charges based upon the water used as determined by the City either by
an estimate agreed to by the customer or by metering the water system at the
customer’s expense.  Any negotiated or agreed-upon sales or charges shall
be subject to approval of the Council.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



99.04   PAYMENT OF BILLS.



   All sewer service charges are due and payable with and under the same
terms and conditions as payment for water service as established by the
Utility Board.  Procedures for delinquent final accounts and write offs
shall be adopted by resolution passed by the City Council.



99.05   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.



   The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall
be jointly and severally liable for sewer service charges to the premises. 
Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien
upon the property or premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to
the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



99.06   LIEN EXEMPTION.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



   1.   Exemption.  The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to the
charges for any of the services of sewer systems, storm water drainage
systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal
for a residential rental property where the charge is paid directly to the
City by the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the
property is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the
rates or charges for such service.  The City may require a deposit not
exceeding the usual cost of 90 days of such services to be paid to the
City.  When the tenant moves from the rental property, the City shall refund
the deposit if all service charges are paid in full.  The lien exemption
does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the
services.



   2.   Written Notice.  The landlord’s written notice shall contain
the name of the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the
residential or commercial rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and
the date that the occupancy begins.  Upon receipt, the City shall
acknowledge the notice and deposit.  A change in tenant for a residential
rental property shall require a new written notice to be given to the City
within 30 business days of the change in tenant.  A change in tenant for a
commercial rental property shall require a new written notice to be given to
the City within 10 business days of the change in tenant.  A change in the
ownership of the residential rental property shall require written notice of
such change to be given to the City within 30 business days of the completion
of the change of ownership.  A change in the ownership of the commercial
rental property shall require written notice of such change to be given to
the City within 10 business days of the completion of the change of
ownership. 



   3.   Mobile Homes, Modular Homes, and Manufactured Homes.  A lien
for nonpayment of utility services described in subsection 1 of this section
shall not be placed upon a premises that is a mobile home, modular home, or
manufactured home if the mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home is
owned by a tenant of and located in a mobile home park or manufactured home
community and the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or
manager is the account holder, unless the lease agreement specifies that the
tenant is responsible for payment of a portion of the rates or charges billed
to the account holder.



99.07   LIEN NOTICE.



   A lien for delinquent sewer service charges shall not be certified to
the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien
is given to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were
incurred.  If the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the
property or premises has made a written request for notice, the notice shall
also be given to the owner or landlord.  The notice shall be sent to the
appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to
certification of the lien to the County Treasurer.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



99.08   SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED.



   No statement in these chapters shall be construed as preventing a
special agreement, arrangement, or contract between the Council, and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted subject to special conditions, rate, and cost as
established by the Council.



CHAPTER 100
SEWER EXTENSIONS



 

100.01  Purpose
 
100.04  Construction by Owner


100.02  Definition
 
100.05  Others Required to Connect


100.03  Construction by City
 
100.06  Building Sewers Installed



 



100.01     PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means and method for the
extension of sewers to serve property not served by an existing sewer line so
as to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and
convenience of the residents of the City.



100.02     DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, “builder” means the owner of land
who causes a sanitary sewer to be installed under the provisions of this
chapter.  Such term includes the heirs, successors or assigns of such owner.



100.03     CONSTRUCTION BY CITY.



   An owner of land abutting or adjoining a property or a public street
where no sanitary sewer has been installed may make application to the
Council for the installation of a sanitary sewer in said street for the
purpose of serving the property in accordance with the following:



   1.   Application and Deposit.  A written request for such
installation, and a sum equal to the cost as estimated by the City of
construction from the point where the sanitary sewer is presently installed
and terminates to the point where the most distance boundary of the owner’s
lot abuts the said public street, shall be submitted to the Council.



   2.   Construction.  Upon receipt of the deposit, the City shall
construct the sanitary sewer for the purpose of serving the property of the
applicant (builder), as soon as such construction can reasonably be
accomplished.



   3.   Additional Costs.  In the event the actual cost to the City of
installation of the sanitary sewer is in excess of the estimated cost, the
builder agrees to reimburse the City for the actual additional cost within 30
days after the presentation of a bill for such additional cost.



   4.   Lien Authorized.  In the event of the failure of the builder
to reimburse the City, as specified in subsection 3 above, the total of the
additional cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer as a special
assessment lien against the builder’s real estate.  In the written request
for installation of the sanitary sewer, the landowner shall waive all
objections to jurisdiction and rights to notice and consent to the entry of
such a special assessment lien against the real estate.



   5.   Connecting Property.  The expense of connecting the property
of the builder to the sanitary sewer laid in the public street shall be borne
by the builder, in addition to the cost of constructing said sewer, but such
connection shall be under the supervision of the City.



100.04     CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER.



   In the event an owner of land abutting or adjoining a public street in
which no sewer has been previously installed desires to construct said sewer
at the owner’s own expense, the owner may do so, after making proper
application to the City and receiving a permit to install such a sewer, in
accordance with the following:



   1.   City Supervision.  The installation of such a sewer by a
landowner at the owner’s expense shall be under the strict supervision of
the City and shall, in all ways, conform to the requirements and
specifications of the City.



   2.   Surety Bond.  When making application to the City for a permit
to install such a sewer, the applicant shall post with the City a surety
bond, in an amount to be set by the Council and made a matter of record in
the minutes of the Council, which shall be in an amount equal to but not less
than 110 percent of the total estimated cost of the installation for the full
distance from the termination point of the presently existing sewer to the
point where the farthest boundary of the applicant’s land abuts the public
street, and not more than $12.00 per lineal foot for said distance, and which
bond shall guarantee the installation of the sewer in as short a time as
reasonably possible and shall further indemnify the City for the cost of
completing the project in the event the applicant fails to complete the
project within a reasonable time, and shall further indemnify the City for
all damages to the public street incurred in the installation, and shall
further hold the City harmless for any and all other damages arising from the
installation of the sanitary sewer.



   3.   Ownership of Sewer Line.  After the sewer has been installed,
it shall become the property of the City.



   4.   Manholes.  Manholes shall be installed at such locations as
the City may designate.



100.05     OTHERS REQUIRED TO CONNECT.



   Following the installation of a sanitary sewer under the provisions of
this chapter, owners of land abutting or adjoining a public street in which
such sewer has been installed, being persons other than the builder, shall be
obliged to connect any sewage generating facilities into said sanitary sewer,
as required by Chapter 95.



100.06     BUILDING SEWERS INSTALLED.



   Each sanitary sewer constructed in a public street or right-of-way,
whether constructed by the City or by a private party, shall include a stub
to each abutting or adjoining lot line of the street or right-of-way on which
the sewer is installed.  Each party responsible for installing such sewer
shall provide the City with an accurate map showing the location of each of
such stubs within 30 days of the completion of the installation.



CHAPTER 101
STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM



 

101.01  Purpose
 
101.05  Lien for Nonpayment


101.02  Storm Water Drainage System
 
101.06  Storm Water Emergencies


101.03  Rates
 
101.07  Storm Water Emergencies Fees


101.04  Payment of Rates
 



 



101.01     PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a storm water drainage
system district and provide a means of funding the operation and maintenance
of storm water management facilities including, but not limited to, retention
or detention basins, storm sewers, inlets, ditches and drains.



101.02     STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM.



   The entire City is hereby declared a storm water drainage system
district for the purpose of establishing, imposing, adjusting and providing
for the collection of rates for the operation and maintenance of storm water
management facilities.  As additional areas are annexed to the City they
shall immediately be included in the storm water drainage system district.



101.03     RATES.



   The rates for the operation and maintenance of the storm water
management facilities shall be collected by imposing a monthly rate on every
City water meter, and on every residence, apartment and dwelling unit in
mobile home parks.  A monthly rate of $5.50 shall be collected on every
business, commercial and industrial City water meter.  A monthly rate of
$3.25 shall be collected on every residence, apartment and dwelling unit in
mobile home parks.  The rates shall be billed and collected in the same
manner as water service rates.  The Council shall have the authority to
establish different monthly rates for different classifications of City water
meters.



101.04     PAYMENT OF RATES.



   The monthly rates are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions as sewer service charges.  Procedures for delinquent final
accounts and write offs shall be adopted by resolution passed by the City
Council.



101.05     LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.



   Except as provided for in Section 99.06 of this Code of Ordinances, the
owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for charges for the operation and maintenance of
the storm water management facilities.  Any such charges remaining unpaid
and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be
certified to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as
property taxes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)



101.06     STORM WATER EMERGENCIES. 



   The City’s Public Works Department is available seven days week, 24
hours a day to assist City property owners in the event that a storm water
emergency occurs. In the event a property owner contacts the City to report a
storm water emergency including, the backup of retention or detention basins,
storm sewers, inlets, ditches, or drains, and a Public Works employee goes
out to the property to investigate or perform maintenance work in relation to
the storm water emergency; and after investigation by the Public Works
employee the storm water emergency is determined to be caused by the
privately owned portion of the storm water drainage system; labor and
equipment fees can be assessed to the property owner as outlined in 101.07. 
The City will only maintain and repair City owned infrastructure.



101.07     STORM WATER EMERGENCIES FEES. 



All fees associated with Section 101.06 of this chapter will be mailed to the
property owner as an invoice and said fees shall be paid to the City of
Hiawatha by the due date listed on the invoice for payment.



   1.   Fees associated with activities as provided in Section 101.06
of this chapter shall be adopted by resolution passed by City Council.



   2.   Fees charged in connection with activities as provided in
Section 101.06 of this chapter shall cover only the City’s costs, including
but not limited to, City employee labor and the use of City equipment.



CHAPTER 102
ILLICIT DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM



 

102.01  Findings
 
102.06  Suspension of Access to the City’s Storm Sewer System


102.02  Illicit Discharges Prohibited
 
102.07  Watercourse Protection


102.03  Illicit Connections Prohibited
 
102.08  Enforcement


102.04  Industrial Discharges
 
102.09  Appeal


102.05  Illicit Discharge Detection and Reporting, Cost Recovery
 



 



102.01     FINDINGS.



   1.   The U.S. EPA’S National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (“NPDES”) permit program (“Program”) administered by the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources (“IDNR”) requires that cities meeting
certain demographic and environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR
and NPDES a permit for the discharge of storm sewer from a Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer System (MS4 Permit).  The City is subject to the Program and is
required to obtain, and has obtained, an MS4 Permit; the City’s MS4 Permit
is on file at the office of the City Clerk and is available for public
inspection during regular office hours.



   2.   As a condition of the City’s MS4 Permit, the City is obliged
to adopt and enforce an ILLICIT DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM ordinance.



   3.   No State or federal funds have been made available to assist
the City in administering and enforcing the Program.  Accordingly, the City
may fund its operations under this chapter entirely by charges imposed on the
owners of properties which are made subject to the Program by virtue of State
and federal law, and/or other sources of funding established by a separate
ordinance.



   4.   Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings specified in
the Program.



102.02     ILLICIT DISCHARGES PROHIBITED.



   1.   For purposes of this chapter, a “responsible party” is one
or more persons or entities that control or are in possession of or own
property from which the illicit discharge occurs; or commit the “illicit
discharge.”  Responsible parties shall be jointly and severally
responsible for compliance with this chapter and jointly and severally liable
for any illicit discharge for purposes of this chapter, “property”
includes, but is not limited to, real estate, fixtures, facilities, premises
of any kind located upon, under or above the real estate and vehicles.



   2.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to relieve a
responsible party subject to an IDNR-issued industrial discharge permit or
any other Federal, State or City permit, statute, ordinance or rule from any
obligation imposed by such permit, statute, ordinance or rule if any such
obligation is greater than any obligation imposed by this chapter.



   3.   Any discharge into the City’s storm sewer system prohibited
by the City’s MS4 Permit, the terms of which are hereby incorporated by
reference, shall be deemed an “illicit discharge” in violation of this
chapter.  The term “illicit discharge” also includes the definition
contained in EPA’S Phase II storm water regulations as “any discharge to
a municipal separate storm sewer that is not composed entirely of storm
water, except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit and discharges resulting
from firefighting activities.”



   4.   Sediment pollution originating from excessive erosion rates on
a construction site not otherwise subject to the City’s Construction Site
Erosion and Sediment Control (COSESCO) ordinance or sediment pollution
entering a municipal storm sewer that causes a water quality violation as
determined by the DNR shall also be deemed an illicit discharge in violation
of this chapter.



102.03     ILLICIT CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.



   1.   For purposes of this chapter, an “illicit connection” to
the City’s storm sewer system is any physical connection or other
topographical or other condition, natural or artificial, which is not
specifically authorized by ordinance or written rule of the City, which
causes or facilitates, directly or indirectly, an illicit discharge.



   2.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
any illicit connection shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



   3.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



102.04     INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES.



   Any responsible party subject to an industrial NPDES discharge permit
issued by the IDNR shall comply with all provisions of such permit.  Proof
of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the
enforcement officer prior to discharges to the storm sewer system authorized
by said permit.



102.05     ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND REPORTING; COST RECOVERY.



   1.   All detection activities permitted under this chapter shall be
conducted by the City of Hiawatha or designated department, hereinbefore and
after referred to as the “enforcement agency.”



   2.   The City shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect
consequences to persons or property of an illicit discharge, or circumstances
which may cause an illicit discharge, undetected by the City.



   3.   Every responsible party has an absolute duty to monitor
conditions on property owned or controlled by them, to prevent all illicit
discharges, and to report to the enforcement agency illicit discharges which
the responsible party knows or should have known occurred.  Failure to
comply with any provision of this chapter is a violation of this chapter.



      A.   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any
responsible party has information of any known or suspected illicit
discharge, the responsible party shall immediately take all necessary steps
to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such discharge at the
responsible party’s sole cost.



      B.   If the illicit discharge consists of hazardous materials,
the responsible party shall also immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.



      C.   If the illicit discharge emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall
also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken
to prevent its reoccurrence.  Such records shall be retained for at least
three years.



      D.   A report of an illicit discharge shall be made in person
or by phone or facsimile or email to the enforcement agency immediately but
no later than the end of the first business day after the day of discovery of
the illicit discharge; notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed
by written notice addressed and mailed or emailed to the enforcement officer
within 24 hours of the personal or phone notice.



   4.   Any person or entity shall also report to the City any illicit
discharge or circumstances which such person or entity reasonably believes
pose a risk of an illicit discharge.



   5.   Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous subsections,
or otherwise coming into possession of information indicating an actual or
imminent illicit discharge, the enforcement officer shall conduct an
inspection of the site and thereafter shall provide to the responsible party
a written report of the conditions which may cause or which have already
caused an illicit discharge.  The responsible party shall immediately
commence corrective action or remediation and shall complete such corrective
action or remediation within 21 days after discovery.  If it is not possible
to eliminate an illicit discharge within 21 days after discovery, the
responsible party shall submit to the City the reasons why the discharge
cannot be eliminated within 21 days of discovery and a plan which contains a
timeline of activities which will result in the elimination of the
discharge.  This statement and plan shall be submitted within 21 days of
discovery of the illicit discharge.  If the City and Department of Natural
Resources do not approve the plan, the responsible party will then be
required to eliminate the discharge no later than a date specified by the
City or Department of Natural Resources.



   6.   The enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect
property subject to regulation under this section as often as is necessary to
determine compliance with this section.  If a responsible party has security
measures that require identification and clearance before entry to its
property or premises, the responsible party shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access by the enforcement officer.  By way of
specification but not limitation:



      A.   A responsible party shall allow the enforcement agency
ready access to all parts of the property for purposes of inspection,
sampling, examination and copying of records related to a suspected, actual
or imminent illicit discharge, and for the performance of any additional
duties as defined by State and Federal law.



      B.   The enforcement agency shall have the right to set up on
any property such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the enforcement
officer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling related to a suspected, actual
or imminent illicit discharge.



      C.   The enforcement agency shall have the right to require
any responsible party at responsible party’s sole expense to install
monitoring equipment and deliver monitoring data or reports to the
enforcement agency as the enforcement agency directs.  The sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the responsible party at responsible party’s sole
expense.  All devices shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.



      D.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to property to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the responsible party at the written or oral order of the enforcement
agency and shall not be replaced.  The costs of clearing such access shall
be borne by the responsible party.



      E.   An unreasonable delay in allowing the enforcement officer
access to property is a violation of this chapter.



      F.   If the enforcement agency has been refused access to any
part of the property from which an illicit connection and/or illicit
discharge to a municipal storm sewer is occurring, suspected or imminent, and
is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample
as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the
enforcement officer may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction.



   7.   If it is determined that an illicit discharge is imminent or
has occurred, the actual administrative costs incurred by the City in the
enforcement of this chapter shall be recovered from the responsible party. 
The enforcement agency shall submit an invoice to the responsible party
reflecting the actual costs, wages and expenses incurred by the City for the
enforcement activities undertaken.  Failure to pay charges invoiced under
this chapter within 30 days of billing shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.



102.06     SUSPENSION OF ACCESS TO THE CITY’S STORM SEWER SYSTEM.



   1.   Emergency Suspension.  The enforcement agency may, without
prior notice, suspend storm sewer system access to a property when such
emergency suspension is necessary to stop an ongoing or imminent illicit
discharge.  If the responsible party fails to immediately comply with an
emergency suspension order, the enforcement officer shall take such steps as
deemed necessary to prevent or minimize the illicit discharge.  All costs of
such action shall be recovered from the responsible party for the property
identified as the source of the illicit discharge.



   2.   Non-Emergency Suspension.  If the enforcement agency detects
or is informed of circumstances which could cause an illicit discharge but
such illicit discharge is not ongoing or imminent, and if the suspension of
storm sewer system access would reasonably be expected to prevent or reduce
the potential illicit discharge, the enforcement officer shall notify the
responsible party of the proposed suspension of storm sewer system access and
the time and date of such suspension.  Notice to one responsible party for
the property shall be sufficient notice to all.  Remediation of the
circumstances shall avoid a violation of this chapter provided that no
illicit discharge occurs.  In the alternative, the responsible party may
request a meeting with the enforcement officer for the purpose of presenting
information which the responsible party believes will show that remediation
is unnecessary; and, if the enforcement officer finds such information is
satisfactory, the enforcement agency may rescind or modify the notice of
suspension.  If the enforcement officer finds such information
unsatisfactory, the enforcement officer shall issue a final written order of
suspension including the date and time of suspension; and such order may be
appealed as provided hereinafter.  Any physical action to reinstate storm
sewer system access to property subject to such order prior to obtaining a
court order of relief shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.  An order
of suspension shall not preclude charging the responsible party with a
municipal infraction as provided hereinafter or taking any other enforcement
action permitted by statute or ordinance.



102.07     WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every responsible party of property through which a watercourse passes
shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property
below the elevation of the 100-year flood free of trash, debris, grass
clippings or other organic waste stockpiles and other obstacles that would
pollute, contaminate or significantly alter the quality of water flowing
through the watercourse.  In addition, the responsible party shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or
physical integrity of the watercourse.



102.08     ENFORCEMENT.



   1.   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by
civil action including an action for injunctive relief.  In any civil
enforcement action, administrative or judicial, the City shall be entitled to
recover its attorneys’ fees and costs from a person who is determined by a
court of competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.



   2.   Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced
as a municipal infraction within the meaning of Section 364.22 of the Code of
Iowa, and pursuant to the City’s municipal infraction ordinance.



   3.   Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by the
enforcement officer upon the advice and consent of the City Attorney.



102.09     APPEAL.



   Administrative decisions by City staff and enforcement actions of the
enforcement officer may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council
pursuant to the following rules:



   1.   The appeal must be filed in writing with the City Clerk within
five business days of the decision or enforcement action.



   2.   The written appeal shall specify in detail the action appealed
from, the errors allegedly made by the enforcement offer giving rise to the
appeal, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the applicant
intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all
witnesses the applicant intends to call, copies of all documents the
applicant intends to introduce at the hearing and the relief requested.



   3.   The enforcement officer shall specify in writing the reasons
for the enforcement action, a written summary of all oral and written
testimony the enforcement officer intends to introduce at the hearing,
including the names and addresses of all witnesses the enforcement officer
intends to call, and copies of all documents the enforcement officer intends
to introduce at the hearing.



   4.   The City Clerk shall notify the applicant and the enforcement
officer by ordinary mail and shall give public notice in accordance with
Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa, of the date, time and place for the regular
or special meeting of the City Council at which the hearing on the appeal
shall occur.  The hearing shall be scheduled for a date not less than four
or more than 20 days after the filing of the appeal.  The rules of evidence
and procedure, and the standard of proof to be applied, shall be the same as
provided by Chapter 17A, Code of Iowa.  The applicant may be represented by
counsel at the applicant’s expense.  The enforcement officer may be
represented by the City Attorney or by an attorney designated by the City
Council at City expense.



   The decision of the City Council shall be rendered in writing and may
be appealed to the Iowa District Court.



CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL



 

105.01  Purpose
 
105.06  Littering Prohibited


105.02  Definitions
 
105.07  Toxic and Hazardous Waste


105.03  Sanitary Disposal Required
 
105.08  Prohibited Practices


105.04  Health and Fire Hazard
 
105.09  Sanitary Disposal Project Designated


105.05  Open Burning Restricted
 



 



105.01   PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to
Solid Waste Control and Collection is to provide for the sanitary storage,
collection, and disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens
of the City from such hazards to their health, safety and welfare as may
result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.



105.02   DEFINITIONS.



   For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid
waste from public and private places.



   2.   “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw,
deposit, or drop.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])



   3.   “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located
within a structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that
are used or are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.



   4.   “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal
and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing,
serving and consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and
all offal, excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all such
substances from all public and private establishments and from all
residences. 



(IAC, 567-100.2)



   5.   “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except
garbage.  The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush,
weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings. 



(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])



   6.   “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste
materials, or debris not exceeding 10 pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in
volume.  Litter includes but is not limited to empty beverage containers,
cigarette butts, food waste packaging, other food or candy wrappers,
handbills, empty cartons, or boxes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])



   7.   “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any
person residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting
business in any premises, and as between such parties the duties,
responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be
joint and several.



   8.   “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste,
including but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues,
street cleanings, market and industrial solid waste and sewage treatment
waste in dry or semisolid form. 



(IAC, 567-100.2)



   9.   “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the
premises as a result of residential activities.  The term includes landscape
waste grown on the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but
excludes garbage, tires, trade wastes and any locally recyclable goods or
plastics.



(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])



   10.   “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of
combustible and non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.



(IAC, 567-100.2)



   11.   “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste
so that it does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create
a nuisance.



(IAC, 567-100.2)



   12.   “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and
appurtenances (including all real and personal property connected with such
facilities) that are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed,
equipped, improved, extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final
disposition of solid waste without creating a significant hazard to the
public health or safety, and which are approved by the Director of the State
Department of Natural Resources.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301) 



   13.   “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other
similar discarded solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to
such materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and
domestic activities.  Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by
Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa.  Solid waste does not include any of the
following:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)



      A.   Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.



      B.   Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the
Code of Iowa, except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of
specific wastes have been adopted by the State Environmental Protection
Commission.



      C.   Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as
defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.



      D.   Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to
acceptable State or federal standards.



      E.   Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel
manufacturing process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled
manner and not as a discarded material.



105.03   SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED.



   It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of
all refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a
nuisance.  Any such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of
more than 30 days shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to
abate such nuisances in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50 or by
initiating proper action in district court.



(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657) 



105.04   HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.



   It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises,
improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste
that constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.



105.05   OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED.



   No person shall allow, cause or permit open burning of combustible
materials where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air
without passing through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is
permitted in the following circumstances:



(IAC, 567-23.2[455B] and 567-100.2)



   1.   Disaster Rubbish.  The open burning of rubbish, including
landscape waste, for the duration of the community disaster period in cases
where an officially declared emergency condition exists, provided that the
burning of any structures or demolished structures is conducted in accordance
with 40 CFR Section 61.145.



(IAC, 567-23.2[3a])



   2.   Recreational Fires.  Open fires for cooking, heating,
recreation and ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission
of visible air contaminants established by the State Department of Natural
Resources.  Larger ceremonial fires (e.g., school pep rally bonfires)
require a permit with the signature of the Fire Chief.  Such fires must not
be used for the purpose of refuse or waste disposal.  Persons starting such
fires must exercise due diligence in attending them.



(IAC, 567-23.2[3e])



   3.   Training Fires.  Fires set for the purpose of conducting bona
fide training of public or industrial employees in firefighting methods,
provided that the training fires are conducted in compliance with rules
established by the State Department of Natural Resources.



(IAC, 567-23.2[3g])



105.06   LITTERING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except
that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized
collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles
provided for such purpose.  When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle,
the driver of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case
where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually
discarded the litter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)



105.07   TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   No person shall deposit in a solid wast container or otherwise offer
for collection any toxic or hazardous waste.  Such materials shall be
transported and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State
Department of Natural Resources.  As used in this section, “toxic and
hazardous waste” means waste materials, including (but not limited to)
poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological waste,
flammable or explosive materials, and similar harmful waste that requires
special handling and that must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve
the environment and protect the public health and safety. 



(IAC, 567-100.2) 



(IAC, 567-102.13[2] and 400-27.14[2])



105.08   PROHIBITED PRACTICES.



   It is unlawful for any person to:



   1.   Unlawful Use of Containers.  Deposit refuse in any solid waste
containers not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner
of such containers. 



   2.   Interfere with Collectors.  Interfere in any manner with solid
waste collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful
performance of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be
those of the City, or those of any other authorized waste collection
service. 



   3.   Incinerators.  Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators
designed for high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid,
or gaseous combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from
which the solid residues contain little or no combustible material, as
acceptable to the Environmental Protection Commission.



   4.   Scavenging.  Take or collect any solid waste that has been
placed out for collection on any premises, unless such person is an
authorized solid waste collector.



105.09   SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED.



   The sanitary landfill facilities operated by Linn County are hereby
designated as the official “Public Sanitary Disposal Project” for the
disposal of solid waste produced or originating within the City.



CHAPTER 106
RESOURCE RECOVERY AND REFUSE DISPOSAL



 

106.01  Definitions
 
106.05  Disposal Requirements


106.02  Collection Service
 
106.06  Frequency of Collection/Enclosure Requirements


106.03  Collection Vehicles
 
106.07  Collector’s License


106.04  Loading
 



 



106.01     DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined.



   1.   “Aluminum cans” means disposable aluminum beverage
containers.



   2.   “Ashes” means the residue from the burning of wood and
other non-hazardous combustible material.



   3.   “Brush” means woody stems and branches, evergreen trimming
and thorny brush, all of which must be greater than one-half inch in diameter.



   4.   “Bulky waste” means large household appliances such as
stoves, refrigerators, television sets, washing machines, dryers, logs and
other items of similar size and fixtures and materials too large to fit into
a bag or rigid container.  Bulky waste does not include tires, hazardous
substances, dead animals and batteries.



   5.   “Collection bag” means a plastic watertight bag securely
tied or sealed.  The bag shall not exceed 50 pounds or 33 gallons when
full.  Collection bags may be used only for refuse.



   6.   “Commercial apartment” means a multiple-family dwelling
containing five or more separate dwelling units.



   7.   “Commercial or non-profit business or institution” means
any structure or property not used for residential dwelling purposes and
which includes churches, schools and any commercial or non-profit business
establishment or institution.



   8.   “Construction and demolition waste” means lumber, roofing
material, sheathing, rubble, broken concrete, plaster and brick, conduit,
pipe, wire insulation and similar material which results from a construction,
demolition or remodeling process.



   9.   “Curb side” means the area next to the curb or the traveled
portion of the roadway.



   10.   “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located
within a building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which
are used or are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.



   11.   “Grass and garden waste” means grass clippings, non-woody
dead plants, weeds, flowers and twigs less than one-half inch in diameter.



   12.   “Hauler” means any person under contract with the City to
collect, convey and dispose of and market recyclables and refuse.



   13.   “Household” means persons who reside together in a
dwelling unit.



   14.   “Leaves” means leaves from deciduous trees and shrubs.



   15.   “Newspaper” means paper of the type commonly referred to
as newsprint and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news
and opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public
interest.  Soiled newspapers are excluded.



   16.   “Non-collectible waste” means paint in liquid form,
poisons, acids, caustics, explosives and other hazardous substances that may
cause damage or injury to collection equipment or personnel, human or animal
excrement and dead animals.



   17.   “Recyclables” means designated consumer wastes which are
collected and marketed for resource recovery.  They include, but are not
necessarily limited to, chipboard, cardboard, paper, newspaper, magazines,
catalogs, tin and steel cans, aluminum beverage containers, and #2 plastics.



   18.   “Recycling container” means a rigid container including
lid, properly marked, to be used for the collection, blending together and
disposal of recyclables.



   19.   “Refuse” means solid waste such as food waste, trash,
rags, ashes, ceramics, glass and glass containers, obsolete household goods,
certain plastics and similar items produced or originating within dwelling
units.  Recyclables shall be treated as refuse if not properly disposed of
as set forth in Section 106.05.  Refuse excludes household-generated
hazardous waste.



   20.   “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling unit
and any multiple family dwelling up to and including four separate dwelling
units, including mobile homes.



   21.   “Residential solid waste” means refuse, recyclables, yard
waste, leaves, brush and bulky waste.



   22.   “Rigid container” means a closed, waterproof container not
exceeding 33 gallons or 50 pounds in capacity, of a type originally
manufactured for the storage of residential waste with tapered sides for easy
emptying.  Rigid containers may be used for yard waste or refuse.  When
used for automated residential trash collection, which requires less manual
lifting, fewer injuries, and a more accurate record of waste volumes,
“rigid container” means a closed, waterproof container of sizes as
follows:  35 gallons, 65 gallons, 95 gallons or up to 50 pounds in capacity,
of a type originally manufactured for the storage of residential waste with
tapered sides for easy emptying. 



   23.   “Tags” are the tags designated by the hauler which are
placed on refuse, grass and garden waste and bulky waste to indicate that the
disposal fee has been paid.



   24.   “Tin and steel cans” means clean containers made of
tin-coated iron or steel in which food or beverages were preserved.



   25.   “Yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings,
leaves, garden waste, brush and trees.  Yard waste does not include tree
stumps.



106.02     COLLECTION SERVICE.



   The collection of solid waste within the City shall be only by
collectors licensed by the City.



106.03     COLLECTION VEHICLES.



   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of
garbage and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such
materials shall be leakproof, durable and of easily cleanable construction. 
They shall be cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution or insect breeding and
shall be maintained in good repair.



(IAC, 567-104.9[455B])



106.04     LOADING.



   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of
any solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents
will not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent
blowing or loss of material.  Where spillage does occur, the material shall
be picked up immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the
vehicle or container and the area properly cleaned.



106.05     DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All persons residing in dwelling units located within the City shall
dispose of refuse, yard waste and bulky waste in compliance with the
provisions of this section.  Recyclables may be diverted from each dwelling
unit’s refuse and disposed of in compliance with this section.  The hauler
may refuse to collect improperly prepared material and may notify the owner
why it was not collected.  No person shall dump any residential solid waste,
construction and demolition waste or non-collectible waste in privately owned
dumpsters.



   1.   Refuse.



      A.   Refuse shall be drained of liquid and placed within an
approved collection bag or rigid container.



      B.   The monthly service fee will entitle the use of one
collection bag or rigid container each week.  A tag shall be prominently
attached to each additional collection bag and/or rigid container that is set
on the curb side for collection in the manner stated on the back of the
tag.  Tags may be placed on top of refuse in a container if covered by a
secure lid.  Bags shall not be placed in dumpsters.



      C.   Full rigid containers or collection bags shall be placed
on the curb side for collection on the next scheduled collection date.



      D.   Refuse shall be collected weekly at the curb side.  The
hauler shall determine the weekday of collection and may substitute for
holidays.



   2.   Recyclables.



      A.   Each dwelling unit shall have one properly marked
recycling container.



      B.   Recyclables shall be commingled and must be placed in the
recycling container and the lid shall be firmly affixed, if possible.  The
container shall be placed on the curb side for collection.



      C.   Only items designated as recyclables shall be included
within the container.



      D.   Each dwelling unit is responsible for the security of the
recycling container.  Lost or stolen containers will be replaced by the
property owner.



      E.   Recyclables will be collected weekly on the same day as
refuse.  Upon placement of the recycling container on the curb side, the
contents thereof shall become the property of the hauler.  It is unlawful
for any person, other than the hauler, to collect the contents thereof.



   3.   Grass and Garden Waste.



      A.   No more than 50 pounds of grass and garden waste shall be
placed in a rigid container.  Grass and garden waste may be placed in paper
yard bags at additional cost.



      B.   Each rigid container or paper yard bag shall have a tag
prominently attached to it in the manner stated on the back of each tag.



      C.   Grass and garden waste shall be placed on the curb side
for collection at least 10 feet from other solid waste.



      D.   No other solid waste shall be commingled with grass and
garden waste.



      E.   Grass and garden waste shall be collected from March 15
through November 15 each year.  Grass and garden waste will be collected on
the same day as refuse during that period.



   4.   Brush and Tree Limbs.



      A.   All brush and tree limbs shall be neatly stacked parallel
to the roadway with large cut ends to the right as one faces the street.



      B.   Stacks shall be no larger than four feet in length and no
more than 50 pounds per stack.



      C.   No more than two such stacks shall be placed along the
curb for collection each month.



      D.   Thorny brush shall be bundled with natural fiber twine. 
Bundles shall be no larger than one foot in diameter or more than four feet
long.



      E.   No brush or limbs shall be more than two inches in
diameter.



      F.   Brush shall be collected monthly from March 15 through
November 15 each year.  The hauler shall determine the day of the week for
collection.



   5.   Bulky Waste.  Bulky waste shall be collection by arrangement
with the hauler.



   6.   Recyclable Corrugated Cardboard.  Recyclable corrugated
cardboard shall be separated by the generator from all other garbage, refuse
and rubbish for the purpose of recycling.  Recyclable corrugated cardboard
may be mixed with other approved recyclable materials for recycling. 
Recyclable corrugated cardboard that has been separated from all other
garbage, refuse and rubbish may be mixed with approved compostable materials
and may be composted.  This subsection will apply to all haulers that
utilize Bluestem Solid Waste sites.



106.06     FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION/ENCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.



   All solid waste shall be collected from every residential premises once
each week.  Multi-family housing, commercial, industrial, non-profit
businesses and institutional premises shall have solid waste collected at a
minimum of once per week or on a more frequent basis to prevent trash
receptacles and dumpsters from overflowing and becoming a nuisance.



   1.   Enclosure Requirement.  All multi-family, office, commercial,
civic, and institutional land uses approved after July 1, 2009, including new
construction and additions to existing structures, which use garbage
dumpsters shall provide enclosures for dumpsters and/or screening of trash
and recycling, cardboard, grease and similar service or support containers
meeting the requirements of this section.  Enclosures are not required for
single family residential use.  The location and design of each enclosure
shall be shown on the site plan and approved prior to issuance of structural
building permits.  All land uses listed above existing prior to July 1,
2009, shall not be required to install enclosures unless the City Council has
declared that the property owner is a repeat violator.



   2.   Construction and Appearance.



      A.   Each required enclosure shall be accessible for truck
pick-up.  Access drives shall be constructed of material and thickness to
accommodate truck loading.  Year round accessibility to the enclosure shall
be maintained by the property owner or tenant.



      B.   Each required enclosure shall be screened so that
container is not visible from the adjacent property or from any public
right-of-way thru the use of solid material or landscaping on at least three
sides to at least the height of the top of the container, but not exceeding
eight feet above ground level.  The use of materials that are not solid,
such as slates in chain-link fencing, shall not be used to meet this
requirement.



      C.   Enclosure openings directly visible from a public
right-of-way and/or adjoining properties shall have a gate constructed of
solid material.  For larger areas a separate gate access is encouraged.



      D.   Enclosures shall be of an adequate size to accommodate
expected containers.  It is encouraged to design the enclosure area to be
expandable to accommodate future additional containers.



      E.   Enclosure structures shall be designed to protect the
walls from damage by containers.  Such protections may include use of
barrier curbing, reinforced masonry wall, or other similar means.



      F.   Materials and elevations for enclosures that are attached
to buildings shall incorporate the same principal colors and materials used
in the adjacent or nearest façade of the primary structure.



      G.   If enclosures are to be attached to buildings they shall
comply with the applicable fire codes and building codes.



      H.   Trash enclosures shall not be located within a required
street front or street side setback or occupy area used for required parking
spaces.



106.07     COLLECTOR’S LICENSE.



   No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting,
processing or disposing of solid waste other than waste produced by that
person within the City without first obtaining from the City an annual
license in accordance with the following:



   1.   Application.  Application for a solid waste collector’s
license shall be made to the Clerk and provide the following:



      A.   Name and Address.  The full name and address of the
applicant, and if a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers
thereof.



      B.   Equipment.  A complete and accurate listing of the
number and type of collection and transportation equipment to be used.



      C.   Collection Program.  A complete description of the
frequency, routes and method of collection and transportation to be used.



      D.   Disposal.  A statement as to the precise location and
method of disposal or processing facilities to be used.



   2.   Insurance.  No collector’s license shall be issued until and
unless the applicant therefor, in addition to all other requirements set
forth, shall file and maintain with the City evidence of satisfactory public
liability insurance covering all operations of the applicant pertaining to
such business and all equipment and vehicles to be operated in the conduct
thereof in the following minimum amounts:



Bodily Injury   $500,000.00 per person. 



   $1,000,000.00 per occurrence.



   Property Damage   $100,000.00



   Each insurance policy required hereunder shall include as a part
thereof provisions requiring the insurance carrier to notify the City of the
expiration, cancellation or other termination of coverage not less than 10
days prior to the effective date of such action. 



   3.   License Fee.  A license fee in the amount of $100.00 shall
accompany the application.  In the event the requested license is not
granted, the fee paid shall be refunded to the applicant.



   4.   License Issued.  If the Council upon investigation finds the
application to be in order and determines that the applicant will collect,
transport, process or dispose of solid waste without hazard to the public
health or damage to the environment and in conformity with law and ordinance,
the requested license shall be issued to be effective for a period of one
year from the date approved.



   5.   License Renewal.  An annual license may be renewed simply upon
payment of the required fee, provided the applicant agrees to continue to
operate in substantially the same manner as provided in the original
application and provided the applicant furnishes the Clerk with a current
listing of vehicles, equipment and facilities in use and a current
certification of insurance. 



   6.   License Not Transferable.  No license authorized by this
chapter may be transferred to another person. 



   7.   Owner May Transport.  Nothing herein is to be construed so as
to prevent the owner from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises
owned, occupied or used by such owner, provided such refuse is disposed of
properly in an approved sanitary disposal project. 



   8.   Grading or Excavation Excepted.  No license or permit is
required for the removal, hauling, or disposal of earth and rock material
from grading or excavation activities; however, all such materials shall be
conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles so constructed and
maintained that none of the material being transported spills upon any public
right-of-way.



   9.   Records.  The hauler shall keep records of all yard waste
tonnage, recycling tonnage and solid waste tonnage collected and shall
prepare and submit to the City, a minimum of twice a year, by June 30 and
December 30, landfill diversion charts and recycling information required by
the State Department of Natural Resources and by the County.  This will
include, but not be limited to, information regarding equipment, volume of
the waste stream and any other information that is requested.  The hauler
agrees that this will be accurate information and any misrepresentation of
information will be cause for the hauler’s license to be terminated.



CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE



 

110.01  Franchise Granted
 
110.06  Indemnification


110.02  State Code Restrictions
 
110.07  Extension of Mains and Pipes


110.03  Excavations
 
110.08  Standard of Service


110.04  Relocation of Installations
 
110.09  Franchise Fee


110.05  Restoration of Property
 



 



110.01     FRANCHISE GRANTED.



   There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa
corporation, hereinafter called “Company,” and to its successors and
assigns the right and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and
operate in the City a gas distribution system, to furnish natural gas along,
under and upon the streets, avenues, alleys, and public places to serve
customers within and without the City and to furnish and sell natural gas to
the City and its inhabitants.  For the term of the franchise the Company is
granted the right of eminent domain, the exercise of which is subject to City
Council approval upon application by the Company.  This franchise shall be
effective for a 25-year period from and after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter† 7 , provided however, that there may be
a re-evaluation prior to the end of year 15, with the opportunity for both
parties to request amendments.  If neither party requests such re-evaluation
by means of a written notice to the other party at least 90 days prior to the
expiration of year 15, the franchise will continue without change for the
remaining 10 years.



110.02     STATE CODE RESTRICTIONS.



   The rights and privileges hereby granted are subject to the
restrictions and limitations of Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa, or as
subsequently amended or changed.



110.03     EXCAVATIONS.



   Company shall have the right to excavate in any public street for the
purpose of laying, relaying, repairing or extending gas pipes, mains,
conduits, and other facilities provided that the same shall be so placed as
not to interfere with the construction of any water pipes, drain or sewer or
the flow of water therefrom, which have been or may hereafter be located by
authority of the City.



110.04     RELOCATION OF INSTALLATIONS.



   The Company shall, at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its
installations in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the City in
such manner as the City may at any time reasonably require for the purposes
of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of
the street or alley or any public improvement of, in or about any such street
or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such
improvement.  If the City has a reasonable alternative route for the street,
alley or public improvements or an alternative construction method, which
would not cause the relocation of the Company installations, the City shall
consider but is not required to select said alternative route, or
construction method.  If relocation of the Company facilities could be
avoided by relocating other franchisee’s or facility user’s equipment and
facilities or by using a different method to perform the street and/or
curbing construction, and said other cost of construction or relocation is
less than the Company’s, the City shall consider but is not required to
select the route or method that is less expensive. If project funds from a
source other than the City are available to pay for the relocation of utility
facilities, both parties will support efforts to secure said funds and
provide them to the Company to compensate the Company for the costs of
relocation.



110.05     RESTORATION OF PROPERTY.



   In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys and public places
for the installation of gas pipes, conduits or apparatus, Company shall not
unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets and shall replace the surface,
restoring the original condition as nearly as practicable in accordance with
City specifications.  City property located within the right of way damaged
or disturbed by the Company will be restored to the condition that existed
prior to Company work in the right of way.  The Company shall not be
responsible for any repairs or repair costs beyond the Company’s pro rata
share of the restoration or repair costs.  The Company shall not be
responsible to repair trenches, excavations, damages and damages to property
caused by other entities and persons.



110.06     INDEMNIFICATION.



   Company shall indemnify and save harmless the City from any and all
claims, suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses on account of injury or
damage to any person or property, caused or occasioned, or allegedly caused
or occasioned, in whole or in part, by Company’s negligence in
construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation or maintenance of the gas
utilities authorized by this franchise, provided, however, that the Company
shall not be obligated to defend, indemnify and save harmless the City for
any costs or damages arising from the negligence of the City, its officers,
employees or agents.



110.07     EXTENSION OF MAINS AND PIPES.



   The Company shall extend its mains and pipes and operate and maintain
the system in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa
Utilities Board or its successors.



110.08     STANDARD OF SERVICE.



   During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish natural
gas in the quantity and quality consistent with applicable Iowa laws and
regulations.



110.09     FRANCHISE FEE.



   The City reserves the right to impose a franchise fee in a manner
consistent with State law.  The City shall work with the Company to develop
a methodology and timeline to implement the franchise fee.



   1.   In its monthly billing the Company shall include a franchise
fee of three percent on the gross receipts, minus uncollectable amounts, from
the sale of natural gas and mixed gas and distribution services for customers
within the limits of the City.  The Company shall commence collecting the
three percent franchise fee on July 1, 2016, following the acceptance of the
franchise by the Company and filed with the City Clerk.  The franchise fee
may increase up to a maximum of five percent on or after January 1, 2017. 
The City shall give the Company a minimum six-month notice prior to the
request to implement an increase in the franchise fee.  Collection of the
franchise fee shall cease at the earlier of the City’s repeal of the
franchise fee or the end of the franchise term.



   2.   The franchise fee shall be applied to all customers’ bills in
accordance with Code of Iowa Chapter 364.2(f) and 423B.5.  The Company shall
not grant exemptions or refunds of the franchise fee beyond that granted by
the Code of Iowa. 



   3.   The City agrees that the Company’s obligations related to the
franchise fee are limited to those obligations set forth in subsections 1, 2
and 6 of this section.  The City further agrees to bear all costs (including
attorney fees), and to defend, indemnify and hold the Company harmless from
any and all liability, claims or causes of action associated with disputes
related to the billing and/or collection of the franchise fee.



   4.   Upon receipt of a final and unappealable order or approval
authorizing annexation, or changes in the limits of the City, the Clerk shall
provide written notification to an officer of Company of such annexation or
change in the limits of the City, and the Company shall apply the franchise
fee to its customers who are affected by the annexation or change in the
limits of the City, commencing six months from receipt of the written notice.



   5.   The sum of such additional charges for the franchise fee and
any additional charges related to subsection 1 of this section shall be shown
separately on the utility bill to each customer.



   6.   The Company shall remit collected franchise fees to the City on
a quarterly basis, within 30 days after last day of the last revenue month of
the quarter.



   7.   Said franchise fee shall be in lieu of any other payments to
the City for the Company’s use of streets, avenues, alleys and public
places in the City and other administrative or regulatory costs with regard
to said franchise; and said poles, lines, wires, conduits and other
appliances for the transmission of electric current along, under and upon the
streets, avenues, alleys and public places in the City to supply individuals,
corporations, communities and municipalities both inside and outside of the
City with electric light, heat and power shall be exempt from any special
tax, assessment, license or rental charge during the entire term of the
franchise.



 


Notes

7 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  Ordinance No. 629, adopting a natural gas franchise for
the City, was passed and adopted on March 4, 2009.

 



CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
INTERSTATE POWER AND LIGHT COMPANY



 

111.01  Grant of Franchise
 
111.06  Uninterrupted Service


111.02  Placement of Appliances
 
111.07  Franchise Fee


111.03  Installation of Meters
 
111.08  Term of Franchise


111.04  Standard of Service
 
111.09  Scope


111.05  Nonexclusive Franchise
 



 



111.01     GRANT OF FRANCHISE.



   There is hereby granted to Interstate Power and Light Company,
hereinafter referred to as the “Company,” its successors and assigns, the
right and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the
City, works and plants for the manufacture and generation of electricity and
a distribution system for electric light, heat and power and the right to
erect and maintain the necessary poles, lines, wires, conduits and other
appliances for the transmission of electric current along, under and upon the
streets, avenues, alleys and public places in the City; also the right to
erect and maintain upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public places,
transmission lines through the City to supply individuals, corporations,
communities, and municipalities both inside and outside of the City with
electric light, heat and power for the period of 25 years† 8 ; the
franchise also includes the right of eminent domain as provided in Section
364.2 of the Code of Iowa.



111.02     PLACEMENT OF APPLIANCES.



   The poles, wires and appliances shall be placed and maintained so as
not to unnecessarily interfere with the travel on said streets, alleys, and
public places in the City or unnecessarily interfere with the proper use of
the same, including ordinary drainage, or with the sewers, underground pipe
and other property of the City, and the said Company, its successors and
assigns shall hold the City free and harmless from all damages arising from
the negligent acts or omissions of the Company in the erection or maintenance
of said system.



111.03     INSTALLATION OF METERS.



   The Company, its successors and assigns, shall furnish and install all
meters at its own expense, and shall provide the service wire to buildings as
set forth in the Company’s tariff filed with the Iowa Utilities Board.



111.04     STANDARD OF SERVICE.



   The system authorized by this chapter shall be modern and up-to-date
and shall be of sufficient capacity to supply all reasonable demands of the
City and its inhabitants thereof and shall be kept in a modern and up-to-date
condition.



111.05     NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.



   The franchise granted by this chapter shall not be exclusive.



111.06     UNINTERRUPTED SERVICE.



   Service to be rendered by the Company under this franchise shall be
continuous unless prevented from doing so by fire, acts of God, unavoidable
accidents or casualties, or reasonable interruptions necessary to properly
service the Company’s equipment, and in such event service shall be resumed
as quickly as is reasonably possible.



111.07     FRANCHISE FEE.



   1.   In its monthly billing the Company shall include a franchise
fee of three percent on the gross receipts from the sale of electricity for
customers within the limits of the City.  The Company shall commence
collecting the three percent franchise fee on July 1, 2016, following the
acceptance of the franchise by the Company and filed with the City Clerk. 
The franchise fee may increase up to a maximum of five percent on or after
January 1, 2017.  The City shall give the Company a minimum six-month notice
prior to the request to implement an increase in the franchise fee. 
Collection of the franchise fee shall cease at the earlier of the City’s
repeal of the franchise fee or the end of the franchise term.



   2.   Said franchise fee shall be in lieu of any other payments to
the City for the Company’s use of streets, avenues, alleys and public
places in the City and other administrative or regulatory costs with regard
to said franchise; and said poles, lines, wires, conduits and other
appliances for the transmission of electric current along, under and upon the
streets, avenues, alleys and public places in the City to supply individuals,
corporations, communities and municipalities both inside and outside of the
City with electric light, heat and power shall be exempt from any special
tax, assessment, license or rental charge during the entire term of the
franchise.



111.08     TERM OF FRANCHISE.



   The term of the franchise granted by this chapter and the rights
granted thereunder shall continue for the period of 25 years from and after
its acceptance by the said Company, as herein provided.



111.09     SCOPE.



   This chapter sets forth and constitutes the entire agreement between
the Company and the City with respect to the rights contained herein, and may
not be superseded, modified or otherwise amended without the approval and
acceptance of the Company.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall
the City enact any ordinance or place any limitations, either operationally
or through the assessment of fees other than those approved and accepted by
the Company within this chapter, that create additional burdens upon the
Company, or which delay utility operations.



 


Notes

8 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  Ordinance No. 580 adopting an electric franchise for
the City, was passed and adopted on August 17, 2005.

 



CHAPTER 112
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
LINN COUNTY RURAL ELECTRIC



 



112.01  Franchise Granted
 
112.13  Annexation


112.02  Placement Not To Interfere
 
112.14  Indemnification


112.03  Excavating
 
112.15  Franchise Fee Remitted


112.04  Existing Facilities
 
112.16  Notice


112.05  Tree Maintenance
 
112.17  Responsibility on Use


112.06  Service Provided
 
112.18  Refund of Fee


112.07  Franchise Nonexclusive
 
112.19  Termination of Collection


112.08  Service Continuous
 
112.20  No Other Fee For Use


112.09  Franchise Fee Billing
 
112.21  No Right-of-Way Management Fee


112.10  Franchise Fee Shown Separately
 
112.22  Term


112.11  Franchise Fee Collection
 
112.23  Conditions Upon Acceptance


112.12  Franchise Fee Administration Cost
 
112.24  Entire Agreement




 



112.01   FRANCHISE GRANTED.



   There is hereby granted to Linn County Rural Electric Cooperative
Association, hereinafter referred to as the “Company,” its electrical
energy suppliers as necessary to provide Company distribution at 25,000 Volts
or less, its successors and assigns, the right and franchise to construct,
reconstruct, repair, maintain and operate in the City systems for the
distribution of electric power, and the right to construct, reconstruct,
repair, maintain and operate the necessary poles, lines, wires, conduits and
other appurtenances for the distribution of electric power and energy along,
under and upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public ways in the City; also
the right to erect and maintain upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public
ways, distribution lines through the City to supply individuals,
corporations, communities and municipalities both inside and outside of said
City with electric light and power appurtenances for the period of 25 years;
also the right of eminent domain as provided in Section 364.2 of the Code of
Iowa. † 9



112.02   PLACEMENT NOT TO INTERFERE.



   The poles, lines, wires, circuits, and other appurtenances shall be
placed and maintained so as not to unnecessarily interfere with the travel on
said streets, alleys, and public places in said City nor unnecessarily
interfere with the proper use of the same, including ordinary drainage, or
with the sewers, underground pipe and other property of the City, and the
said Company, its successors and assigns shall hold the City free and
harmless from all damages to the extent arising from the negligent acts or
omissions of the Company in the erection or maintenance of said system.



112.03   EXCAVATING.



   In making any excavations in any street, alley, or public place,
Company, its successors and assigns, shall protect the site while work is in
progress by guards, barriers or signals, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the
use of the streets, and shall back fill all openings in such manner as to
prevent settling or depressions in the surface, pavement or sidewalk of such
excavations with same materials, restoring the condition as nearly as
practical.  The Company shall not be required to restore or modify public
right of way, sidewalks or other areas in or adjacent to the Company project
to a condition superior to its immediate previously existing condition.



112.04   EXISTING FACILITIES.



   The Company shall, at its cost, locate and relocate its existing
facilities or equipment in, on, over or under any public street or alley in
the City in such a manner as the City may at any time reasonably require for
the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or
repair of the street or alley or any public improvement thereof, in or about
any such street or alley or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of
any such improvement.  If the City orders or requests the Company to
relocate its existing facilities or equipment for any reason other than as
specified above, or as the result of the initial request of a commercial or
private developer, the Company shall receive payment for the cost of such
relocation as a precondition to relocating its existing facilities or
equipment.  The City shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its
public works projects so as not arbitrarily to cause the Company unreasonable
additional expense in exercising its authority under this section.  The City
shall also provide a reasonable alternative location for the Company’s
facilities as part of its relocation request.  Prior to the City abandoning
or vacating any street, avenue, alley or public ground where the Company has
electric facilities, the City shall grant the Company a utility easement for
said facilities.  If the City fails to grant the Company a utility easement
for said facilities prior to abandoning or vacating a street, avenue, alley
or public place, the City shall at its cost and expense obtain easements for
existing Company facilities.  The Company shall not be required to relocate,
at its cost and expense, Company facilities in the public right of way that
have been relocated at Company expense at the direction of the City in the
previous 10 years.



112.05   TREE MAINTENANCE.



   The Company is authorized and empowered to prune or remove at Company
expense any tree extending into any street, alley or public grounds to
maintain electric reliability, safety, to restore utility service and to
prevent limbs, branches or trunks from interfering with the wires and
facilities of the Company.  The pruning and removal of trees shall be
performed in accordance with Company’s then current line clearance
vegetation plan as filed and approved by the Iowa Utilities Board, as well as
all applicable codes and standards referenced therein.



112.06   SERVICE PROVIDED.



   During the term of the franchise, the Company shall furnish electric
energy in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities
Board and the Company’s tariffs.  The Company will maintain compliance
with Iowa Utilities Board regulatory standards for reliability.



112.07   FRANCHISE NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The franchise granted by this chapter shall not be exclusive.



112.08   SERVICE CONTINUOUS.



   Service to be rendered by the Company under the franchise shall be
continuous unless prevented from doing so by fire, acts of God, unavoidable
accidents or casualties, or reasonable interruptions necessary to properly
service the Company’s equipment, and in such event service shall be resumed
as quickly as is reasonably possible.



112.09   FRANCHISE FEE BILLING.



   In its monthly billing the Company shall include a franchise fee of
three percent on the gross receipts from the sale of electricity to the
Company’s electric customers located within the corporate limits of the
City.



112.10   FRANCHISE FEE SHOWN SEPARATELY.



   The franchise fee shall be applied to all customers’ bills in
accordance with Code of Iowa Chapter 364.2 and 423B.5.  The amount of the
franchise fee shall be shown separately on the utility bill to each customer.



112.11   FRANCHISE FEE COLLECTION.



   The Company will commence collecting franchise fees on or before the
first Company billing cycle of the first calendar month following 90 days of
receipt of information required of the City to implement the franchise fee. 
This information shall include but not be limited to a copy of the City’s
Revenue Purpose Statement and written proof of legal adoption and publication
of the Revenue Purpose Statement, City’s list of City utility accounts
exempt per Iowa law from the franchise fee, signed Nondisclosure Agreement
pertaining to the protection of the confidentiality of utility service
address information provided by the Company to the City, and the City’s
verified utility customer service address list.



112.12   FRANCHISE FEE ADMINISTRATION COSTS.



   The City recognizes that the costs of franchise fee administration are
not charged directly to the City and the City and Company agree that the
Company may only charge such administrative fees as are provided for in State
statute.



112.13   ANNEXATION.



   Upon receipt of a final and unappealable order or approval authorizing
annexation, or changes in the corporate approval authorizing annexation, or
changes in the corporate limits of said City, the City Clerk shall provide
written notification by certified mail to an officer of Company of such
annexation or change in the limits of said City, and the Company shall apply
the franchise fee to its customers who are affected by the annexation or
change in the corporate limits of the City, commencing on an agreed upon date
which is not less than 90 days from receipt of the information required of
the City to implement the franchise fee.  The Company shall have no
obligation to collect franchise fees from customers in any annexed area until
and unless the following have all been provided to the Company by certified
mail; such final and unappealable orders or approvals, the City’s list of
City utility accounts exempt from the franchise fee in the annexed area, and
the City’s verified utility customer service address list for the annexed
area.



112.14   INDEMNIFICATION.



   The City shall indemnify the Company from claims of any nature arising
out of or related to the imposition and collection of the franchise fee.  In
addition, the Company shall not be liable for collecting franchise fees from
any customer originally or subsequently identified, or incorrectly
identified, by the City as being subject to the franchise fee or being exempt
from the imposition of franchise fees.



112.15   FRANCHISE FEE REMITTED.



   The Company shall remit franchise fee receipts to the City no more
frequently than on or before the last business day of the month following
each calendar year quarter.  Company shall notify City at least 30 days in
advance of any changes made in this collection schedule, including any
alterations in the calendar quarters or any other changes in the remittance
periods.



112.16   NOTICE.



   The City shall give the Company a minimum six-month notice prior to the
request to implement any adjustment in the percentage of franchise fee to be
collected pursuant to Section 112.09 hereof.  The City agrees to modify the
level of franchise fees imposed only once in any 24-month period.  When any
such ordinance increasing, decreasing, modifying or eliminating the franchise
fee shall become effective, billings reflecting the change shall commence on
an agreed upon date which is not less than 90 days following written notice
to the Company by certified mail.  The Company shall not be required to
implement such new percentage unless and until it determines that it has
received appropriate official documentation of final action by the City
Council.  In no event may the percentage of franchise fee exceed the
statutory amount authorized by Iowa law.



112.17   RESPONSIBILITY ON USE.



   The City shall be solely responsible for the proper use of any amounts
collected as franchise fees, and shall only use such fees as collected for a
purpose as allowed by applicable law.



112.18   REFUND OF FEE.



   The Company shall not, under any circumstance be required to return or
refund any franchise fees that have been collected from City customers and
remitted to the City.  In the event the Company is required to provide data
or information in defense of the City’s imposition of franchise fees or the
Company is required to assist the City in identifying customers or
calculating any franchise fee refunds for groups of customers or individual
customers, the City shall reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by
the Company to provide such data or information.



112.19   TERMINATION OF COLLECTION.



   Collection of the franchise fee shall cease at the earlier of the
modification or repeal of the franchise fee or the end of the franchise term.



   1.   The obligation to collect and remit the fee imposed by this
chapter is modified if:



      A.   Any other person is authorized to sell electricity to
customers within the corporate limits of the City and the City imposes a
franchise fee or its lawful equivalent at zero or a lesser rate than provided
in this chapter, in which case the obligation of Company to collect and remit
franchise fee shall be modified to zero or the lesser rate; or



      B.   The City adds additional territory by annexation or
consolidation and is unable or unwilling to impose the franchise fee upon all
persons selling electricity to consumers within the additional territory, in
which case the franchise fee imposed on the revenue from sales by Company in
the additional territory shall be zero or equal to that of the lowest fee
being paid by any other retail seller of electricity within the City; or



      C.   The Iowa General Assembly enacts legislation, or any Iowa
court issues a final judicial decision regarding franchise fees, or the Iowa
Utilities Board issues a final non-appealable order (collectively, “Final
Franchise Fee Action”) that modifies, but does not repeal, the ability of
the City to impose a franchise fee or the ability of Company to collect from
City customers and remit franchise fees to City.  Within 60 days of Final
Franchise Fee Action, the City shall notify Company and the parties shall
meet to determine whether this Ordinance can be revised, and, if so, how to
revise the franchise fee on a continuing basis to meet revised legal
requirements.  After Final Franchise Fee Action and until passage by the
City of revisions to the franchise fee ordinance, Company may temporarily
discontinue collection and remittance of the franchise fee if in its sole
opinion it believes it is required to do so in order to comply with revised
legal requirements.



   2.   The obligation to collect and remit the fee imposed by this
chapter is repealed, effective as of the date specified below with no
liability therefor, if:



      A.   Any of the imposition, collection or remittance of a
franchise fee is ruled to be unlawful by the Supreme Court of Iowa, effective
as of the date of such ruling or as may be specified by that Court; or



      B.   The Iowa General Assembly enacts legislation making
imposition, collection or remittance of a franchise fee unlawful, effective
as of the date lawfully specified by the General Assembly ; or



      C.   The Iowa Utilities Board, or any successor agency, denies
the Company the right to impose, collect or remit a franchise fee provided
such denial is affirmed by the Supreme Court of Iowa effective as of the date
of the final agency order from which the appeal is taken.



112.20   NO OTHER FEE FOR USE.



   The franchise fee shall be in lieu of any other payments to the City
for the Company’s use of streets, alleys and public places in the said City
and other administrative or regulatory costs with regard to said franchise;
and said poles, lines, wires, conduits and other appurtenances for the
distribution of electric current along, under and upon the streets, alleys
and public places in the said City to supply individuals, corporations,
communities, and municipalities both inside and outside of said City with
electric light, heat and power shall be exempt from any special tax,
assessment, license or rental charge during the entire term of the franchise.



112.21   NO RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT FEE.



   The City shall not, pursuant to Chapter 480A.6 of the Code of Iowa,
impose or charge right-of-way management fees upon the Company or fees for
permits for Company construction, maintenance, repairs, excavation, pavement
cutting or inspections of Company work sites and projects or related matters.



112.22    TERM.



   The term of the franchise granted by this Ordinance and the rights
granted thereunder shall continue for the periods of 25 years from and after
its acceptance by the said Company, as herein provided.



112.23    CONDITION UPON ACCEPTANCE.



   The franchise granted by this chapter shall be conditioned upon
acceptance by the Company in writing. 



112.24    ENTIRE AGREEMENT.



   This chapter sets forth and constitutes the entire agreement between
the Company and the City with respect to the rights contained herein, and may
not be superseded, modified or otherwise amended without the written approval
and acceptance of the Company.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event
shall the City enact any ordinance or place any limitations, either
operationally or through the assessment of fees other than those approved and
accepted by the Company within this chapter, which create additional burdens
upon the Company, or which delay utility operations.



 


Notes

9 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  Ordinance No. 863, adopting a eletric franchise for the
City, was passed and adopted on May 18, 2016.

 



CHAPTER 115
UTILITY LINES



 

115.01  Definition
 
115.08  Poles, Towers or Structures


115.02  Permit Required
 
115.09  Above Ground Transmission Lines 


115.03  Permit Approval Required
 
115.10  Repair and Maintenance of Existing Installations


115.04  Burial Required
 
115.11  Developer Responsibility


115.05  Exceptions to Burial
 
115.12  Compliance


115.06  Fees Established
 
115.13  Conflicting Provisions


115.07  Quality Regulation
 



 



115.01     DEFINITION.



For purposed of this Chapter, “utility lines” means any lines placed for
purposes of transmitting a public or private utility, including by way of
illustration, but not necessarily limited to, electric, gas, telephone,
television, fiber optics and other like or similar utilities, whether owned,
installed or constructed by the supplier, consumer or any other party. 
Utility lines include those placed either within the City or outside of its
corporate limits but within the jurisdiction of the City’s platting and
subdivision regulations.



115.02     PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person or entity shall install, construct, perform maintenance,
reconstruct, or repair any utility lines or associated structures located in
the public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the City,
pursuant to Section 135.09 of this Code of Ordinances.  No permit shall be
issued by the City until the permit applicant has paid any applicable fees
required by this chapter, has executed an agreement to defend, indemnify, and
hold the City harmless, has provided a policy of insurance satisfactory to
the City Administrator insuring the City against any liability arising out of
the work, and has posted the bond required by Section 135.09 of this Code of
Ordinances.



115.03     PERMIT APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   Plans to place utility lines subsequent to the adoption of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, whether new utility lines or utility
lines that replace prior utility lines, must be submitted in writing to the
Hiawatha Building Department with a completed permit application.  The City
Engineer, the Community Development Director, the Water Superintendent, and
the Public Works Superintendent will review the plans for purposes of
determining whether the plans comply with the requirements of this chapter
and will approve or deny the permit application.



115.04     BURIAL REQUIRED.



   Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, utility lines hereafter
installed, constructed, or otherwise placed shall be installed and placed
underground.  Above ground placement, construction, modification or
replacement of meters, gauges, transformers, amplifiers, street lighting and
service connection pedestals shall be allowed.  All utility lines shall be
placed within appropriate easements or dedicated public rights-of-way so as
to cause minimum conflict with other underground services.



115.05     EXCEPTIONS TO BURIAL. 



   The following exceptions to the strict applicability of Section 115.04
shall be allowed upon the conditions stated:



   1.   Above ground placement, construction, modification, replacement
or relocation of lines shall be allowed where the City Engineer, Community
Development Director, Water Superintendent, and Public Works Superintendent
find that:



      A.   Underground placement would place an undue financial
burden upon the persons or entities bearing the financial responsibility for
the placement of the lines underground; or



      B.   Underground placement is impractical or not technically
feasible due to topographical, subsoil or other existing conditions which
adversely affect underground utility placement; or



      C.   Above ground structures are currently in place upon which
placement could be accomplished.



   2.   Above ground placement of temporary service utility lines shall
be allowed:



      A.   During the new construction of any project for a period
not to exceed 12 months, provided the construction period can be extended by
mutual agreement.



      B.   During any emergency to safeguard lives or property
within the City.



      C.   For a period of not more than seven months when soil
conditions make excavation impractical.



   3.   Above ground placement of utility lines in excess of 34
kilovolts shall be allowed.



115.06     FEES ESTABLISHED.



In order to recover its costs in managing the public right-of-way, the permit
applicant shall pay to the City a management fee established by the City. 
The fee shall be due and payable at the time of filing the permit application
and at the time of filing each proposed amendment to the permit. The
following utilities are exempt from the management fee:



   1.   Any utility or communication system franchised by the City; or



   2.   Any utility with a certificate of franchise authority issued by
the State of Iowa. Exception: This fee exemption does not apply to
contractors or subcontractors doing work for exempt franchisees.



115.07     QUALITY REGULATION. 



   All persons or entities installing, constructing, performing
maintenance, reconstructing or repairing any utility lines or associated
structures pursuant to a City issued permit agree to perform the work in
compliance with all federal and State laws, all City codes, specifications,
and ordinances, and the Engineering Standards as adopted by resolution by the
Hiawatha City Council in accordance with Hiawatha Code Section 165.58.
Furthermore, Underground Facilities Information, Code of Iowa Chapter 480, is
made a part of this policy.  The law requires persons excavating to contact
the one call system at least 48 hours prior to any excavation.  Iowa One
Call can be reached at 1-800-292-8989 or 811.



(Ord. 920 - Feb. 19 Supp.)



115.08     POLES, TOWERS OR STRUCTURES.



   All poles installed subsequent to the adoption of the ordinance
codified in this chapter for the purpose of placement of permitted above
ground utility lines shall be composed of laminated materials.  All poles,
towers or structures installed subsequent to the adoption of such ordinance
for the purpose of placement of permitted above ground utility lines shall:



   1.   Be as tall as practical and reasonably available; and



   2.   Spaced apart at maximum distances reasonably possible.



115.09     ABOVE GROUND TRANSMISSION LINES. 



   When permitted to place new above ground transmission lines that did
not exist at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter was adopted,
only one such above ground transmission line shall be permitted along any
roadway, street, avenue or alley.  All permitted above ground transmission
lines placed after the adoption of such ordinance, whether they are new
transmission lines or transmission lines that replace prior transmission
lines, must be attached as close to the poles, towers or structures that
support the lines as reasonably possible.  When new or additional lines are
to be placed on existing above ground structures, all persons or entities
shall secure in writing the appropriate utility’s permission to install on
the existing structures and submit that writing to the City before a permit
shall be issued.



115.10     REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING INSTALLATIONS. 



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent repair,
maintenance, replacement or modification of existing overhead and underground
utility lines and related equipment.



115.11     DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITY.



   All persons or entities responsible for complying with the requirements
of this chapter shall submit to the City written instruments from the
appropriate utility companies showing that all necessary arrangements with
said companies for installation of such utility lines have been made.



115.12     COMPLIANCE. 



   Failure to comply with this chapter may result in the issuance of a
stop work order, double permit charges, issuance of a municipal infraction
and/or denial of any further excavation permits until a bond or letter of
credit is submitted and the City is satisfied that the permit holder will
comply with this chapter.  A failure to complete work may result in the
City, after written notice to the permit holder and without any response from
the permit holder, performing the necessary work to complete the excavation,
including surface restoration, and assessing all costs associated to the
permit holder in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



115.13     CONFLICTING PROVISIONS. 



   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are in
conflict with conditions imposed by any other provision of law, code,
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the provisions of this
chapter shall govern.



CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS



 

120.01  License or Permit Required
 
120.04  Action by Council


120.02  General Prohibition
 
120.05  Prohibited Sales and Acts


120.03  Investigation
 
120.06  Amusement Devices



 



120.01   LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep
for sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor
control license, wine permit, or beer permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171)



120.02   GENERAL PROHIBITION.



   It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale,
possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations, and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the
Code of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil
penalty may be imposed for a violation thereof. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)



120.03   INVESTIGATION.



   Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer
permit, the Clerk may forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct
an investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts
averred in the application.  The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to
determine if they conform to the requirements of the City.  The Council
shall not approve an application for a license or permit for any premises
that does not conform to the applicable law and ordinances, resolutions, and
regulations of the City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)



120.04   ACTION BY COUNCIL.



   The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of the
liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its
approval or disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application,
necessary fee and bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic
Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce for such further
action as is provided by law. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])



120.05   PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.



   A person or club holding a liquor license or retail wine or beer permit
and the person’s or club’s agents or employees shall not do any of the
following:



   1.   Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one
simulating intoxication, any alcoholic beverage. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])



   2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage on the premises covered
by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday; however, a holder of a
liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit granted the privilege of
selling alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer on Sunday may sell or dispense
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and
2:00 a.m. of the following Monday, and further provided that a holder of any
class of liquor control license or the holder of a class “B” beer permit
may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer for consumption on the
premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on Monday
when that Monday is New Year’s Day and beer for consumption off the
premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on the
following Monday when that Sunday is the day before New Year’s Day.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b] & 123.150)



   3.   Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a
bona fide credit card.  This provision does not apply to sales by a club to
its members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests or
to retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center,
or events center.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])



   4.   Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])



   5.   In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow
the mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or
any other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])



   6.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa
law, or knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])



   7.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the
premises covered by the license or permit.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])



   8.   Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any
alcoholic liquor in any container except the original package purchased from
the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce and
except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate
consumption.  However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are mixed on the
premises and are not for immediate consumption may be consumed on the
licensed premises, subject to rules adopted by the Alcoholic Beverages
Division.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])



   9.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or
receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or
adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents or remaining
contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly
possess any original package that has been reused or adulterated.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])



   10.   Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee, or
employees of the licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed
premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or other container that is
designed for the transporting of such beverages, except as allowed by State
law.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])



   11.   Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is
used to vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a
vaporized form.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])



120.06   AMUSEMENT DEVICES.



   The following provisions pertain to electrical or mechanical amusement
devices possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the Code of
Iowa.  (Said devices are allowed only in premises with a liquor control
license or beer permit, as specifically authorized in said Chapter 99B.)



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)



   1.   As used in this section, “registered electrical or mechanical
amusement device” means an electrical or mechanical device required to be
registered with the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals, as provided in
Section 99B.53 of the Code of Iowa.



   2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to
participate in the operation of a registered electrical or mechanical
amusement device.



   3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a registered
electrical or mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning
or leasing a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, to
knowingly allow a person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation
of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.



   4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the
operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with a
person under the age of 21.



CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS



 

121.01  Definitions
 
121.06  Refunds


121.02  Permit Required
 
121.07  Persons Under Legal Age


121.03  Application
 
121.08  Self-Service Sales Prohibited


121.04  Fees
 
121.09  Permit Revocation


121.05  Issuance and Expiration
 



 



121.01   DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)



   1.   “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not
consisting of or containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the
body of nicotine, whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling,
snorting, or sniffing, or by any other means.  “Alternative nicotine
product” does not include cigarettes, tobacco products, or vapor products,
or a product that is regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food
and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act.



   2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in
part of tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape
and irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored,
adulterated, or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a
wrapper or cover made of paper or any other material.  However, cigarette
shall not be construed to include cigars.



   3.   “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are sold,
stored, or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.



   4.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or
offers for sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for
consumption, cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products,
irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages
in the business of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products to ultimate consumers.



   5.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product display,
placement, or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take
possession of the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the
retailer or employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a
restricted access location.



   6.   “Tobacco products” means the following:  cigars; little
cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready
rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco;
fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings,
cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco
prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or
otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.



   7.   “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may
or may not contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source,
electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means,
regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a
solution or other substance.  “Vapor product” includes an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or
similar product or device, and any cartridge or other container of a solution
or other substance, which may or may not contain nicotine, that is intended
to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device.  “Vapor
product” does not include a product regulated as a drug or device by the
United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.



121.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.



   1.   Retail Cigarette Permits.  It is unlawful for any person,
other than a holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative
nicotine products, or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall
distribute, sell, or solicit the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products within the City without a valid permit for each
place of business.  The permit shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at
the place of business so as to be easily seen by the public and the persons
authorized to inspect the place of business.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)



   2.   Retail Tobacco Permits.  It is unlawful for any person to
engage in the business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products at any place of business
without first having received a permit as a retailer for each place of
business owned or operated by the retailer.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)



   A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also
obtain a retail tobacco permit.  However, if a retailer only holds a retail
cigarette permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the
retailer shall not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products, during such time.



121.03   APPLICATION.



   A completed application on forms furnished by the State Department of
Revenue or on forms made available or approved by the Department and
accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk.  Renewal
applications shall be filed at least five days prior to the last regular
meeting of the Council in June.  If a renewal application is not timely
filed, and a special Council meeting is called to act on the application, the
costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)



121.04   FEES.



   The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows: 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)



 

FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:
 
FEE:


July, August or September
 
$ 75.00


October, November or December
 
$ 56.25


January, February or March
 
$ 37.50


April, May or June
 
$ 18.75



 



121.05   ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.



   Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall
be issued.  Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business
for which it is issued and shall be nonassignable.  All permits expire on
June 30 of each year.  The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application
for a permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of
Commerce within 30 days of issuance of a permit.



121.06   REFUNDS.



   A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from
the City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule
of refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa. 



(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 & 453A.47A)



121.07   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.



   No person shall sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any
person under 18 years of age.  The provision of this section includes
prohibiting a minor from purchasing tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a vending machine. 
If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the provisions of this
section, the Council shall, after written notice and hearing, and in addition
to the other penalties fixed for such violation, assess the following:



   1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil
penalty in the amount of $300.00.  Failure to pay the civil penalty as
ordered under this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the
permit for a period of 14 days.



   2.   For a second violation within a period of two years, the
retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 or the
retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.  The
retailer may select its preference in the penalty to be applied under this
subsection.



   3.   For a third violation within a period of three years, the
retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the
retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.



   4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the
retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the
retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days.



   5.   For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the
retailer’s permit shall be revoked.



   The Clerk shall give 10 days’ written notice to the retailer by
mailing a copy of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the
application for a permit.  The notice shall state the reason for the
contemplated action and the time and place at which the retailer may appear
and be heard. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])



121.08   SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.



   Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine
as provided in Section 453A.36[6] of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not
sell or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service
display.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)



121.09   PERMIT REVOCATION.



   Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as
provided by the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the
Code of Iowa or any rule adopted thereunder.  If a permit is revoked, a new
permit shall not be issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or
to any other person for the place of business at which the violation
occurred, until one year has expired from the date of revocation, unless good
cause to the contrary is shown to the Council.  The Clerk shall report the
revocation or suspension of a retail permit to the Alcoholic Beverages
Division of the Department of Commerce within 30 days of the revocation or
suspension.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)



CHAPTER 122
PUSHCARTS AND VENDORS



 



122.01  Purpose
 
122.12  Sale Prohibited


122.02  Definitions
 
122.13  Cease and Desist


122.03  License and Identification Required
 
122.14  Nuisance Prohibited


122.04  Application for License
 
122.15  Revocation of License


122.05  License Fees
 
122.16  Notice


122.06  Bond and Insurance Required
 
122.17  Hearing


122.07  License and Identification Badge Issued
 
122.18  Record and Determination


122.08  Display of License and Identification Badge
 
122.19  Appeal


122.09  License Not Transferable
 
122.20  Exemptions


122.10  Time and Location Restriction
 
122.21 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations


122.11  Pushcart Restrictions
 




 



122.01     PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health and safety of City
residents and to protect against fraud, unfair competition and intrusion into
the privacy of citizens’ homes by licensing and regulating peddlers,
solicitors and transient merchants.



122.02     DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Potentially hazardous food” (“PHF”) means any food
that consists in whole or in part of milk or milk products, eggs, meat,
poultry, fish, shellfish, edible crustacean or other ingredients, including
synthetic ingredients, in a form capable of supporting rapid and progressive
growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms.  PHFs do not include hard
boiled eggs with the shell intact, foods with a pH of 4.6 or below when
measured at 75 degrees Fahrenheit, or foods with a water activity value
(“aw”) of 0.85 or less.



   2.   “Pushcart” means a non-motorized vehicle limited to serving
non-potentially hazardous foods or commissary-wrapped food maintained at
proper temperatures.  A motorized vehicle shall not be considered a
pushcart, unless it is a special exception granted to a disabled person
pursuant to Section 122.11.



   3.   “Temporary or intermittent business” means less than 60
consecutive days.



   4.   “Vendor” means any person carrying goods, wares, or
merchandise or offering services for immediate sale or delivery from house to
house or upon the public street; any person who solicits or attempts to
solicit from house to house or upon the public street any contribution,
donation, raffle, contest or any order for goods, wares, or merchandise to be
delivered at a future date; or any person engaged in the temporary or
intermittent business of selling and delivering goods, wares, or
merchandise.  Vendor also includes any person engaged in the sale of
non-potentially hazardous foods by pushcart.



122.03     LICENSE AND IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED.



   Every person engaged in the solicitation, peddling, or sale of goods,
wares, merchandise, services, gifts, donations or other items from house to
house or upon the public street, and who does not have any indoor place in
the City where the same selling, soliciting or peddling of said items and
services is done on a continuous and permanent basis or is engaged in the
sale of non-potentially hazardous foods by pushcart, shall first obtain and
display, in a manner plainly visible, a license and identification badge
issued by the City Clerk.  Any person engaging in the aforementioned
activities in the City without first obtaining a license and identification
badge as herein provided is in violation of this chapter.  Before the City
Clerk will issue a license pursuant to this chapter for the operation of a
pushcart, all such applicants shall comply with all County, State, and
federal regulations, including but not limited to Linn County Health
Department regulations.



122.04     APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   All applicants shall file a written application with the City Clerk for
a license at least 10 days prior to the first day of any activity described
in this chapter and each applicant shall be subject to the following
application process:



   1.   All applicants shall provide name, address, date of birth,
social security number, height, weight, hair, eye color, phone number, and if
applicant does not have a permanent residence in this City, the residence and
phone number where the applicant permanently resides.  Registration for
minor children shall be done by a parent or legal guardian, or by a person
bearing the notarized authorization of the child’s parent or guardian.



   2.   Each adult shall produce a photograph-driver’s license, or if
they have no such license, a passport or other official photographic
identification.  Minor children’s identification shall be any reasonable
means that establish the child’s identity and the identity of the child’s
parent or guardian.



   3.   Persons working for or as a part of a group shall provide the
names, addresses and phone numbers for each person and for the person in
charge of and responsible for the group.



   4.   The make, model, year, state of registration and license number
of any and all vehicles being used in connection with activities as described
by this chapter.



   5.   List of the products being sold and the price of each. 
Persons applying for a license to operate a pushcart must provide a statement
that all such items offered for sale and consumption are non-potentially
hazardous foods, and provide a copy of the applicant’s Linn County Health
Department license.



   6.   Name, address and phone number of the supplier of the product.



   7.   Proof of the state sales tax permit or exemption from state and
federal taxing authorities.



   8.   If employed by or working in association with a corporation,
the state of its incorporation, whether it is authorized to do business in
Iowa, and evidence that the corporation has designated a resident agent
within Iowa upon whom legal service may be made and that the corporation will
be responsible for the acts of its employees and or associates in the City.



   9.   A statement as to whether or not applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance other than
a traffic violation, the nature of the offense and the penalty imposed.   



   10.   The last municipalities, not exceeding three, where applicant
carried on activities for which license is sought immediately preceding the
date of application and the addresses from which such business was conducted
in those cities.



   11.   The proposed location and/or route of every person engaging in
activities as described by this chapter.



   12.   The City will conduct background checks on every person
applying for a license to carry out any activities as described in this
chapter.



      A.   A Non-Law Enforcement Record check form must be completed
and submitted to the City Clerk to complete this process.



      B.   Out of state applicants are required to submit to the
City Clerk a state wide background check conducted by a law enforcement
agency. Online background checks will not be accepted.



   13.   All completed applications along with all supporting documents
as required in this chapter shall be submitted to the Police Department for
review, completion of the background check, verification of information
provided, and approval.



122.05     LICENSE FEES.



   Prior to issuing any license and identification badge, all fees shall
be paid to the City Clerk.



   1.   All licenses are issued for one of the following duration
periods:



      A.   One day



      B.   One week



      C.   Up to six months



      D.   One year or major part thereof



   2.   All license and application fees shall be adopted by resolution
passed by City Council.



   3.   Ice cream novelties and concessions will be provided a reduced
license fee as adopted by Council resolution.  This chapter does not apply
to ice cream route delivery persons.



122.06     BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   Before a license under this chapter is issued, a non-pushcart applicant
shall provide to the City Clerk either:  (i) evidence that the applicant has
filed a bond with the Secretary of State in a penal sum two times the value
of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale in
accordance with Chapter 9C.4 of the Code of Iowa; or (ii) a $1,000.00 bond. 
All applicants shall deliver to the Clerk a certificate of insurance prior to
the issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter.  All applicants shall
obtain general liability insurance, including products liability coverage, in
the amount of $300,000.00 per occurrence and $100,000.00 for property damage,
and shall name the City and its employees as additional insureds. 



122.07     LICENSE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE ISSUED.



   If the City Clerk finds the application is completed in conformance
with the requirements of this chapter, the license and application fees have
been paid, and the Police Department has completed the background check,
verified the contents of the application, and approved the application, a
license and identification badge may be issued.  The City will consider
factors when determining whether a license under this chapter will be granted
or denied, including but not limited to:



   1.   Whether the proposed activity is likely to cause undue
congestion of a public area;



   2.   Whether the applicant has had complaints for misrepresentation,
fraud, or selling defective merchandise;



   3.   If the applicant has been convicted of a violation of a similar
ordinance within the last six months;



   4.   If the applicant has been convicted within the last five years
of any public offense relating to fraud or misrepresentation; and



   5.   If the proposed activity is likely to cause excessive or
unusual noise.



   6.   If the applicant seeks a license for pushcart activities, the
City will consider the nature of the proposed pushcart activity in light of
the nature of existing pushcart activities already operating with City limits.



   The City Clerk shall either issue the license and identification badge
or an explanation of why the application was denied.  The City Clerk shall
refuse to register persons who fail to furnish complete or accurate
information, and the license shall be invalidated if it is found that false
information was provided.  The license shall be denied if the applicant has
violated this chapter, or had a license hereunder revoked or invalidated in
the past 12 months.  Additionally, if the City determines complaints were
made or inappropriate business practices occurred in any of the three most
recent communities in which the applicant carried on activities as described
in this chapter, the license shall be denied.  The identification badge
shall be of a distinctive logo and design to show clearly that it has been
issued by the City and shall incorporate a photograph of the registrant taken
at the City Clerk’s office or where the City Clerk directs, at the time of
application.  The identification badge shall be valid for the length of time
issued on the license.  Applicants who obtain a license and identification
badge pursuant to this chapter shall pay such fee as the City Council shall
set to cover costs of administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter.



122.08     DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE. 



   Each vendor shall keep such license and identification badge in his or
her possession at all times and the identification badge must be worn in
plain sight while doing business in the City.  Upon the request of
prospective customers or law enforcement officers the vendor must exhibit the
license as evidence of compliance with all requirements of this chapter. 



122.09     LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   Licenses and identification badges issued under the provisions of this
chapter are not transferable between vendors in any situation and are
applicable only to the applicant to whom the license or badge was issued.



122.10     TIME AND LOCATION RESTRICTION.



   All vendors’ licenses shall provide that said license permits
activities only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.  A licensee’s
hours of operation may be adjusted upon the written request of the applicant
and approval of the City Clerk.  Such adjusted hours shall be indicated on
the vendor’s license.  Every pushcart operator shall operate only at the
location specified in the City license and only during the hours specified on
the City license.  Pushcarts must be removed from the designated location
after the close of the licensee’s hours of operation.  The City reserves
the right to limit the number of pushcarts within City limits.  Pushcarts
are permitted only in the CPR-1 Zoning District.  Applicants may apply in
writing for permission to locate outside the CPR-1 Zoning District only for
specific events such as local festivals, fairs, or community events.  These
requests will be considered using the factors listed in Section 122.07.



122.11     PUSHCART RESTRICTIONS.



   No pushcart shall have dimensions exceeding four feet in width, eight
feet in length, and eight feet in height.  All pushcarts must be
aesthetically pleasing in appearance, and shall be maintained in a neat and
orderly fashion.  Each pushcart shall be capable of being moved and kept
under control by one person traveling on foot.  The City may grant a special
license to a handicapped person to operate a pushcart propelled by an
electric motor, providing that the applicant meets all other conditions for a
license.



122.12     SALE PROHIBITED.



   The sale of all PHFs are prohibited within City limits.  No other
items, merchandise, goods, or wares—other than non-potentially hazardous
foods—may be displayed, offered for sale, or sold by pushcart within City
limits.



122.13   CEASE AND DESIST.



   Law enforcement officers shall give orders to all persons found to be
acting in violation of this chapter to halt all activity immediately until
further notice or until compliance with this chapter is met.  This includes,
all persons whether licensed or not licensed, while engaging in activities
described in this chapter that enter upon any residential premises in the
City where the owner, occupant, or person legally in charge of the premises
has posted, at the entry to the premises or at the entry to the principal
building on the premises, a sign bearing the words “No Peddlers,” “No
Solicitors,” or words of similar import.  Failure or refusal to obey such
orders shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.



122.14   NUISANCE PROHIBITED. 



   No vendor shall conduct business in such a way as would restrict or
interfere with the ingress or egress of the abutting property owner or
tenant, or create or become a public nuisance, increase traffic congestion or
delay, or constitute a hazard to traffic, life, or property, or act as an
obstruction impeding the access of fire, police, sanitation, or emergency
personnel or vehicles.  The City reserves the right to require the
relocation of any licensee to a new location in the event public health,
safety or welfare so requires.



122.15   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The City Clerk shall, after reasonable notice and opportunity for a
hearing before City Council, revoke any license issued under this chapter for
the following reasons:



   1.   The licensee, in the application or in the course of conducting
his/her licensed activity has made statements constituting a fraudulent
practice as defined by the Code of Iowa.  Revocation of any license shall
bar the licensee from being eligible for any license under this chapter for a
period of one year from the date of revocation.



   2.   The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise
conducted the business in an unlawful manner.



   3.   The licensee has conducted the business in such a manner as to
endanger the public health, welfare, or safety.



122.16     NOTICE.



   The City Clerk shall send a notice to the licensee at the address
listed in the licensee’s application, not less than 10 days before the date
set for a hearing on the possible revocation of license.  Such notice shall
contain particulars of the complaints against the licensee, the ordinance
provisions or statutes allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for
hearing on the matter.



122.17     HEARING.



   The City Council shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and
any complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged
in the complaint and notice.  Should the licensee or authorized
representative fail to appear without good cause, the City Council may
proceed to a determination of the complaint.



122.18     RECORD AND DETERMINATION.



   The City Council shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions
of law and shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record
the City Council finds clear and convincing evidence of a violation of this
chapter or State law.



122.19     APPEAL.



   If the City Clerk refuses to issue a license, the City Clerk shall make
as part of the record the reasons therefore.  The licensee or applicant
shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next regular
meeting.  The Council may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the City
Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the City Clerk
shall carry out the decision of the Council.



122.20     EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter do not apply in the following cases:



   1.   Persons delivering, collecting for or selling subscriptions to
newspapers.



   2.   Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scouts, Girl
Scouts, 4-H Clubs and Future Farmers of America.



   3.   Local residents and farmers who offer for sale products of
their own making or produce of their own raising.



   4.   Students representing the Cedar Rapids Community School
District, adjacent community school districts, and Grant Wood Area Schools
conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.



   5.   Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit additional
business or make special sales.



   6.   Persons customarily calling on businesses or institutions for
the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional use.



   7.   Public Safety and Emergency Medical Service personnel and any
City employee conducting fundraising and any other activity in association
with a charitable or City event.



122.21     CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.



   Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations
operating under the provisions of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa desiring to
solicit money or to distribute literature are exempt from the license fees
imposed by this chapter, but are still required to pay the fees for any
background checks required by Section 122.04.  All such organizations are
required to submit in writing to the City Clerk the names and addresses of
the officers and directors of the organization, the period during which such
activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions, fees or wages
are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof.  If the City
Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit
organization and background check results are approved by the Police
Department, the City Clerk may issue, free of charge, a license containing
the above information to the applicant.  In the event the City Clerk denies
the exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal
the decision to the Council as provided in this chapter.



CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS



 

123.01  House Mover Defined
 
123.07  Permit Issued


123.02  Permit Required
 
123.08  Public Safety


123.03  Application
 
123.09  Time Limit


123.04  Bond Required
 
123.10  Removal by City


123.05  Insurance Required
 
123.11  Protect Pavement


123.06  Permit Fee
 
123.12  Overhead Wires



 



123.01   HOUSE MOVER DEFINED.



   A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building
or similar structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the
building or structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids,
jacks, dollies, or any other specialized moving equipment.



123.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover
as herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house,
building or similar structure to be moved. 



123.03   APPLICATION.



   Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to
the Clerk.  The application shall include:



   1.   Name and Address.  The applicant’s full name and address
and, if a corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers.



   2.   Building Location.  An accurate description of the present
location and future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.



   3.   Routing Plan.  A routing plan approved by the Police Chief,
street superintendent, and public utility officials.  The route approved
shall be the shortest route compatible with the greatest public convenience
and safety.



123.04   BOND REQUIRED.



   The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the minimum sum
of $5,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the
State.  The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage
done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by
the City in the course of moving the building or structure.



123.05   INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating
that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the
duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees
for the following minimum amounts:



   1.   Bodily Injury – $100,000.00 per person; $300,000.00 per
accident.



   2.   Property Damage – $100,000.00 per accident.



123.06   PERMIT FEE.



   A permit fee set by resolution of the Council shall be payable at the
time of filing the application with the Clerk.  A separate permit shall be
required for each house, building or similar structure to be moved.



123.07   PERMIT ISSUED.



   Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance
certificate, and payment of the required fee, the Clerk shall issue a permit.



123.08   PUBLIC SAFETY.



   At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any
street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain flag
persons at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to
the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure.  At all times when
the building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk or
public property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights
at the intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of
the building or structure.



123.09   TIME LIMIT.



   No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to
remain upon any street or other public way for a period of more than 12 hours
without having first secured the written approval of the City.



123.10   REMOVAL BY CITY.



   In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in
violation of Section 123.09, the City is authorized to remove such building
or structure and assess the costs thereof against the permit holder and the
surety on the permit holder’s bond.



123.11   PROTECT PAVEMENT.



   It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any
pavement, unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is
moved are at least one inch in width for each 1,000 pounds of weight of such
building.  If there is any question as to the weight of a house or building,
the estimate of the City as to such weight shall be final.



123.12   OVERHEAD WIRES.



   The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all
telephone, cable television and electric wires and poles are removed when
necessary and replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of
the same.



CHAPTER 124
PRACTICE OF HEALTH RELATED SCIENCES



 

124.01  State License Required
 
124.03  Public Health and Safety


124.02  Definition
 



 



124.01     STATE LICENSE REQUIRED.



   The practice of any health related professions by unlicensed
individuals is prohibited.  It is unlawful for a person to engage in or
offer to engage in the practice of health sciences, or use in connection with
the person’s name initials, words, or titles that imply or represent that
the person practices health sciences, unless that person possesses a license
issued by the State of Iowa.



124.02     DEFINITION.



   “Health related professions” mean medicine and surgery, podiatry,
osteopathic medicine and surgery, practice as a physician assistance,
psychology, chiropractic, nursing, dentistry, dental hygiene, dental
assisting, optometry, speech pathology, audiology, pharmacy, physical
therapy, physical therapy assisting, occupational therapy, occupational
therapy assisting, respiratory care, cosmetology arts and sciences,
barbering, mortuary science, marital and family therapy, mental health
counseling, social work, dietetics, massage therapy, athletic training,
acupuncture, nursing home administration, hearing aid dispensing, sign
language interpreting or transliterating, orthotics, prosthetics, pedorthics,
or any other occupation requiring licensure under the Code of Iowa.



124.03     PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY.



   The Hiawatha Police Department shall placard, as unsafe for entry, any
building where any person has established a practice of any health related
profession without a State license and shall keep the premises placarded
until a State license has been obtained or some other legal use has been
established.



CHAPTER 125
SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS



 

125.01  Purpose
 
125.04  Exemption


125.02  Definitions
 
125.05  Right of Inspections


125.03  Surveillance Camera Required
 



 



125.01     PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the potential for situations
where employees of certain businesses are exposed to potential death and/or
injuries because of the actions of people with criminal intent.



125.02     DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Business” means an establishment for retail sale of
petroleum products and other supplies for motor vehicles, as well as for the
retail sale of a variety of other items typically sold in grocery stores or
an establishment that provides lodging for paying guests or any other
establishment for the sale of products or the provision of services that has
at any time between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. only one clerk or
employee on duty.



   2.   “Surveillance camera” means any video type camera or
similar video recording device capable of producing a retrievable image on
film or tape that can be made a permanent record and that can be enlarged
through projection or other means.



125.03     SURVEILLANCE CAMERA REQUIRED.



   Any business, as defined herein, shall be equipped with a functioning
surveillance camera between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or during
the portion of those hours the business is open each day (night) that the
business is open.  The surveillance camera shall be positioned so as to
record on film or videotape the image of all persons entering the business
and/or all persons approaching within five feet of the cash register.  All
proposed installations and positioning of a surveillance camera shall be
submitted in advance to the Police Department for determination and approval
that the same meets the requirements set out in this chapter.



125.04     EXEMPTION.



   A business may apply to the Police Chief for exemption from the
provisions of this chapter when that business has demonstrated that it is
temporarily unable to comply for good cause.



125.05     RIGHT OF INSPECTIONS.



   Cameras shall be maintained in proper working order and positioned
correctly at all times and shall be subject to inspection by the Police Chief
or designee.



CHAPTER 126
ELECTRICAL LICENSING CODE



 

126.01  Purpose and Scope
 
126.03  Violations and Penalties


126.02  Licensing Required
 



 



126.01     PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the examination,
qualification, licensing and insuring of electrical contractors,
electricians, and residential electricians and the registration of apprentice
electricians and apprentice residential electricians, in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.



126.02     LICENSING REQUIRED.



   No person shall install, alter, add to, repair, relocate, replace, or
maintain any electrical system within the City unless such person is licensed
by the State of Iowa, thereby meeting the requirements established by the
Iowa Electrical Examining Board, and has obtained a permit for said
electrical work from the Building Official according to the provisions
Chapter 157 of this Code of Ordinances.  Those exempt from this licensure by
the State of Iowa shall also be exempt from licensure in the City.



126.03     VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and punishable as a
municipal infraction as provided in Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances. 
Each day in which any said violation is committed, continued or permitted
shall be deemed a separate offense.



CHAPTER 127
PLUMBING LICENSING CODE



 

127.01  Purpose and Scope
 
127.03  Violations and Penalties


127.02  Licensing Required
 



 



127.01     PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing and bonding
of plumbing contractors, and for the licensing of master plumbers and
journeymen, in order to protect public health, safety and welfare.



127.02     LICENSING REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of
contracting, planning or supervising the installation, alteration, repair,
relocation, replacement, addition to or removal of any plumbing system or
equipment or portion thereof within the City unless such person, firm, or
corporation is licensed and insured as required by the State of Iowa and has
obtained a permit for such plumbing work as provided by Chapter 156 of this
Code of Ordinances.  Those exempt from this licensure by the State of Iowa
shall also be exempt from licensure in the City.



127.03     VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   Violations of this chapter is a misdemeanor and punishable as a
municipal infraction as provided in Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances. 
Each day in which any said violation is committed, continued or permitted
shall be deemed a separate offense.



CHAPTER 128
MECHANICAL LICENSING AGREEMENT



 

128.01  Purpose and Scope
 
128.03  Violations and Penalties


128.02  Licensing Required
 



 



128.01     PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the examination,
qualification and licensing of heating/cooling contractors, refrigeration
contractors, comprehensive mechanical contractors, heating/cooling
installers, and refrigeration systems installers; and the registration of the
respective apprentice installers, in order to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.



128.02     LICENSING REQUIRED.



   No person shall install, alter, add to, repair, relocate, replace, or
maintain any mechanical system within the City unless such person is licensed
and insured as required by the State of Iowa and has obtained a permit for
said mechanical work as provided by Chapter 158 of this Code of Ordinances. 
Those exempt from this licensure by the State of Iowa shall also be exempt
from licensure in the City.



128.03     VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   Violations of this chapter shall be punished as a municipal infraction
as provided in Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.  Each day in which any
such violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be deemed a
separate offense.



CHAPTER 130
TAXICAB CODE



 

130.01  Adoption and Scope
 
130.07  Prohibited Acts


130.02  Definitions
 
130.08  Solicitation


130.03  Taxicab Business License
 
130.09  Revocation for Violations and Injunctive Remedy


130.04  Condition of the Vehicles
 
130.10  Duty to Carry Orderly Passengers


130.05  Vehicle Inspection Required
 
130.11  Exceptions


130.06  Rates/Fares
 



 



130.01     ADOPTION AND SCOPE.



   This chapter shall be known as the Hiawatha Taxicab Code and shall
apply to the operation of taxicab services originating within the City of
Hiawatha.



130.02     DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Driver” means every person who drives or operates a
vehicle while providing vehicle transportation services pursuant to a taxicab
business license.



   2.   “Metropolitan area” means the area within the corporate
limits of the cities of Cedar Rapids, Marion, Hiawatha and Robins.



   3.   “Passenger” means any tangible item being transported
including human cargo. 



   4.   “Taxicab” means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the
business of carrying passengers for hire and not operated on a fixed route or
schedule and operating with a meter.



   5.   “Taxicab business” means a firm that provides taxicab
services originating within the corporate limits of the metropolitan area. 
Activities to be conducted include, but are not limited to: receiving calls
and dispatching of taxicabs, transferring driver's and/or vehicles, parking
and storage of vehicles, storage of lost or misplaced baggage, maintenance
and storage of business records, the conducting of employee meetings and
related personnel matters.



   6.   “Taxicab business license” means a license issued by the
City Clerk, authorizing the operation of a taxicab business for trips
originating within the City limits.



130.03     TAXICAB BUSINESS LICENSE.



   1.   Required.  Every person owning, operating or controlling a
taxicab within the limits of the City shall be associated with a taxicab
business, and each taxicab business shall obtain a business license. 
However, if the taxicab business has a valid business license issued by the
city of Cedar Rapids, city of Marion, or city of Robins, no license need be
obtained for Hiawatha and reciprocity will be granted for the license issued
within the metropolitan area and the taxicab business shall be deemed to
comply with the provisions of this chapter unless the license or reciprocity
is suspended or revoked.



   2.   The taxicab business owner (applicant) shall file a completed
application with the City Clerk.  For the City to consider the application
all questions must be answered fully, all supporting documentation requested
by the City attached, and the application must be signed and verified by the
applicant.  Upon receipt of an application, the City Clerk shall forward it
along with a background check and supporting documentation to the Police
Chief, who shall review the application and background check and submit a
recommendation to the City Clerk as to the approval and disapproval of the
taxicab business license.  Applicants who have not resided within the State
of Iowa during the previous five years shall provide the City Clerk with
background checks for each state they have resided in during that period. 
The applicant shall pay all costs associated with any background
investigations.  It shall be the duty of the Community Development Director
to verify that the applicant fully complied with all applicable ordinances
and regulations relating to buildings and zonings.



   3.   The taxicab business shall prohibit the use of or being under
the influence of drugs or alcohol by a driver while providing vehicle
transportation services.



   4.   The taxicab business shall meet all applicable zoning ordinance
regulations and other applicable City regulations.



   5.   The taxicab business shall keep a daily activity log listing
the date, time, trip origination address and trip destination address.  The
activity logs must be available for inspection by and upon the request of the
Police Chief.  The logs must be maintained by the taxicab business for a
period of one year.



   6.   If a complaint is received about a taxicab business or driver
or owner of a taxicab is charged with a criminal offense other than a simple
misdemeanor moving violation while on duty, the taxicab business is subject
to a hearing and a possible revocation or suspension of their taxicab
business license.  The Police Chief, or other City staff as necessary, has
the authority to inspect the records of the taxicab business license holder
as necessary to investigate the cause and/or to resolve the complaint.



   7.   Qualifications for Taxicab Business License.  Each company
filing applications with the office of the City Clerk for a Taxicab Business
License shall meet the following requirements:



      A.   Require all drivers authorized to operate a taxicab and
provide vehicle transportation services to have a valid driver’s license
for the operation of the motor vehicle used as a taxicab that is not an
instruction permit, special instruction permit, or temporary restricted
license.



      B.   The taxicab business shall not allow a person to operate
a taxicab under its taxicab business license if any of the following apply:



         (1)   The person is under the age of 19.



         (2)   The person has been convicted within the past five
years of a felony, or of a crime involving sexual abuse, or appears on a
current sexual abuse registry.  Such person shall not have been convicted
within the past three years of a crime involving violence against others,
including assault and domestic abuse, and shall not have been convicted
within the past three years of one or more violations of Code of Iowa 321J.2
(OWI); nor convicted in the previous three years of any violation which
resulted in an automatic suspension of an operator’s or chauffeur’s
license pursuant to Chapters 321, 321A or 321B of the Code of Iowa.



   8.   Each taxicab business shall have a separate taxicab business
license for each place of business, which shall be valid only for the
business conducted at that location.



   9.   Each taxicab business shall display its license conspicuously
where all persons entering such premises may readily observe such license.



   10.   No taxicab business license shall be sold or transferred. 
The purchaser or purchasers of any business or of the majority of the stock
of any corporation operating a business shall obtain a new taxicab business
license before operating such business at the location for which the license
has been issued or at any other location.



   11.   The taxicab business shall ensure that each taxicab operating
under its taxicab business license is covered by the minimum insurance
coverage for operation of the vehicle used in providing vehicle
transportation services as required by Code of Iowa Section 325A.6, and upon
request provide to the Police Chief certificates of insurance evidencing such
coverage.



   12.   Cabs and Drivers from other Cities.  Any taxicab or driver
licensed to operate in another city or county of this or any other state may
carry passengers from said city or state where so licensed to any place
within the City and may freely enter and travel upon the streets and
thoroughfares for that purpose.  In such case it shall not be necessary for
the owner of such vehicle to be licensed by the City of Hiawatha.  However,
neither the owner nor operator of such vehicle shall be permitted to accept
any passenger for hire within the City, or to otherwise operate within the
City without being licensed under the provisions of this chapter.



   13.   Display of Taxi Driver’s Identification.  The taxicab
business shall require taxicab drivers to properly display within the vehicle
and visible to all passengers, taxi driver identification cards with the name
and photograph of the person driving such vehicle.  The driver
identification cards shall be provided for every driver by each taxicab
business license holder at its sole cost and expense.  The license shall be
covered with transparent material and must be kept legible, clear and clean.



   14.   The owner, driver, or operator of any licensed taxicab shall,
upon request, give any person the number of said vehicle, the name of the
owner, driver, or operator thereof, and the address of their place of
business.



   15.   The business license application shall contain the following:



      A.   The full name of the taxicab business, the street address
of the premises for which the application is being made, all telephone
numbers where the taxicab business will be conducted, and the paint color and
design of the vehicles (taxicabs only).



      B.   The full name, address, telephone number, and date of
birth of the applicant, whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony
as well as any aliases by which the applicant has been or is currently known.



      C.   The type of business entity such as sole proprietorship,
partnership or corporation and, in the case of a corporation, the names and
residence addresses of all officers and directors of the corporation and of
each stockholder holding ten percent or more of the stock of said
corporation; in the case, of a partnership, the names and residence addresses
of all partners including limited partners of the partnership.



      D.   The name of the owner of the building where such taxicab
business will be located.



      E.   The signature of the applicant or applicants or, if the
application is in the name of a corporation, the signature of each officer of
the corporation; if the application is in the name of a partnership, the
signature of each partner, including limited partners, of the partnership.



      F.   List of Drivers.  The taxicab business shall provide at
the time of application, a current and accurate list of all drivers.  The
taxicab business shall maintain an updated list at all times and the only
drivers on such list shall be identified including names, dates of birth,
address, telephone number, and driver’s license number.  This list shall
be provided to the Police Chief upon request.



      G.   List of Vehicles.  The holder shall provide at the time
of application, a current and accurate list of all taxicabs.  The holder
shall maintain an updated list at all times and only taxicabs on such list
shall be able to provide service under the taxicab business license.  Each
taxicab shall be identified including make, model, VIN number and license
plate number.  This shall be provided to the Police Chief upon request.



   16.   If the City Clerk finds that the applicant has fully complied
with all requirements of this chapter and with all other applicable
ordinances and codes, the City Clerk shall authorize the issuance of a
license to conduct a taxicab business at the location designated in the
application.  Such license shall commence on July 1, or the date the
operations are started, if later, and shall terminate on the following June
30.



   17.   License Fees.  Each taxicab business license will be for a
term of one year, and the annual business license fee shall be set by City
Council resolution.  Said fees shall be prorated quarterly and paid to the
City Clerk of the city where the taxicab service has their primary office.



   18.   An application or license denied, revoked, or suspended by any
city will not be issued by any other city within the metropolitan area until
such time all requirements of this chapter are met and resubmitted to the
originating city.



   19.   Upon finding by the Police Chief that any of the requirements
set forth in this chapter have been violated subsequent to the filing of the
application, the taxicab business license may be suspended or revoked after
notice and hearing.  The license may also be suspended or revoked if the
applicant provides false information on the license application.  A license
revoked in one city in the metropolitan area will not be reissued in another
city until the revocation period has expired.



130.04     CONDITION OF THE VEHICLES.




   Roof-mounted advertising signs are allowed on vehicles as long as the
sign is safely and securely attached to the vehicle and does not extend
beyond the roofline of the vehicle.  Flashing, scrolling message, or other
electronic advertising signs are prohibited.





   All taxicabs shall be marked on the outside, on both sides, with the
name of the company, phone number, and unit number.  The markings shall be
painted or affixed by decal in letters or figures at least two and one-half
inches in height, except the rate letters or figures which must be at least
one and one-half inches in height.




130.05     VEHICLE INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   All vehicles governed by this chapter shall be subject to vehicle
inspections as required by the City to confirm that they meet all of the
requirements set forth in this chapter for taxicabs. 



   1.   The taxicab business will be responsible to conduct vehicle
inspections annually by or under the direction of an independent automobile
mechanic currently certified by the National Institute for Automobile Service
Excellence, or similar automobile service, or similar automobile service
certification organization to ensure the continued maintenance of safe
operating conditions.  Upon inspection if it is found that the vehicle does
not meet safe operating requirements, the holder shall cause the vehicle to
be removed from service until such time as the repaired vehicle will comply
with safe operating standards.  Records of these vehicle inspections shall
be maintained during the current taxicab business license period, for a
period of no less than two years by the taxicab business license holder and
will provide these records upon request.



   2.   The holder and the driver shall be jointly and severally liable
if the holder permits the driver to use a vehicle that does not meet the
requirements for a transportation service vehicle.  Operation of any vehicle
in violation of the requirements of this section shall subject the holder to
sanction as determined by the Police Chief, up to and including suspension or
revocation of the taxicab business license after hearing as prescribed in
this chapter.



130.06   RATES/FARES.



   1.   Rates and charges for vehicle transportation services shall be
posted at all times in a manner and place clearly visible to the person
requesting the service prior to the service being booked or performed.  Such
rates and charges shall be posted for the potential customer’s information
in whatever medium utilized for contracting for such services, including but
not limited to use of a rate card, taximeter, digital platform or the
internet.



   2.   An estimate of the fare is required to be given in advance of
the trip.  It shall be unlawful for the holder or driver of any taxicab to
fix, charge, collect, and/or offer to fix, charge, or collect a rate more
than that specified at the time the service is requested.



   3.   If requested by a passenger or customer, the holder or driver
shall give a receipt upon payment of the correct fare or charge via paper,
email or an electronic transmission.



130.07     PROHIBITED ACTS.



   1.   No taxicab shall transport more passengers at any one time than
the vehicle has working seatbelts available to accommodate.  No more than
one person in addition to the driver shall be allowed in the front seat, and
no one shall be seated in such a way as to interfere with the driver's
operation of the taxicab.  All vehicles, when applicable, are required to
abide by all City and State laws governing child restraints and whenever
needed, the passenger is responsible to provide the appropriate child seat.



   2.   No driver shall deceive any passenger as to destination, route,
or authorized taxicab rates.



   3.   No driver shall take a circuitous route to a destination or any
other route than the most direct route, without the express consent of the
passenger.



   4.   No driver shall overcharge or fail to provide a receipt upon
request.



   5.   No driver shall drop a passenger at a location other than the
location requested without good cause.



   6.   While on duty or within four hours prior to being on duty, a
driver shall not consume any alcoholic beverage or any other drug or
substance which may impair his or her driving ability, or otherwise be
impaired and, while on duty, a driver shall not have any such beverage or
substance in his or her possession.



   7.   Smoking in a taxicab is prohibited in accordance with the
Smokefree Air Act, Code of Iowa Chapter 142D.



   8.   The transferring of drivers and/or vehicles in a residential
district is restricted to a maximum of one vehicle per residential building
address.



130.08     SOLICITATION.



   1.   Solicitation of Passenger by Drivers.  No owner, operator, or
driver of a taxicab, while conducting business and accepting passengers for
hire on a public street or any other public place, shall solicit passengers
for hire for a taxicab except when sitting in the driver’s compartment or
while standing immediately adjacent to the curbside at the Eastern Iowa
Airport, and shall remain in the driver’s compartment or immediately
adjacent to driver’s vehicle at all times.  Nothing herein contained shall
prohibit a driver from alighting for the purpose of assisting passengers into
or out of the vehicle or from complying with the directions of the person
engaging the taxicab regarding the loading or unloading of any baggage,
goods, wares or merchandise.



   2.   Prohibited Soliciting.



      A.   No owner, operator, or driver shall solicit patronage in
a loud or annoying tone of voice or by sign or in any manner annoying any
person, nor by obstructing the movement of any person or following any person
for the purpose of soliciting patronage.



      B.   It is unlawful for any operator of a taxicab to solicit a
passenger or passengers for hire when said passenger or passengers have
engaged another taxicab and are awaiting the arrival of such vehicle.



   3.   Solicitation of Other Common Carrier Passengers.  No owner,
operator, or driver shall solicit passengers within the terminal of any other
common carrier nor at any immediate points along any established routes of
any common carrier.  This section is not intended to preclude a response to
any call for taxicabs made by telephone or signal from a pedestrian or from
soliciting patronage of a debarking passenger of any common carrier.



   4.   Manner of Progress in Line.  When a taxicab conducting
business by transporting or soliciting passengers for hire at public
buildings leaves the line upon the taxicab stand, those behind it shall
immediately move up and a taxicab seeking a place on the taxicab stand shall
approach the same only from the rear of the stand and shall stop as near as
practicable to the last cab in the line.



130.09     REVOCATION FOR VIOLATIONS AND INJUNCTIVE REMEDY.



   Any violation of this chapter or of the laws of Iowa may be sufficient
grounds for a hearing to consider revoking any taxicab business license
issued.  In addition to the criminal penalties set out in this chapter, the
City may also pursue injunctive or other relief to prohibit or regulate a
taxicab business not complying with the provisions of this chapter.



130.10     DUTY TO CARRY ORDERLY PASSENGERS.



   No taxicab driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person
or persons, upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by
the provisions of this chapter to do so.  The driver shall, however, not be
obligated to convey any person who is incapable of entering the taxicab
unassisted due to intoxication or convey any person with objectionable
personal hygiene.



130.11     EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions under this chapter shall not apply to any vehicle
transportation services except taxicabs and shall not apply to Transportation
Network Companies, or their drivers, operating pursuant to and in compliance
with, Code of Iowa Chapter 321N.



CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE



 

135.01  Removal of Warning Devices
 
135.08  Burning Prohibited


135.02  Obstructing or Defacing
 
135.09  Excavations 


135.03  Placing Debris On
 
135.10  Property Owner’s Responsibility for Maintenance


135.04  Playing In
 
135.11  Failure to Maintain


135.05  Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
 
135.12  Dumping of Snow 


135.06  Use for Business Purposes
 
135.13  Driveway Culverts


135.07  Washing Vehicles
 
135.14  Mailboxes



 



135.01   REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.



   It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy or
carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other
article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed
thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places
in said street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1) 



135.02   OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.



   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface or injure any street
or alley in any manner.  Parades and other special events addressed through
other administrative processes shall not be considered obstructions but shall
be regulated in accordance with the Traffic Control Ordinances and the
Special Events Policy of the Fire Department and Police Department of the
City.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)



135.03   PLACING DEBRIS ON.



   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or
alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage,
rubbish, litter, offal, leaves, grass or any other debris likely to be washed
into the storm sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to
injure any person, animal or vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)



135.04   PLAYING IN.



   It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets
or alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])



135.05   TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.



   It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any
street or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares
placed thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police
officer or member of the Fire Department.



135.06   USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.



   It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering
same for sale, without permission of the Council.



135.07   WASHING VEHICLES.



   It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street, or
alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment,
or any vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a
business.  This does not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or
her own vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or
alley.



135.08   BURNING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other combustible
material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.



135.09   EXCAVATIONS.



   No person shall dig, excavate, or in any manner disturb any street,
parking or alley except in accordance with the following:



   1.   Right-of-Way Permit Required.  No excavation shall be
commenced without first obtaining a right-of-way permit.  A written
application for such permit shall be filed with the City and shall contain
the following:



      A.   An exact description of the property, by lot and street
number, in front of or along which it is desired to excavate.



      B.   A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the
excavation is to be made.



      C.   The person responsible for the refilling of said
excavation and restoration of the street or alley surface.



      D.   Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion
date.



      E.   Detailed lane restrictions, road closures, and required
detours.



   2.   Winter Excavations.  It is unlawful to make any excavation in
any street or highway within six feet of the existing water pipe while the
ground is frozen, or to dig up or uncover so as to expose to frost any water
pipe without the special permission in writing of the Water Superintendent or
the City Engineer.



   3.   Public Convenience.  Streets and alleys shall be opened in the
manner that will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the
uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.



   4.   Traffic Control:



      A.   Applicant shall be responsible for all traffic control
safety measures required for work in the right-of-way in accordance with the
applicable Engineering Standards as adopted by resolution by the Hiawatha
City Council in accordance with Hiawatha Code Section 165.58 and Traffic
Control Laws for the State of Iowa.



      B.   For work that includes a right-of-way closure the
applicant shall also:



         (1)   Apply for the permit at least one week prior to
the anticipated closure.  Application for the permit is not considered the
notification to Community Development.



         (2)   Notify Community Development of the dates of road
closure at least one week before road closure.



         (3)   Notify adjacent property owners and residences
three days in advance of the closure.



         (4)   Install all necessary traffic detour and warning
signage three days in advance of the work.  Signs shall be installed in
accordance with the applicable Metro Standards.



         (5)   Remove all traffic signage when the right-of-way
is reopened.



(Ord. 921 - Feb. 19 Supp.)



   5.   Barricades, Fencing and Lighting.  Adequate barricades,
fencing and warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be
so placed as to protect the public from hazard.  Any costs incurred by the
City in providing or maintaining adequate barricades, fencing or warning
lights shall be paid to the City by the permit holder/property owner.



   6.   Surety Bond.  Before an excavation permit is issued pursuant
to this chapter, each applicant, except public utility companies, shall
deposit with the Clerk a surety bond in the amount of $10,000.00 payable to
the City.  The required surety bond must be:



      A.   With good and sufficient surety.



      B.   By a surety company authorized to transact business in
the State.



      C.   Satisfactory in form and substance to the City Attorney.



      D.   Conditioned upon the permittee’s compliance with this
chapter and to secure and hold the City and its officers harmless against any
and all claims, judgements, attorney fees and costs, or other costs arising
from the excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for
which the City, the Council or any City officer may be made liable by reason
of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the
permittee either in not properly guarding the excavation or for any other
injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee, and further
conditioned to fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition as near
as may be to its original condition, and to maintain any street where
excavation is made in as good condition for the period of four years after
said work shall have been done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it was in
before the work shall have been done.



   Any settlement of the surface within said four-year period shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the permittee to
maintain any repairs to pavement made by the City if such repairs should
prove defective.  Any owner of real estate, repairing or engaging another to
repair his or her own sidewalk, shall not be required to give such bond. 
Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond
but it shall in its entirety cover any or all future accidents or injuries
during the excavation work for which it is given.  In the event of any suit
or claim against the City by reason of the negligence or default of the
permittee, upon the City’s giving written notice to the permittee of such
suit or claim, any final judgement against the City requiring it to pay for
such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee and the permittee’s
surety.  An annual bond may be given under this provision which shall remain
in force for one year conditioned as above, in the amount specified above and
in other respects as specified above but applicable as to all excavation work
in streets by the principal in such bond during the term of one year from the
date.



   7.   Insurance Required.  Each applicant shall also file a
certificate of insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public
liability insurance in effect for the duration of the permit covering the
applicant and all agents and employees for the following minimum amounts:



      A.   Bodily Injury - no less than $1,000,000.00



      B.   Property Damage - no less than $1,000,000.00



   8.   Restoration of Public Property.  Streets, sidewalks, alleys
and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored to the condition of the property prior to the commencement of the
work, or in a manner satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit
holder/property owner.



   9.   Inspection.  All work shall be subject to inspection by the
City.  Backfill shall not be deemed completed, and no resurfacing of any
improved street or alley surface shall begin, until such backfill is
inspected and approved by the City.  The permit holder/property owner shall
provide the City with notice at least 24 hours prior to the time when
inspection of backfill is desired. 



   10.   Completion by the City.  Should any excavation in any street
or alley be discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of 24 hours
after the approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly
done, the City has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and
charge any expenses for such work to the permit holder/property owner.



   11.   Settlement and Seeding.  The permit holder shall be
responsible for maintenance of any excavation, backfill or seeding for a
period of four years after the completion of the permanent restoration.  If
at any time within such four years, the excavation or backfill settles, or
seeding does not take, as a result of the work performed, the permit holder
shall remedy the issue at the permit holder’s expense.  After written
notice, if the permit holder fails to remedy the issue, the City may perform
the necessary work and assess all costs associated with the work to the
permit holder.



   12.   Responsibility for Costs.  All costs and expenses incident to
the excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner. 
The permit holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.



   13.   Notification.  At least 48 hours prior to the commencement of
the excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, the person
performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and
provide the center with the information required under Section 480.4 of the
Code of Iowa.



   14.   Right-of-Way Permit Fee.  A permit fee set by Council
resolution shall be payable at the time of filing the application with the
City.  A separate permit shall be required for each excavation.



   15.   Permit Issued.  Upon approval of the application, filing of
bond and insurance certificate, and payment of any required fees, a permit
shall be issued.



   16.   Quality Regulation.  All persons or entities installing,
constructing, performing maintenance, reconstructing or repairing any utility
lines or associated structures pursuant to a City issued permit agree to
perform the work in compliance with all Federal and State laws, all Hiawatha
City codes, specification, and ordinances, and the Engineering Standards
adopted by resolution by the Hiawatha City Council in accordance with
Hiawatha Code Section 165.58.



(Ord. 921 - Feb. 19 Supp.)



   17.   Compliance.  Failure to comply with this chapter may result
in the issuance of a stop work order, double permit charges, issuance of a
municipal infraction and/or denial of any further excavation permits until a
bond or letter of credit is submitted and the City is satisfied that the
permit holder will comply with this chapter.  A failure to complete work may
result in the City, after written notice to the permit holder and without any
response from the permit holder, performing the necessary work to complete
the excavation, including surface restoration, and assessing all costs
associated to the permit holder in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



135.10   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.



   The abutting property owner shall maintain all property outside the lot
and property lines and inside the curb lines upon public streets and shall
keep such area in a safe condition, free from nuisances, obstructions, and
hazards.  In the absence of a curb, such property shall extend from the
property line to that portion of the public street used or improved for
vehicular purposes. The abutting property owner shall not be required to
remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly owned property or
right-of-way. Maintenance includes, but is not limited to, timely mowing,
trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up litter and debris.  The abutting
property owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to maintain the
publicly owned property or right-of-way.† 10 The City reserves the right to
exempt, by resolution of the Council, specific and identified areas in which
the City has invested in streetscape and landscaping enhancements.  In areas
exempted by the City, it shall specify in a written notice to the abutting
property owner who shall maintain the area.  This provision shall be
interpreted and enforced consistently with Section 151.03 of this Code of
Ordinances.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])



135.11   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.



   If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required
under the above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the
required action and assess the cost against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e]) 



135.12   DUMPING OF SNOW.



   It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be
thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks,
or driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct
gutters, or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to
create a hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large
commercial drives in the business district it is absolutely necessary to move
the snow onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be
removed promptly by the property owner or agent.  Arrangements for the
prompt removal of such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])



135.13   DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.



   The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert
deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s
property, and before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained
from the City.  In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to
culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make such
repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the
right to make the repairs.  If the property owner fails to reimburse the
City for the cost of said repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County
Treasurer and specially assessed against the property as by law provided.



135.14     MAIL BOXES.



   The property owner may, at the owner’s expense, install a mail box. 
Said mail box support post shall be set back a minimum of six inches from the
back of the curb, and the support post shall be no larger than four inches by
four inches, or a two-inch diameter standard steel or aluminum pipe, buried
no more than 24 inches below grade.  In the event a mail box is damaged by
the City in the course of snow removal or street maintenance, the City shall
reimburse the property owner the actual replacement/repair not to exceed
$50.00.



 


Notes

10 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  See also Section 136.04 relating to property owner’s
responsibility for maintenance of sidewalks.



CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS



 



136.01  Purpose
 
136.11  Interference with Sidewalk Improvements


136.02  Definitions
 
136.12  Awnings 


136.03  Removal of Snow, Ice, and Accumulations
 
136.13  Encroaching Steps


136.04  Property Owner’s Responsibility for Maintenance
 
136.14  Openings and Enclosures


136.05  City May Order Repairs
 
136.15  Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks


136.06  Sidewalk Construction Ordered
 
136.16  Defacing


136.07  Permit/Bond Requirement
 
136.17  Debris on Sidewalks


136.08  Sidewalk Standards
 
136.18  Merchandise Display


136.09  Barricades and Warning Lights
 
136.19  Sales Stands


136.10  Failure to Repair or Barricade
 




 



136.01   PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement, or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the City.



136.02   DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by
sweeping the sidewalk when it is hardening. 



   2.   “Defective sidewalk” means any public sidewalk exhibiting
one or more of the following characteristics:



      A.   Vertical separations equal to one inch or more. 



      B.   Horizontal separations equal to one inch or more.



      C.   Holes, missing sections, or depressions equal to one inch
or more in depth and at least four inches in diameter. 



      D.   Spalling over 50 percent of a single square of the
sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to one-half inch or more.



      E.   Spalling over less than 50 percent of a single square of
the sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to one inch or more. 



      F.   Sloping from side to side in excess of one inch per foot.



      G.   A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that
no part thereof has a piece greater than one square foot.   



      H.   Raised or depressed sections of sidewalk more than three
inches above or below design or construction elevation.



   3.   “Established grade” means that grade established by the
City for the particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.   



   4.   “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of
the concrete is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.



   5.   “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property
abutting any sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of
notification required herein.  For all other purposes, “owner” includes
the lessee, if any. 



   6.   “Portland cement” means any type of cement except
bituminous cement. 



   7.   “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business,
residential or suburban areas.



   8.   “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction,
reconstruction, repair, replacement, or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or
the excavating, filling or depositing of material in the public right-of-way
in connection therewith. 



   9.   “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by
smoothing the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.



136.03   REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS.



   The abutting property owner shall remove snow, ice, and accumulations
promptly from sidewalks. If a property owner does not remove snow, ice, or
accumulations within a reasonable time, not to exceed 24 hours following the
cessation of snow fall or the forming of ice, the City may do so and assess
the costs against the property owner for collection in the same manner as a
property tax. The abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused by
failure to remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from the sidewalk. 
The City reserves the right to exempt, by resolution of the Council, specific
and identified areas in which the City has invested in streetscape and
landscaping enhancements.  In areas exempted by the City, it shall specify
in a written notice to the abutting property owner who shall maintain the
area.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])



136.04   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.



   The abutting property owner shall repair, replace, or reconstruct, or
cause to be repaired, replaced, or reconstructed, all broken or defective
sidewalks and maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk
outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or, in the
absence of a curb, any sidewalk between the property line and that portion of
the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes.  The abutting
property owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to maintain the
sidewalk.  The City reserves the right to exempt, by resolution of the
Council, specific and identified areas in which the City has invested in
streetscape and landscaping enhancements.  In areas exempted by the City, it
shall specify in a written notice to the abutting property owner who shall
maintain the area.  This section shall be interpreted consistently with
Section 136.05 of this chapter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])



136.05   CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.



   If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required,
the Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the
owner to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time
and if such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the
Council may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the
abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.  The
City reserves the right to exempt, by resolution of the Council, specific and
identified areas in which the City has invested in streetscape and
landscaping enhancements.  In areas exempted by the City, it shall specify
in a written notice to the abutting property owner who shall maintain the
area.  This section shall be interpreted consistently with Section 136.04 of
this chapter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d & e])



136.06   SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.



   The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any
street or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such
improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)



136.07     PERMIT/BOND REQUIREMENT.



   1.   Permit.  No person shall remove, reconstruct or install a
sidewalk unless such person has obtained a permit from the City and has
agreed in writing that said removal, reconstruction or installation will
comply with all ordinances and requirements of the City for such work. 
Permit fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.



   2.   Penal Bond/Maintenance Bond.  No person shall commence
removal, reconstruction or installation of a sidewalk until a bond is posted
pursuant to Section 135.09(6)(A and B).  Property owners who perform the
work to remove, reconstruct or install a sidewalk abutting their property
shall be exempt from the requirements under said paragraphs.



136.08   SIDEWALK STANDARDS.



   Sidewalks repaired, replaced, or constructed under the provisions of
this chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards:



   1.   Cement.  Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the
construction and repair of sidewalks. 



   2.   Construction.  Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction. 



   3.   Sidewalk Base.  Concrete may be placed directly on compact and
well-drained soil.  Where soil is not well drained, a three-inch sub-base of
compact, clean, coarse gravel or sand shall be laid.  The adequacy of the
soil drainage is to be determined by the City. 



   4.   Sidewalk Bed.  The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the
constructed sidewalk will be at established grade.



   5.   Length, Width and Depth.  Length, width and depth requirements
are as follows:



      A.   Residential sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide
and four inches thick, and each section shall be no more than four feet in
length.



      B.   Business District sidewalks shall extend from the
property line to the curb.  Each section shall be four inches thick and no
more than six feet in length.



      C.   Driveway areas shall be not less than six inches in
thickness.



   6.   Location.  Residential sidewalks shall be located with the
inner edge (edge nearest the abutting private property) one foot from the
property line, unless the Council establishes a different distance due to
special circumstances.



   7.   Grade.  Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the
street, which is the established grade.



   8.   Elevations.  The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an
elevation even with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half inch above
the curb for each foot between the curb and the sidewalk.   



   9.   Slope.  All sidewalks shall slope one-fourth inch per foot
toward the curb.



   10.   Finish.  All sidewalks shall be finished with a broom finish
or wood float finish. 



   11.   Ramps for Persons with Disabilities.  There shall be not less
than two curb cuts or ramps per lineal block which shall be located on or
near the crosswalks at intersections.  Each curb cut or ramp shall be the
same width as the sidewalk, shall be sloped at not greater than one inch of
rise per 12 inches lineal distance, shall have a nonskid surface, and shall
otherwise be so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk
for persons with disabilities using the sidewalk. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)



136.09   BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.



   Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue,
highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or
when any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all
persons having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner,
agent, or lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may
be deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous
places at each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material
deposited in the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or
flares, and to keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect
sufficient barricades both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. 
The party or parties using the street for any of the purposes specified in
this chapter shall be liable for all injuries or damage to persons or
property arising from any wrongful act or negligence of the party or parties,
or their agents or employees or for any misuse of the privileges conferred by
this chapter or of any failure to comply with provisions hereof.



136.10   FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.



   It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or
the owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the
event of failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to
install or erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.



136.11   INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.



   No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any
portion of any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being
improved or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto,
or shall remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach
thereto, or shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or
destroy, mar, remove or deface any notice provided by this chapter.



136.12   AWNINGS.



   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any
sidewalk unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight feet
above the surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck,
canvas or other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets
securely fastened to the building, without any posts or other device that
will obstruct the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of
pedestrians.



136.13   ENCROACHING STEPS.



   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to
any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution
of the Council.



136.14   OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.



   It is unlawful for a person to:



   1.   Stairs and Railings.  Construct or build a stairway or
passageway to any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk,
or to enclose any portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by
resolution of the Council. 



   2.   Openings.  Keep open any cellar door, grating, or cover to any
vault on any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to
protect the public. 



   3.   Protect Openings.  Neglect to properly protect or barricade
all openings on or within six feet of any sidewalk.



136.15   FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS.



   It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk
or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.



136.16   DEFACING.



   It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint, or
writing on any sidewalk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)   



136.17   DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.



   It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any
glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish,
litter, offal, or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any
person, animal, or vehicle.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2]) 



136.18   MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.



   It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any
goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere
with the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no
case shall more than three feet of the sidewalk next to the building be
occupied for such purposes.



136.19   SALES STANDS.



   It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or
stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on
any sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.



CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS



 

137.01  Power to Vacate
 
137.04  Findings Required


137.02  Planning and Zoning Commission
 
137.05  Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys


137.03  Notice of Vacation Hearing
 
137.06  Disposal by Gift Limited



 



137.01   POWER TO VACATE.



   When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest
of the City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public
grounds, the Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])



137.02   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public
grounds shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by
the Council.  The Commission shall submit a written report including
recommendations to the Council within 30 days after the date the proposed
vacation is referred to the Commission. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)



137.03   NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.



   The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of
the time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.



137.04   FINDINGS REQUIRED.



   No street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be
vacated unless the Council finds that:



   1.   Public Use.  The street, alley, portion thereof, or any public
ground proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and
therefore, its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified. 



   2.   Abutting Property.  The proposed vacation will not deny owners
of property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their
property.



137.05   DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.



   When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of
the City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public
ground, the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section
364.7, Code of Iowa.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)



137.06   DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.



   The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a
governmental body for a public purpose or to a fair.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15[2] & 364.7[3])



 

EDITOR’S NOTE


The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.


ORDINANCE NO.
 
ADOPTED
 
ORDINANCE NO.
 
ADOPTED




16
 
September 2, 1952
 
 


36
 
December 1, 1958
 
 


38
 
December 11, 1958
 
 


40
 
February 5, 1959
 
 


41
 
April 2, 1959
 
 


154
 
April 2, 1980
 
 


338
 
May 18, 1994
 
 


342
 
July 20, 1994
 
 


733
 
September 5, 2012
 
 


791
 
July 2, 2014
 
 


809
 
October 15, 2014
 
 


810
 
October 15, 2014
 
 


836
 
June 3, 2015
 
 


867
 
June 1, 2016
 
 


868
 
July 6, 2016
 
 


869
 
September 7, 2016
 
 


908
 
August 15, 2018
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 




 



CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES



 

138.01  Established Grades
 
138.02  Record Maintained



 



138.01   ESTABLISHED GRADES.



   The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which have been
heretofore established by ordinance, are hereby confirmed, ratified, and
established as official grades.



138.02   RECORD MAINTAINED.



   The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.



 

EDITOR’S NOTE


The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.


ORDINANCE NO.
 
ADOPTED
 
ORDINANCE NO.
 
ADOPTED




59
 
September 27, 1962
 
 


63
 
July 18, 1963
 
 


65
 
September 25, 1964
 
 


73
 
April 7, 1966
 
 


90
 
October 8, 1970
 
 


107
 
June 26, 1972
 
 


111
 
August 15, 1973
 
 


125
 
October 8, 1975
 
 


164
 
November 18, 1981
 
 


189
 
August 17, 1983
 
 


269
 
August 1, 1990
 
 


320
 
June 16, 1993
 
 


414
 
October 16, 1996
 
 


420
 
December 18, 1996
 
 


516
 
April 17, 2002
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 




 



CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS



 

139.01  Naming New Streets
 
139.04  Official Street Name Map


139.02  Changing Name of Street
 
139.05  Revision of Street Name Map


139.03  Recording Street Names
 



 



139.01   NAMING NEW STREETS.



   New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:



   1.   Extension of Existing Street.  Streets added to the City that
are natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the
existing street.



   2.   Resolution.  All street names, except streets named as a part
of a subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.



   3.   Planning and Zoning Commission.  Proposed street names shall
be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and
recommendation.



139.02   CHANGING NAME OF STREET.



   The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.



139.03   RECORDING STREET NAMES.



   Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the
Clerk shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and
County Assessor.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)



139.04   OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.



   Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name
Map, which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter.  The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature
of the Mayor, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: 
“This is to certify that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to
in Section 139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of Hiawatha, Iowa.”



139.05   REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.



   If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made
in street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name
Map promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry
on the Official Street Name Map as follows:  “On (date), by official
action of the City Council, the following changes were made in the Official
Street Name Map:  (brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the
Mayor and attested by the Clerk.



CHAPTER 140
RIGHT-OF-WAY



 

140.01  Purpose
 
140.04  Visual of Right-of-Way Description


140.02  Administration
 
140.05  Permit Required


140.03  Definitions
 



 



140.01     PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is for the regulation of the use of public
rights-of-way in the interest of public safety and convenience, and the
operation and protection of public works infrastructure.  Excavation and
restoration standards are required to preserve the integrity, operational
safety and function of the public right-of-way.  The following sections
shall be made a part of the specifications for any and all work or use within
an existing or future public right-of-way.



140.02     ADMINISTRATION.



   The Community Development Department along with the City Engineer is
the principal City official responsible for the administration of the
rights-of-way, right-of-way permits and the ordinances related thereto.  The
Community Development Department and the City Engineer’s authority shall
establish rules and regulations governing street excavations and shall
implement this chapter.  The Community Development Department and the City
Engineer may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.



140.03     DEFINITIONS.



   1.   “City Standard Details and City Standards, Specifications,
Rules and Regulations” refers to general engineering standards,
specifications, rules and regulations and the standard details for
construction activities within the City right-of-way.



   2.   “Excavation” means an operation for the purposes of
movement or removal of earth, rock or other materials in or on the ground or
otherwise disturbing the subsurface of the earth, by the use of powered or
mechanized equipment, including but not limited to, digging, blasting,
auguring, backfilling, test boring, drilling, pile driving, grading,
plowing-in, hammering pulling-in, trenching, tunneling, reclamation
processes, and milling; excluding the movement of earth by tools manipulated
only by human power and tilling of soil for agricultural purposes.



   3.   “Facility” means any wire, cable, pipe, vault, storage
tank, transformer, or other similar property or equipment owned by public
utilities for furnishing electric, gas, telephone, communications and
pipeline (whether for hire or not), sewage (including storm sewers, sanitary
sewers and drainage systems, or parts thereof), water, traffic signal, fire
signal, or similar service, regardless of whether such property or equipment
is located on land owned by a person or public agency or whether it is
located within an easement or right-of-way, but excluding property or
equipment owned by the owner of a private residence for utility service
solely for such residence.



   4.   “Permittee” means a person who has obtained a permit as
required by this chapter.



   5.   “Person” means any natural or corporate person, business
association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a
partnership, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or
private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the
foregoing, or any other legal entity.



   6.   “Right-of-way” means the area on, below, or above the
public roadway, highway, street, vegetative area, bicycle path, place, alley,
sidewalk, park, or any other similar public property or easement owned or
controlled by the City and dedicated to public use.  The City has an
interest for public travel and utility purposes.  A right-of-way does not
include the airwaves above the right-of-way with regard to cellular or other
non-wire telecommunications or broadcast service.



   7.   “Right-of-way permit” refers to a permit issued by the City
Community Development Department, describing the work proposed within the
City right-of-way and conditions permittee shall be obligated to comply with
including requirements set forth under this right-of-way chapter.



   8.   “Utility” means the owner or operator of underground or
above ground facilities and their plant or similar facilities. Such
facilities may consist of, but not be limited to, public or private companies
selling or controlling the sale, distribution or use of water, gas,
electricity, cable television, communication systems, sewage (including storm
sewers, sanitary sewers and drainage systems, or parts thereof), railroad
lines and tracks, wires, cables, ducts, pipes, manholes, transformers, poles,
towers, steam, traffic signal, fire signal or similar service.



140.04     VISUAL OF RIGHT-OF-WAY DESCRIPTION.







140.05     PERMIT REQUIRED.



   For additional regulations and permitting requirements see requirements
of:



   1.   Chapter 135 – excavations in the right-of-way.



   2.   Chapter 115 – utility work in the public right-of-way.



   3.   Chapter 136 – work on sidewalks in the right-of-way.



   4.   Chapter 96 – work on sanitary sewer connections.



   5.   Chapter 151 – trees planted in the right-of-way.



   6.   Hiawatha Water Department Rules and Regulations - water service
connections.



CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



 

145.01  Enforcement Officer
 
145.05  Conduct of Hearing


145.02  General Definition of Unsafe
 
145.06  Posting of Signs


145.03  Unsafe Building
 
145.07  Right to Demolish; Municipal Infraction


145.04  Notice to Owner
 
145.08  Costs



 



145.01   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   The Building Official is responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter.



145.02   GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE.



   All buildings or structures that are structurally unsafe or not
provided with adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are
otherwise dangerous to human life, or that in relation to existing use
constitute a hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for
the purpose of this chapter, unsafe buildings.  All such unsafe buildings
are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure
specified in this chapter.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 & 364.12[3a]) 



145.03   UNSAFE BUILDING.



“Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all
of the following criteria:



   1.   Various Inadequacies.  Whenever the building or structure, or
any portion thereof, because of: (i) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay;
(ii) faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement, or instability of any
portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;
(iv) the deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any
other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.



   2.   Manifestly Unsafe.  Whenever, for any reason, the building or
structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for
which it is being used.



   3.   Inadequate Maintenance.  Whenever a building or structure,
used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation,
decay, damage, faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health
officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition
that it is likely to cause sickness or disease.



   4.   Fire Hazard.  Whenever any building or structure, because of
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined
by the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.



   5.   Abandoned.  Whenever any portion of a building or structure
remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or
structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in
excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an
attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.



145.04   NOTICE TO OWNER.



   The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every
building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged
and, if such is found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter,
the enforcement officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure
written notice stating the defects thereof.  This notice may require the
owner or person in charge of the building or premises, within 48 hours or
such reasonable time as the circumstances require, to commence either the
required repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or
structure or portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed within 90
days from date of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement
officer.  If necessary, such notice shall also require the building,
structure, or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied
until the required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and
approved by the enforcement officer. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h]) 



   1.   Notice Served.  Such notice shall be served by sending by
certified mail to the owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the
Code of Iowa, if the owner is found within the City limits.  If the owner is
not found within the City limits, such service may be made upon the owner by
registered mail or certified mail.  The designated period within which said
owner or person in charge is required to comply with the order of the
enforcement officer shall begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.



   2.   Hearing.  Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or
she may request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a
written request for hearing within the time provided in the notice.



145.05   CONDUCT OF HEARING.



   If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with
the following:



   1.   Notice.  The owner shall be served with written notice
specifying the date, time and place of hearing.



   2.   Owner’s Rights.  At the hearing, the owner may appear and
show cause why the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.



   3.   Determination.  The Council shall make and record findings of
fact and may issue such order as it deems appropriate.† 11



145.06   POSTING OF SIGNS.



   The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to
such building a notice to read:  “DO NOT ENTER.



   UNSAFE TO OCCUPY.



   CITY OF HIAWATHA, IOWA.”  Such notice shall remain posted until the
required demolition, removal or repairs are completed.  Such notice shall
not be removed without written permission of the enforcement officer and no
person shall enter the building except for the purpose of making the required
repairs or of demolishing the building.



145.07   RIGHT TO DEMOLISH; MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.



   In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice
to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure
or portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building
prosecuted as a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the
enforcement officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice.  A
statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council.  As
an alternative to this action, the City may utilize the municipal infraction
process to abate the nuisance.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



145.08   COSTS.



   Costs incurred under Section 145.07 shall be paid out of the City
treasury.  Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved
and levied as a special assessment against the land on which the building or
structure is located, and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for
collection in the manner provided for other taxes.  In addition, the City
may take any other action deemed appropriate to recover costs incurred. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h]) 



 


Notes

11 
†EDITOR’S NOTE:  Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order
of the Council for the administration of this chapter are provided in the
APPENDIX to this Code of Ordinances.  Caution is urged in the use of this
procedure.  We recommend you review the situation with your attorney before
initiating procedures and follow his or her recommendation carefully.



CHAPTER 146
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES



 

146.01  Definitions
 
146.03  Foundation Requirements


146.02  Conversion to Real Property
 



 



146.01   DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)



   1.   “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure built
under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403 which was constructed on or after
June 15, 1976, and is required by federal law to display a seal from the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.



   2.   “Manufactured home community” means any site, lot, field,
or tract of land under common ownership upon which ten or more occupied
manufactured homes are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and includes any building, structure or enclosure used or intended
for use as part of the equipment of the manufactured home community.



   3.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used
or so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance
upon the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed or
reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human
habitation by one or more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with
motive power not registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa.  A mobile home means
any such vehicle built before June 15, 1976, which was not built to a
mandatory building code and which contains no State or federal seals.



   4.   “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field or tract of
land upon which three or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a
combination of any of these homes, are placed on developed spaces and
operated as a for-profit enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and
electrical services available. 



   The term “manufactured home community” or “mobile home park” is
not to be construed to include manufactured or mobile homes, buildings,
tents, or other structures temporarily maintained by any individual,
educational institution, or company on its own premises and used exclusively
to house said entity’s own labor or students.  The manufactured home
community or mobile home park shall meet the requirements of any zoning
regulations that are in effect.



146.02   CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY.



   A mobile home or manufactured home that is located outside a
manufactured home community or mobile home park shall be converted to real
estate by being placed on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for
real estate taxes except in the following cases:



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26 & Sec. 435.35)



   1.   Retailer’s Stock.  Mobile homes or manufactured homes on
private property as part of a retailer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not
used as a place for human habitation.



   2.   Existing Homes.  A taxable mobile home or manufactured home
that is located outside of a manufactured home community or mobile home park
as of January 1, 1995, shall be assessed and taxed as real estate, but is
exempt from the permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until the
home is relocated.



146.03   FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS.



A mobile home or manufactured home located outside of a manufactured home
community or mobile home park shall be placed on a permanent frost-free
foundation system that meets the support and anchorage requirements as
recommended by the manufacturer or required by the State Building Code.  The
foundation system must be visually compatible with permanent foundation
systems of surrounding residential structures.  Any such home shall be
installed in accordance with the requirements of the State Building Code.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10 & 414.28)



CHAPTER 147
MOBILE HOME PARKS



 



147.01  Purpose
 
147.19  Water Distribution System


147.02  Definitions
 
147.20  Individual Water Riser Pipes and Connections


147.03  Limitations on Uses
 
147.21  Sewage Disposal


147.04  Mobile Home Park Development Plan
 
147.22  Sewer Lines


147.05  Area
 
147.23  Individual Sewer Connections


147.06  Yards
 
147.24  Electrical Distribution System


147.07  Required Separation Distances
 
147.25  Main Electrical Power Distribution Lines


147.08  Park Perimeter General Area Requirements
 
147.26  Individual Electrical Connections


147.09  Soil and Ground Cover Requirements
 
147.27  Required Grounding


147.10  Site Drainage Requirements
 
147.28  Service Buildings and Community Service Facilities


147.11  Lot Markers
 
147.29  Refuse Hauling


147.12  Park Areas for Accessory Uses
 
147.30  Insect and Rodent Control


147.13  Required Recreation Areas
 
147.31  Natural Gas System


147.14  Park Street Systems
 
147.32  Fire Protection


147.15  Required Parking Areas
 
147.33  Responsibilities of Park Management


147.16  Walks
 
147.34  Responsibilities of Park Occupants


147.17  Mobile Home Stands
 
147.35  Restriction on Occupancy


147.18  Water Supply
 
147.36  Variations and Exceptions




 



147.01     PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for municipal regulation of
mobile home parks in furtherance of the public health, safety, morals and
welfare, and to regulate mobile home parks, lot size, parks, street
standards, density, common areas, sewage requirements, water supply, mobile
home stands, skirting of mobile homes, tenant storage, community buildings,
yards, health standards, fire standards, building standards, recreation
areas, parking areas, refuse handling, and insect and rodent control in the
City.



147.02     DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall be applicable to the terms used in this
chapter.



   1.   “Accessory use” means a use incidental to the primary use
of the mobile home park such as direct service facility building, park
management building, maintenance building, community buildings or other uses
of a similar nature.



   2.   “Approved mobile home park development plan” means the
mobile home park development plan approved by the Council.



   3.   “Appurtenances” means an attached or detached enclosed
addition to a mobile home, situated on the mobile home lot for the use of its
occupants, such as an enclosed carport, garage, storage shed, or items of a
similar nature.



   4.   “Building Codes” means those applicable codes enforced by
the Building Department of the City.



   5.   “Common area” means any area or space designed for joint
use of tenants occupying mobile home parks.



   6.   “Common walk system” means sidewalks within the mobile home
park.



   7.   “Community building” means a building housing toilet and
bathing facilities for men and women, a slop-water sink and such other
facilities as may be required by this chapter.



   8.   “Density” means the number of mobile homes or mobile home
stands per gross acre.



   9.   “Design standards” means those standards and specifications
adopted and approved for public improvements by the City.



   10.   “Driveway” means a minor private way used by vehicles and
pedestrians on a mobile home lot.



   11.   “Easement” means a vested or acquired right to use land,
other than as a tenant, for a specific purpose. Such right being held by
someone other than the owner who holds title to the land.



   12.   “Electric park receptacle” means the waterproof,
attachment receptacle device located adjacent to the water and sewer outlets
to receive the flexible cable from the mobile home or where required, the
permanently installed conductors.



   13.   “Electric service drop” means that part of the electric
distribution system from the main electrical distribution system, overhead or
underground to the service equipment serving one or more mobile home spaces.



   14.   “Existing installations” means those installations which
were constructed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter.



   15.   “Health authority” means the legally designated health
authority of the City or the authorized representative of such authority.



   16.   “Mobile home” means a transportable, single family
dwelling unit suitable for year round occupancy having no foundation other
than the wheels, jacks, piers, or skirtings and containing water supply,
water disposal, heating and electrical conveniences.



   17.   “Mobile home lot” means a parcel of land for the placement
of a single mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants.



   18.   “Mobile home park” means a parcel of land under single
ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile
homes for non-transient use.



   19.   “Mobile home park development plan” means a custom-made
design for a specific site or area consisting of drawings, maps, and
engineering details to set forth the boundary, topography and overall park
design, including streets, parking facilities, mobile home lot locations and
service facilities.



   20.   “Mobile home stand” means that part of an individual
mobile home lot which has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home
and any appurtenances thereto.



   21.   “New installations” means those which are proposed for
construction after the effective date of these rules and regulations.



   22.   “Patio” means a surfaced outdoor living space designed to
supplement the mobile home living area.



   23.   “Permit” means a written permit issued by the City
Building Department permitting the construction, alteration and extension of
a mobile home park under the provisions of this chapter.



   24.   “Plat” means a map, plan, or chart of a City, Town,
Section, County section, or subdivision, indicating the location and
boundaries of individual properties.



   25.   “Private street” means a private way which affords
principal means of access to abutting individual mobile home lots or
accessory buildings.



   26.   “Property line” means a recorded boundary of a plat.



   27.   “Public street” means a public way which affords principal
means of access to abutting properties.



   28.   “Public system (water or sewage)” means a system which is
owned and operated by a local governmental authority or by an established
public utility company which is adequately controlled by governmental
authority.  Such systems are usually existing systems serving the
municipality or a water or sewer district established and directly controlled
under the laws of the state.



   29.   “Right-of-way” means the area, either public or private,
over which the right of passage exists.



   30.   “Roadway” means that portion of the mobile home park
street system that is surfaced for the actual travel or parking of vehicles,
and includes curbs.



   31.   “Sewer connection” means the connection consisting of all
pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home
to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewerage system
serving the mobile home park.



   32.   “Sewer riser pipe” means that portion of the sewer lateral
which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each
mobile home lot.



   33.   “Single ownership” means an individual, partnership,
corporation, or other entity owning the whole park.



   34.   “Skirting” means the materials and construction around the
perimeter of a mobile home floor between the bottom of the mobile home floor
and the grade level of the mobile home stand.



   35.   “Tenant storage” means an enclosed space designed to
provide auxiliary general storage space for an individual mobile home.



   36.   “Transient use” means the occupancy of a mobile home lot
by a mobile home for a period of 14 days or less.



   37.   “Water connection” means the connection consisting of all
pipes, meter pit, meters, and fittings from the water riser pipe to the water
inlet pipe of the distribution system within the mobile home.



   38.   “Water riser pipe” means that portion of the water supply
system serving the mobile home park which extends vertically to the ground
elevation and terminates at a designated point at each mobile home lot.



   39.   “Yard” means the area on the same lot with a mobile home
between the lot line and the front, rear, or side of the mobile home.



   For purposes of this chapter the “front” of a mobile home shall be
considered as that part of the mobile home facing toward the approved street
or right-of-way as required by this chapter.



147.03     LIMITATIONS ON USES.



   The area proposed for a mobile home park shall have at least seven
acres of gross development area or provide for a minimum of 40 single wide
mobile home lots or a combination of single and double wide with a minimum
square footage for single wide of 6,000 square feet and double wide of 7,200
square feet.  Such area may be developed in two or more stages, provided
that said stages conform in all respects with the overall mobile home park
development plan.  Occupancy shall not be permitted until all facilities and
improvements are installed and operational for not less than 25 mobile home
lots.  The maximum density allowed for the gross development area shall be
six mobile home units per acre.  No mobile home shall be connected to water,
sewer, or electrical service unless the mobile home complies with the
standards and requirements prescribed by Standard for Mobile Homes, USAS
A119.1, 1963 and amendments thereto published by United States of America
Standards Institute as applicable or an equivalent standard.  Compliance
with the aforesaid standard shall be determined by the Building Official.  A
certificate issued by the manufacturer of the mobile home shall be
permanently affixed on a readily visible location on the exterior of the
mobile home as prima facie evidence of such compliance.



147.04     MOBILE HOME PARK DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   No mobile home shall be located or altered, or land or water used, nor
shall any certificate of occupancy be issued therefor by the Building
Official unless and until the required mobile home park development plan is
officially approved by resolution of the Council.  Existing mobile home
parks shall comply in the area of change if lot sizes are changed or any new
area developed.  The proposed mobile home park development plan shall
conform to the following:



   1.   The plan shall show the following:



      A.   Topography with topographic lines at a minimum of
two-foot intervals.



      B.   Park boundaries and dimensions as obtained by a boundary
survey by a licensed land surveyor in the State of Iowa.



      C.   Location and area of all uses, including streets adjacent
to and within the park; walks, patios, mobile home stands; play areas, parks,
and common open spaces, parking areas; utilities including street lighting
and fire hydrants; physical features such as retaining walls, fences, trees,
and natural features; other information that may be required by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, Engineering, Traffic, Fire, Health, Water, or Building
Departments; easements and dedications.



   2.   The mobile home park development plan shall be prepared by a
landscape architect, architect, engineer, land surveyor, or other experienced
designer and have the seal of a duly authorized engineer or land surveyor in
the State of Iowa, certifying boundaries, boundary measurements, and such
other matters as are required to be so approved by the Subdivision
Regulations.



   3.   The proposed mobile home park development plan shall be in
accordance with the site design plan approved by the Council with the R-MH
zoning granted for the proposed mobile home park.



   4.   Every mobile home park shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the approved mobile home park development plan.



   5.   All mobile homes shall be located and maintained in full
conformity with the approved mobile home park development plan.



   6.   In recommending upon and approving mobile home parks, the
Council shall consider the location, size, height, spacing, and extent of use
of any mobile home and its appurtenances, access and circulation for vehicles
and pedestrians, streets, parking areas, yards and open spaces and the
relationship to adjacent property.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
not recommend nor the Council adopt such mobile home park development plan
unless it finds that such plan conforms to all applicable provisions of this
chapter.



   7.   If said mobile home park development plan contains no
dedication to the City for streets or utilities or should it be contemplated
that the facilities of the City shall not be used for maintenance of streets,
sidewalks, water and sewer lines, garbage collection or other related
functions, then the owners of the real estate contained in the mobile home
park development shall be required to record with the mobile home park
development plan a covenant that said owners will maintain said streets,
sidewalks, water and sewer lines in compliance with the minimum standards as
established by the City, and that should such owners or their assignees,
heirs or those holding or owning said land through said owners fail to
maintain said standards in any of these respects, the City may, after 10
days’ notice to such owners, effect all the necessary repairs or
improvements as required to maintain said minimum standards and the cost of
all these and other necessary repairs or improvements shall become a lien
against said real estate and enforced and recorded as mechanic’s liens are
enforced and recorded against such real estate.



   8.   Amending Procedure.



      A.   If it is found necessary to make material or substantial
alterations or modifications to an approved mobile home park development
plan, such alterations or modifications shall be subject to the approval of
the Council.



      B.   A request for approval of alterations or modifications of
a previously approved mobile home park development plan shall be accompanied
by the same kind and number of exhibits as are required for a new request for
approval insofar as such exhibits are applicable to the requested alterations
or modifications.  When the Council by official resolution approves the
revised mobile home park development plan, said revised plan will supplant
the original approved mobile home park development plan.



      C.   If a reasonable length of time has elapsed without
significant progress having been made in completion of the mobile home park
or if there has in the interim been a significant environmental change within
or surrounding the area covered by the plan, the Council may require that a
revised plan be submitted by the developer.



147.05     AREA.



   Every lot upon which a mobile home unit is located shall front onto an
approved public or private street or right-of-way as defined in this chapter
and shall conform to the following minimum lot area and width requirements.



   1.   Residential Use.  The lot area shall be a minimum of 6,000
square feet for single wide and 7,200 square feet for double wide mobile
homes, with a minimum depth of 120 feet on its longest side, and with a
minimum frontage on an approved public or private street or right-of-way of
not less than 15 feet.  However, such minimum lot area may be reduced by an
amount equal to an area included in common open space which is defined as an
area permanently reserved as open space—not including land in individual
lots, parking areas or streets—contiguous and immediately available to the
individual lot or lots having reduced, minimum areas, and by means of
location, size, shape and landscaping being obviously primarily for the
utilization and enjoyment of the inhabitants of the said contiguous lots. 
An individual mobile home lot shall not be reduced in an area to less than
3,750 square feet.



   2.   Accessory Uses.  The lot area shall be a minimum of 4,000
square feet for basic requirements for such uses as direct servicing,
management and maintenance of the park.  Any such structure shall be of
permanent type construction meeting all local applicable building codes. 
For uses requiring larger lot areas than heretofore set forth under this
section, such uses may be permitted if lot sizes are increased
proportionately to maintain minimum yard and separation requirements.



147.06     YARDS.



   All mobile home lot yards shall be subject to the following provisions:



   1.   Front Yard.  Every lot shall have a front yard not less than
20 feet in depth measured from the edge of the surface of the public or
private street, or right-of-way to the closest point on the lower surface of
the mobile home.



   2.   Side and Rear Yards.  Side and rear yards shall be provided
and maintained as set forth in this chapter.



147.07     REQUIRED SEPARATION DISTANCES.



   1.   Every mobile home shall be separated from other mobile homes
and from accessory buildings on adjacent lots by a minimum distance of 25
feet.



   2.   Appurtenances attached to a mobile home shall be provided with
a minimum separation of 25 feet from:



      A.   Any other attached appurtenance on an adjacent lot.



      B.   Any mobile home on an adjacent lot.



      C.   Any accessory building on an adjacent lot.



   3.   There shall be provided and maintained a minimum distance of 10
feet between any detached appurtenance and:



      A.   Any other detached appurtenance on the same lot.



      B.   Any mobile home on the same lot.



      C.   Any detached appurtenance on an adjacent lot.



      D.   Any mobile home on an adjacent lot.



   4.   There shall be provided and maintained a minimum distance of 25
feet between any detached appurtenance and any necessary buildings on
adjacent lots.



   5.   Mobile homes shall be separated from each other on opposing
sides of public or private streets a minimum of 45 feet provided that in no
event shall the required front yard be less than set forth in this chapter. 
No mobile home accessory use or appurtenance shall be permitted in the
required mobile home lot front yard or in the required separation between
mobile homes on opposing sides of public or private streets as provided in
this chapter.



147.08     PARK PERIMETER GENERAL AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   1.   Each yard abutting on a perimeter public street shall be
considered a front yard and shall be a minimum of 50 feet in depth.



   2.   All other yards shall have a minimum depth of 50 feet when
adjacent to any other R District other than an R-MH District, and 35 feet
when adjacent to another
R-MH District or when adjacent to any district other than an R District.



   3.   The yard requirement herein may be reduced by one-half the
width of any alley adjacent thereto provided further that a greater or lesser
yard may be required where the Council deems necessary.



   4.   Where the boundary of a mobile home park directly abuts another
use district, the Council may, where it is deemed necessary, require that an
area a minimum of 10 feet in width be reserved along the perimeter of the
mobile home park and within said area require the erection of a fence or wall
six feet in height of a material which will provide a significant visual and
sound barrier, and/or screen plantings to be provided and maintained with a
minimum height of eight feet at maturity; or as otherwise required by the
Council.  Said barrier or plantings shall be maintained by the mobile home
park.



147.09     SOIL AND GROUND COVER REQUIREMENTS.



   Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile home park shall be
paved, or covered with stone screenings, or other solid material, or
protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion
and of preventing objectionable dust.



147.10     SITE DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   Adequate provisions shall be made to handle all surface and storm
drainage water as determined by the City and in accordance with the City’s
storm water regulations.



147.11     LOT MARKERS.



   The limits of each mobile home lot shall be clearly marked on the
ground by permanent steel or iron rods driven into the ground with the top of
said rods flush with the finish lot grade.  Location of lot limits on the
ground shall be approximately the same as shown on the accepted plans. The
degree of accuracy obtainable by working with a scale of the plan and then a
tape on the ground is acceptable.  Precise engineering of lot limits is not
required either on the plans or on the ground. This is in no way to be
construed as permitting lots of a lesser size than the required minimum or in
permitting lesser yard or separation dimensions than set forth elsewhere in
this chapter.



147.12     PARK AREAS FOR ACCESSORY USES.



   No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except
such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well-being of park
residents and for the management and maintenance of the park.  Nothing
contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale by an owner
of a mobile home located on a mobile home stand and connected to the
pertinent utilities.  Any sales of mobile homes in place on the mobile home
stand shall not in any way relieve any parties involved from complying with
all the applicable regulations of this chapter.



147.13     REQUIRED RECREATION AREAS.



   In all parks, there shall be one or more recreation areas which shall
be easily accessible to all park residents.  The size of such recreation
areas shall be based upon a minimum of 250 square feet for each lot.  No
outdoor recreation area shall contain less than 2,500 square feet.  Required
recreation areas shall be computed in addition to any other common open space
required elsewhere in this chapter.  Recreation areas shall be so located as
to be free of traffic hazards and should be easily accessible.



147.14     PARK STREET SYSTEMS.



   1.   General Requirements.  All mobile home parks shall be provided
with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public or private
streets or roads to each mobile home lot.  Alignment and gradient shall be
properly adapted to topography.



   2.   Access.  Access to mobile home parks shall be designed to
minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free
movement of traffic on adjacent streets. The entrance road connecting the
park streets with a public street or road shall have a minimum road pavement
width of 42 feet where parking is permitted on both sides, or a minimum road
pavement width of 32 feet where parking is limited to one side.  Where the
primary entrance road is more than 100 feet long and does not provide access
to abutting mobile home lots within such distance, the minimum road pavement
width may be 24 feet providing parking is prohibited at both sides.



   3.   Interior Streets.  Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate
width to accommodate anticipated traffic, and in any case shall meet the
following minimum requirements:



      A.   All streets, except minor streets, no parking, 24 feet.



      B.   Minor streets, no parking, 22 feet.



      C.   One-way minor street, no parking, 12 feet.  (Acceptable
only if less than 500 feet total length and serving fewer than 25 mobile home
lots.)



      D.   No-outlet streets shall be limited in length to 300 feet
and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside
roadway radius of at least 40 feet with no parking permitted.  Where parking
is permitted, the radius shall not be less than 48 feet.



      E.   All streets of a mobile home park providing ingress and
egress from an abutting public street or road shall have the location and
design of intersection with said public street or road approved by the City
Engineer and by any other governmental agency exercising control over such
streets or roads.



      F.   If streets are to be dedicated to the City, their
construction shall meet the current design standards for public improvements
adopted by the City.



   4.   Required Illumination of Mobile Home Park Street Systems.  All
parks shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced and equipped with
approved fixtures placed at such mounting heights as will provide the
following average maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement of
pedestrians and vehicles at night.



      A.   All parts of the park street system -- 0.6 foot candle,
with a minimum of 0.25 foot candle.



      B.   Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street
intersections and steps or stepped ramps -- individually illuminated with a
minimum of 0.4 foot candle.



   5.   Street Construction and Design Standards.



      A.   Pavement.  All streets shall be constructed with either
hot mix asphaltic concrete or Portland cement concrete with an approved curb
to provide for drainage.  Street surfaces shall be maintained free of
cracks, holes and other hazards.  All streets shall be constructed to
specifications approved by the City.



      B.   Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to insure
adequate surface drainage, but shall be not more than five percent.  City
Engineer approval is required for grades over seven percent.  Maximum
allowable is 12 percent and minimum allowable is five percent.  All street
grades shall have prior approval of the City before commencing construction.



      C.   Intersections.  Within 100 feet of an intersection,
streets shall be at approximately right angles.  A distance of at least 125
feet shall be maintained between centerline of off-set intersecting
streets.  Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be
avoided.



147.15     REQUIRED PARKING AREAS.



   1.   Parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home parks for
the use of park occupants and guests.  Such areas shall be furnished at the
rate of at least two car spaces for each mobile home lot.  No on-street
parking shall be allowed.



   2.   Required car parking spaces shall be so located as to provide
convenient access to the mobile home, but shall not exceed a distance of 200
feet from the mobile home that it is intended to serve.  All parking areas
shall be constructed with a hard, smooth, dust-free surfacing consisting of
either hot mix asphaltic concrete or Portland cement concrete with minimum
thickness to be approved by City Engineer.



   3.   Sufficient off-street parking and storage area shall be
provided to meet anticipated requirements of park occupants for storing of
boats, boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup coaches, truck tractors, trucks
over three-fourths-ton pickup size, and items of a similar nature.  Said
parking and storage area shall be in addition to parking required elsewhere
in this section and parking and storage of vehicles and items listed in this
subsection shall not be permitted in parking areas required elsewhere in this
section.



   4.   Temporary mobile home storage may be permitted prior to
permanent placement on the mobile home stand; such temporary storage of a
mobile home shall not exceed 48 hours.



147.16     WALKS.



   1.   General Requirements.  All parks shall be provided with safe,
convenient, all season pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use,
durable and convenient to maintain, between individual mobile homes, the park
streets and all community facilities provided for park residents.  Sudden
changes in alignment and gradient should be avoided.  All sidewalks shall be
constructed to specifications approved by the City.



   2.   Common Walk System.  A common walk system shall be provided
and maintained between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. 
Such common walks shall have a minimum width of four feet and when
constructed adjacent to the street curbing shall be a minimum of five feet.



   3.   Individual Walks.  All mobile home stands shall be connected
to common walks, to paved streets, or to paved driveways or parking spaces
connected to a paved street.  Such individual walks shall have a minimum
width of two feet.



147.17     MOBILE HOME STANDS.



   The area of the mobile home stand shall be improved to provide an
adequate foundation for the placement and tie-down of the mobile home,
thereby securing the superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation and
overturning.



   1.   The mobile home stand shall be constructed in such a manner
that it will not heave, shift, or settle unevenly under the weight of the
mobile home due to inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on
the superstructure.  The mobile home stand shall be constructed at a minimum
with six inches deep by 30 inches wide poured concrete ribbons with six by
six #10 wire mesh reinforcing and of sufficient length to support all wheels
and undercarriage supports of any mobile home that may be placed on the
mobile home stand.



   2.   The mobile home stand shall be provided with anchors, arrowhead
anchors, or other devices insuring the stability of the mobile home.



   3.   Tie-downs or anchors shall be placed at least at each corner of
the mobile home stand to provide a readily accessible anchor for the mobile
home and each shall be able to sustain a minimum tensile strength of 2,800
pounds.



   4.   Skirting of a permanent type material and construction shall be
installed to enclose the open space between the bottom of a mobile home floor
and the grade level of the mobile home stand and shall be so constructed to
provide substantial resistance to heavy winds, thereby alleviating to the
maximum extent possible, lifting action created on the underside of the
mobile home by heavy winds.



   5.   Sufficient screened, ventilating area shall be installed in the
skirting to supply the combustion requirements of heating units and other
ventilating requirements of the mobile home.  Provision shall be made for
easy removal of a section large enough to permit access for inspection of the
enclosed area under the mobile home and for repairs on sewer and water riser
connections.



   6.   Skirting shall be maintained in an attractive manner consistent
with the exterior of the mobile home and to preserve the appearance of the
mobile home park.



147.18     WATER SUPPLY.



   All mobile home stands and mobile home park facilities shall be
connected to a City water supply and its supply used exclusively.



147.19     WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.



   1.   The water supply system of the mobile home park shall be
connected by pipes to all mobile homes, buildings, and other facilities
requiring water.



   2.   All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with State and local regulations and
requirements and shall be of a type and in locations approved by the City
Water Department.



   3.   The water system shall be designed, constructed, and maintained
according to specifications of the City Water Department and the City
Building Department with a minimum water main size of six inches for adequate
fire flows.



147.20     INDIVIDUAL WATER RISER PIPES AND CONNECTIONS.



   1.   Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the
confined area of the mobile home stand as near to the center from front to
back as possible and at a point where the water connection will approximate a
vertical position, as near to the center of the stand as possible.



   2.   Water riser pipes shall extend at least to ground level. The
pipe shall be at least three-fourths inch.  The water outlet shall be capped
when a mobile home does not occupy the lot.



   3.   Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of
service lines, valves and riser pipes from heaving and thawing actions of
ground during freezing weather.  Surface drainage shall be diverted from the
location of the riser pipe.



   4.   A shut-off valve below the frost line shall be provided near
the water riser pipe on each mobile home lot.



   5.   Underground stops and water valves shall be installed and
connected to the water supply as required by Water Department regulations.



   6.   Water meter pits and water meters shall be installed for each
mobile home and building using water.  The meter pit shall be located in a
manner free and clear from obstruction, i.e., not located under mobile homes.



   7.   There shall be a water meter set at the connection point to the
City mains.



147.21     SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   An adequate and safe sewage system shall be provided in all mobile home
parks for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Such system shall be
designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with State and local laws.



147.22     SEWER LINES.



   All sewer mains and laterals shall be constructed according to
specifications of the City and connected to the City sewer system or a
sewerage system approved by the City.



147.23     INDIVIDUAL SEWER CONNECTIONS.



   1.   Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a
four-inch diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located
on each stand as near to the center from front to back as possible and so
that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain outlet will approximate a
vertical position, as near the center of the stand as possible.



   2.   The sewer connection shall have a minimum inside diameter of
three inches, and the slope thereof shall not be less than one-fourth inch
per foot.  The sewer connection shall consist of one pipe line only without
any branch fittings.  All joints shall be air and watertight.



   3.   All materials used for sewer and sewer connections shall be
semi-rigid, corrosive resistant, nonabsorbent and durable.  The inner
surface shall be smooth.



   4.   Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when
a mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted
away from the riser.  The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least to
ground level.



147.24     ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.



   Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of
necessary wiring, fixtures, and equipment which shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such
systems.



147.25     MAIN ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION LINES.



   Main electrical power lines should be constructed underground according
to local electric utility specifications.



147.26     INDIVIDUAL ELECTRICAL CONNECTIONS.



   1.   Each mobile home stand shall be provided with an approved
disconnecting device and over-current protective equipment.  The minimum
service per mobile home stand outlet shall be according to City
specifications and/or the National Electrical Code.



   2.   Outlet receptacles at each mobile home stand shall be located
as close to the center from front to back as possible and not more than 25
feet from the over-current protective devices in the mobile home and a three
pole, four-wire grounding type shall be used.  Receptacles shall be of
weather proof construction and configuration shall be in accordance with
Standard for Mobile Homes USAS A119.1 published by United States of America
Standards Institute or similar equipment meeting the approval of the
Electrical Code.



   3.   The mobile home shall be connected to the outlet receptacle by
an approved type of flexible cable with connectors and a male attachment
plug.  However, where the calculated load of the mobile home is between 50
and 100 amperes, a second 50-ampere power supply assembly may be installed or
an electrical service shall be provided by means of permanently installed
conductors.



   4.   Where the calculated load exceeds 100 amperes or where a
permanent feeder is used, the supply shall be by means of a four-wire
installation according to City specifications.



147.27     REQUIRED GROUNDING.



   All exposed non-current carrying metal parts of mobile homes and all
equipment having electrical connections shall be grounded by means of an
approved grounding conductor with branch circuit conductors or other approved
method of grounded metallic wiring.  The neutral conductor shall not be used
as a ground for mobile homes or other electrical equipment.



147.28     SERVICE BUILDINGS AND COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITIES.



   1.   General.  The requirements of this section apply to service
buildings, recreation buildings and other community service facilities, such
as:



      A.   Management offices, repair shops and storage areas.



      B.   Sanitary facilities



      C.   Laundry facilities



      D.   Indoor recreation areas



   2.   Required Community Sanitary Facilities.  Every park shall be
provided with the following emergency sanitary facilities.  For each 100
mobile home lots, or fractional part thereof, there shall be one flush toilet
and one lavatory for each sex.  The building containing such emergency
sanitary facilities shall be accessible to all mobile homes.



   3.   Structural Requirement for Building.  All buildings other than
mobile homes and their appurtenances shall be constructed in compliance with
applicable codes and regulations.



   4.   Barbecue Pits, Fireplaces, Stoves and Incinerators.  Cooking
shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces, wood-burning stoves and incinerators
shall be so located, constructed, maintained, and used as to minimize fire
hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on
neighboring property.  No open fire shall be left unattended.  No fuel
shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable
odors.



147.29     REFUSE HAULING.



   1.   The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile
home park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent
harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution.
Refuse collection and disposal shall be in compliance with City regulations
governing refuse disposal and recycling.



   2.   All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, water-tight, rodent
proof containers, which shall be located not more than 300 feet from any
mobile home lot they serve. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number
and capacity to store all refuse properly.



   3.   Refuse collection stands consisting of a holder or rack
elevated at least 12 inches above ground level, or an impervious slab at
ground level shall be provided for all refuse containers.  Such container
stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to
minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning
around them.



   4.   All refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least three
times weekly.  Where suitable collection service is not available from
municipal or private agencies, the mobile home park operator shall provide
this service.  All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered
vehicles or covered containers.



147.30     INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL.



   1.   Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of
insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other
measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements
of the health authority.



   2.   Parks shall remain free of accumulations of debris which may
provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other
pests.



   3.   Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent
harborage; lumber, pipe and other building material shall be stored at least
one foot above the ground.



   4.   The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to
prevent harborage of ticks, chiggers and other offensive insects.  Parks
shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy,
poison oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to
health.  Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any
description.



147.31     NATURAL GAS SYSTEM.



   Natural gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems.



147.32     FIRE PROTECTION.



   1.   The mobile home park area shall be subject to the rules and
regulations of the City’s Fire Department.



   2.   Mobile home parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and
other flammable materials.



   3.   Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the Fire
Department shall be kept in service buildings and at all locations designated
by such fire prevention authority and shall be maintained in good operating
condition.



   4.   Fires shall be made only in stoves, incinerators and other
equipment intended for such purposes.



   5.   Fire hydrants shall be installed in the parks water system and
located at such locations as determined by the Fire Department, Building
Department, and Water Department.



147.33     RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARK MANAGEMENT.



   1.   The mobile home park owner shall operate the park in compliance
with this chapter and regulations issued hereunder and shall maintain the
park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary
condition.



   2.   The park management shall notify park occupants of all
applicable provisions of this chapter and inform them of their duties and
responsibilities under this chapter and regulations issued hereunder.



   3.   The park management shall be responsible for the proper
placement of each mobile home on its mobile home stand which includes
securing its stability, installing all utility connections and required
skirting.  Required skirting shall be installed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and within 30 days after initial occupancy unless
prohibited by frozen ground, in which event such skirting shall be installed
30 days after ground becomes unfrozen.



   4.   The park management shall maintain a register containing the
names of all park occupants.  Such register shall be available to any
authorized person inspecting the park.



   5.   The park management shall notify the health authority
immediately of any suspected communicable or contagious disease within the
park.



147.34     RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARK OCCUPANTS.



   1.   The park occupant shall comply with all applicable requirements
of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder and shall maintain the
mobile home lot, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean
and sanitary condition.



   2.   All regulations in this Code of Ordinances with respect to
keeping of animals and pets shall apply.



147.35     RESTRICTION ON OCCUPANCY.



   A mobile home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes in any mobile
home park unless it is properly placed on a mobile home stand and connected
to water, sewage and electrical utilities in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.



147.36     VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.



   When the tract proposed to be subdivided is of such unusual size or
shape or is surrounded by such development of unusual conditions that the
strict application of the requirements contained in these regulations would
result in substantial hardships or injustice, the Council upon recommendation
of the Planning and Zoning Commission may vary or modify such requirements so
that the developer is allowed to develop the property in a reasonable manner,
but, at the same time, the public welfare and interests of the City and
surrounding area are protected and the general intent and spirit of these
regulations are preserved.



CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING



 

150.01  Definitions
 
150.03  Building Numbering Plan


150.02  Owner Requirements
 



 



150.01   DEFINITIONS.



   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   1.   “Owner” means the owner of the principal building. 



   2.   “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or
subdivision thereof.



150.02   OWNER REQUIREMENTS.



   Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:



   1.   Obtain Building Number.  The owner shall obtain the assigned
number to the principal building from the Clerk.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])



   2.   Display Building Number.  The owner shall place or cause to be
installed and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a
conspicuous place to the street in figures not less than two and one-half
inches in height and of a contrasting color with their background.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])



   3.   Failure to Comply.  If an owner refuses to number a building
as herein provided, or fails to do so for a period of 30 days after being
notified in writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the
assigned number on the principal building and assess the costs against the
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])



150.03   BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN.



   Building numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the building
numbering plan on file in the office of the Clerk.



CHAPTER 151
TREES



 

151.01  Definition
 
151.05  Trimming Trees to Be Supervised


151.02  Planting Restrictions
 
151.06  Disease Control


151.03  Permit Required
 
151.07  Inspection and Removal


151.04  Duty to Trim Trees
 



 



151.01   DEFINITION.



   For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street,
avenue, or highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the
lot line and the curb line or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street,
avenue, or highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street
usually traveled by vehicular traffic. 



151.02   PLANTING RESTRICTIONS.



   No tree shall be planted in any parking or street except in accordance
with the following:



   1.   Alignment.  All trees planted in any street shall be planted
in the parking midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb. 
In the event a curb line is not established, trees shall be planted on a line
10 feet from the property line. 



   2.   Spacing.  Trees shall not be planted on any parking that is
less than nine feet in width, or contains less than 81 square feet of exposed
soil surface per tree.  Trees shall not be planted closer than 20 feet from
street intersections (property lines extended) and 10 feet from driveways,
with a 40-foot minimum between trees.  If it is at all possible, trees
should be planted inside the property lines and not between the sidewalk and
the curb.



   3.   Prohibited Trees.  No person shall plant in any street
right-of-way any fruit-bearing tree or any tree of the kinds commonly known
as ash, cottonwood, poplar, box elder, Chinese elm, weeping willows,
evergreen, silver maple, tree of heaven, catalpa, mulberry or pin oak.



   4.   Exceptions.  City designed, installed and maintained
streetscape projects developed on roadways featured in the Design Guidelines
shall be exempt from the planting restrictions as outlined above in this
chapter.



151.03     PERMIT REQUIRED. 



   A right-of-way permit is required for the planting of trees in the
parking or street right-of-way in accordance with Section 135.09 of this Code
of Ordinances. The permit fee shall be set by resolution of the City
Council.  Exception: The insurance and bond requirements in 135.09 do not
apply to home owners completing the work along the frontages of their own
property.



151.04     DUTY TO TRIM TREES.



   The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on, or
overhanging, the street trimmed so that all branches will be at least 15 feet
above the surface of the street and eight feet above the sidewalks.  If the
abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on
the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within five
days.  If such action is not taken within that time, the City may perform
the required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.  The City reserves the
right to exempt, by resolution of the Council, specific and identified areas
in which the City has invested in streetscape and landscaping enhancements. 
In areas exempted by the City, it shall specify in a written notice to the
abutting property owner who shall maintain the area.  This section shall be
interpreted consistently with Section 135.10 of this Code of Ordinances.



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c, d & e])



151.05   TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED.



   Except as allowed in Section 151.04, it is unlawful for any person to
trim or cut any tree in a street or public place unless the work is done
under the supervision of the City.



151.06   DISEASE CONTROL.



   Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub that may harbor serious
insect or disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.



151.07     INSPECTION AND REMOVAL.



The Council shall inspect or cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in the
City reported or suspected to be infected with or damaged by any disease or
insect or disease pests, and such trees and shrubs shall be subject to
removal as follows:



   1.   Removal from City Property.  If it is determined that any such
condition exists on any public property, including the strip between the curb
and the lot line of private property, and that danger to other trees within
the City is imminent, the Council shall immediately cause such condition to
be corrected by treatment or removal so as to destroy or prevent as fully as
possible the spread of the disease or the insect or disease pests.  The
Council may also order the removal of any trees on the streets of the City
which interfere with the making of improvements or with travel thereon.



   2.   Removal from Private Property.  If it is determined with
reasonable certainty that any such condition exists on private property and
that the danger to other trees within the City is imminent, the Council shall
immediately notify by certified mail the owner, occupant or person in charge
of such property to correct such condition by treatment or removal within 14
days of said notification.  If such owner, occupant or person in charge of
said property fails to comply within 14 days of receipt of notice, the
Council may cause the nuisance to be removed and the cost assessed against
the property. 



(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b & h])



CHAPTER 152
GEOTHERMAL WELL STANDARDS



 



152.01  Purpose
 
152.09  Permit Fee


152.02  Definitions
 
152.10  Permit Suspension and Revocation


152.03  Permit Required
 
152.11  Open Loop Systems Prohibited


152.04  Application Procedure
 
152.12  Testing of System


152.05  Material Requirements
 
152.13  Location of Geothermal Systems


152.06  Review and Approval Process
 
152.14  Abandonment of Geothermal Systems


152.07  Appeal Process
 
152.15  Regulation Conflict


152.08  Well Permits
 
152.16  Failure to Comply




 



152.01     PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the people of the City by ensuring that the ground waters
will not be polluted or contaminated.  Due to the serious potential of
adverse environmental impacts, this chapter will prohibit all open loop
geothermal systems.  It is also the intent of this chapter to allow for
closed loop systems with the requirements contained in this chapter for the
construction, reconstruction, repair and destruction of geothermal wells.



152.02     DEFINITIONS.



   1.   “Annular space” means the space between the casing or well
screen and the wall of the borehole or between drilling pipe and casing or
between two separate strings of casing.



   2.   “Aquifer” means a subsurface water-bearing layer of soil,
sand, gravel or rock that will yield usable quantities of water to a well.



   3.   “Borehole” means a hole drilled or bored into the earth,
usually for exploratory or economic purposes; a hole into which casing,
screen and other materials may be installed to construct a well.



   4.   “Casing” means an impervious, durable pipe placed in a
borehole to prevent the walls of the borehole from caving, and to seal off
surface drainage or undesirable water, gas or other fluids and prevent
entrance into a well.



   5.   “Drinking water” means water which is intended for human
consumption and other domestic uses, and is considered to be free of harmful
chemicals and disease-causing microorganisms.



   6.   “Environmental impact analysis” means a document prepared
by a licensed professional engineer in the State of Iowa, which document
assesses environmental and social risks of constructing a geothermal system,
and determining mitigation measures to address those risks.



   7.   “Geothermal borehole” means a hole drilled or bored into
the earth into which piping is inserted for use in a geothermal system.



   8.   “Geothermal system” means a mechanical system that uses the
thermal properties of the earth and/or ground water to heat or cool
buildings.  Geothermal systems include (but are not limited to) pipes, heat
exchangers, wells, heat exchange fluids, fans and pumps.  Systems are either
open loop or closed loop.



   9.   “Open loop reinjection geothermal system” means a system in
which ground water is pumped from a water well into a heat exchanger located
in a surface building.  The water drawn from the earth is then pumped back
into the aquifer through a different well or in some cases the same well,
otherwise known as re-injection.



   10.   “Open loop surface discharge geothermal system” means a
system in which ground water is pumped from a water well into a heat
exchanger located in a surface building.  The ground water is discharged to
a surface water body also known as pump and dump.  In the heating mode,
cooler water is returned to the earth, while in the cooling mode warmer water
is returned to the surface water body.



   11.   “Closed vertical loop or horizontal geothermal system”
means a system in which a borehole extends beneath the surface.  Pipes are
installed with U-bends at the bottom of the borehole.  The pipes are
connected to the heat exchanger and heat transfer fluid is circulated through
the pipes.



   12.   “Ground water” means water beneath the earth’s surface,
which occurs between saturated soil and rock that supplies wells and springs.



   13.   “Grout” means a low permeability material that is emplaced
in the space between the wall of the borehole and the casing of a well and,
or, emplaced on the wall of the borehole.  The emplacement of grout is to
prevent the migration of water or fluid contaminants into and through the
borehole.  Grout shall consist of neat cement, high solids bentonite slurry,
or hydrated bentonite chips.



   14.   “Heat exchanger” means a device usually made of coils of
pipe that transfers heat from one medium to another; for example, from water
to air or water to water.



   15.   “Heat transfer fluid” means any liquid used specifically
for the purpose of transferring thermal energy from the heat source to
another location.



   16.   “Low permeability material” means a geological unit of
unconsolidated material (usually clay or till) or bedrock (usually shale)
that is all or partially saturated, and having permeability low enough (10-7
cm/sec) to give water in the aquifer artesian head.



   17.   “Material safety data sheet” (MSDS) means a form
containing data regarding the properties of a particular substance.  It is
intended to provide workers and emergency personal with procedures for
handling or working with that substance in a safe manner, and includes
information such as physical data (melting point, boiling point, flash point
etc.) toxicity, health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage, disposal,
protective equipment, and spill handling procedures.  The exact format of an
MSDS can vary from source to source.



   18.   “Major geothermal system” means a horizontal or vertical
closed loop system that is located more than 20 feet below the ground
surface.  Any open loop reinjection system or open loop surface discharge
system shall be considered a major geothermal system.



   19.   “Minor geothermal system” means a horizontal closed loop
system that is placed no more than 20 feet below the ground surface.



   20.   “Permeability” means the propensity of a material to allow
fluid to move through its pores or interstices.  Permeability is an
important soil parameter when flow of water through soil or rock is a matter
of concern.



   21.   “Separation/isolation distances” means the distance of a
source of contamination from a surface drinking water source, a ground water
source supply well, or any type of borehole.



   22.   “Surface water” means water located on the surface of the
earth in water bodies such as lakes, rivers, streams, ponds and reservoirs.



   23.   “Tremie” means a tubing string (typically about two to
three inches in diameter) that is temporarily installed into the borehole
during well construction.  The tremie pipe is used for installing annular
material such as filter pack sand and grout.



   24.   “Water supply well” means a well used by public water
systems, or non-public use, for extracting ground water for human consumption.



   25.   “Well” means any excavation that is drilled, cored,
driven, dug, bored, augured, jetted, washed or is otherwise construction for
the purpose of exploring for ground water, monitoring ground water, utilizing
the geothermal properties of the ground, or extracting water from or
injecting water into the aquifer.  “Well” does not include an open
ditch, drain tiles, an excavation made for obtaining or prospecting for oil,
natural gas, minerals, or products mined or quarried, lateral geothermal heat
exchange systems or temporary dewatering wells such as those used during the
construction of subsurface facilities only for the duration of the
construction.



152.03     PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall dig, bore, drill, replace, modify, repair or destroy a
geothermal well or any other excavation that may intersect ground water
without first applying for and receiving a permit from the City.  A permit
is required for the installation of all geothermal systems.



152.04     APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   Applications for permits shall be made to the City on approved forms
and shall contain all such information as required on the form.  The
application with accompanying filing fee and supporting documents shall be
submitted by the property owner, owner’s representative, or well driller. 
Supporting documents are as follows:



   1.   Site plan including:



      A.   Property boundaries and easements of record.



      B.   Location of wells and loops with retraceable dimensions
to property boundaries.



      C.   Location of test well, required with a major geothermal
system.



      D.   Erosion control and site restoration plan.



      E.   Containment area for drilling effluent.



      F.   Note stating the distance between proposed system and the
nearest open loop geothermal system if within 1,000 feet.



   2.   Test Reports:



      A.   Thermal conductivity test.



      B.   Geotechnical report with boring logs.



   3.   Environmental impact analysis required with a major geothermal
system.  Address risks including but not limited to:



      A.   Atmospheric and noise emissions.



      B.   Clearing of vegetation.



      C.   Ground subsidence.



      D.   Surface water or groundwater pollution resulting from
drilling effluents or heat transfer fluid.



      E.   Disruption of existing in-ground contaminants.



      F.   Fish or wildlife habitats on-site, if any.



      G.   Floodplains or wetlands on-site, if any.



      H.   For open loop reinjection systems, design models based on
local soils, test bores and topography that support the rationale for an open
loop design.



   4.   Product Submittals:



      A.   Material safety data sheets.



      B.   Manufacturers’ shop drawings for piping, grout, pumps,
and leak detector.



      C.   Anticipated quantity of grout that will be used.



   5.   Certification of the well driller as required under Iowa
Administrative Code 567-49 and 567-82.



152.05     MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All system materials and fluids shall meet or exceed requirements of
Iowa Administrative Code 567.49.  Geothermal piping shall have a 50-year
warranty.  Horizontal loops shall be installed with tracer wire.  Heat
transfer fluid used in exchanger lines must be a USP or food grade propylene
glycol or calcium chloride solution.  Ethylene glycol will not be
accepted.  System shall include a pressure-based leak detector that will
stop the system circulating pumps, should a leak occur.



152.06     REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS.



   1.   Minor geothermal systems can be authorized by the Building
Official upon review by the City Water Superintendent and City Engineer.



   2.   Major geothermal systems upon review by the Building Official,
City Water Superintendent, and City Engineer shall be submitted with
recommendations to the City Council for approval.



152.07     APPEAL PROCESS.



   For minor applications denied by the Building Official the applicant
may appeal to the City Council.  Appeal for major geothermal systems denied
by the City Council may be appealed to the Iowa district court.



152.08     WELL PERMITS.



   All proposed well drillers must obtain a permit from the Linn County
Health Department and conform to Chapter 149 of the Iowa Administrative Code
Section 567-49.29(455B).



152.09     PERMIT FEE.



   The fees for all geothermal work shall be set forth in Table 1-A as
adopted by resolution of the City Council.  The permit fee must be submitted
with the application.



152.10     PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   The City may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this
chapter whenever it finds that the permittee has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter or has misrepresented any material fact in
his/her/its application or, any supporting documents for such permit.



152.11     OPEN LOOP SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.



   Due to the serious potential adverse environmental impact with open
loop systems, the following limitations shall apply:



   1.   Open loop surface discharge systems are prohibited.



   2.   Open loop reinjection systems are prohibited for use with one-
and two-family dwellings to control density of penetrations into well aquifer.



   3.   Open loop reinjection water shall be used only for the
geothermal system for which is it designed and permitted.



   4.   Open loop reinjection systems which pose an unacceptable risk
to the City wells as determined by the environment impact analysis or as
determined by the City Engineer and Water Plant Superintendent shall be
prohibited.



152.12     TESTING OF SYSTEM.



   Geothermal piping systems shall be tested hydrostatically at one and
one half times the maximum system design pressure, but not less than 100 psi
(689 kPa).  The duration of each test shall be not less than 15 minutes. 
All geothermal systems must be checked by a licensed geothermal contractor,
every year from the certification system date.  Results shall be submitted
to the Community Development Department on forms as adopted by resolution of
the City Council.  A pressure monitoring system shall be installed on all
geothermal systems which will cause the system to be shut down if there is a
pressure drop of the geothermal system fluid which would indicate an external
leak in the system.



152.13     LOCATION OF GEOTHERMAL SYSTEMS.



   Loops shall be located within the property boundaries and not encroach
on any easements of record.  Major geothermal systems shall not be located
within 1,000 feet of a water supply well.  Minor geothermal systems shall
not be located within 200 feet of a water supply well.



152.14     ABANDONMENT OF GEOTHERMAL SYSTEMS.



   The procedure used for abandonment of geothermal systems must be the
same as currently described in Chapter 39 of the Iowa Administrative Code for
Plugging Abandoned Wells.  The heat transfer fluid must be removed by a
displacement with grout.  The top of the borehole must be uncovered and
capped with grout.



152.15     REGULATION CONFLICT.



   In the event any of the provisions of this chapter conflict with any
State or federal regulation, the State or federal regulations will control.



152.16     FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   Violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 4
of this Code of Ordinances as a municipal infraction.



CHAPTER 155
BUILDING CODE



 



155.01  International Building Code Adopted
 
155.12  Fire Protection of Floors


155.02  Amendments to the Building Code
 
155.13 Glazing Adjacent to Doors


155.03  Referenced Codes
 
155.14  Repeal of Section (Window Sills)


155.04  Scope and Administration
 
155.15 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems


155.05  Work Exempt from Permit
 
155.16  Slab on Grade Foundations


155.06  Schedule of Permit Fees
 
155.17  Swimming Pools and Spas


155.07  Valuation
 
155.18  Swimming Pool Drainage Systems


155.08  Reinspection Fees
 
155.19 Foundation Drainage Sytems


155.09  Board of Appeals
 
155.20  Code of File


155.10  Design Criteria
 
155.21  Condominium Conversions


155.11  Opening Protection
 




 



155.01     INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   Except as hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or amended, there is
hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City that certain Building Code
known as the International Building Code, 2018 Edition including appendix N:
Replicable Buildings, and International Residential Code, 2018 Edition
Chapters 1 through 10, including  Appendix F: Passive Radon Gas Controls
Methods and Appendix Q: Tiny Houses.  This Chapter shall also adopt
referenced 2018 Codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.7 as prepared
and edited by the International Code Council, Inc., and the provisions of
said Building Code shall be controlling in the construction of buildings and
other structures and in all matters covered by said Building Code within the
corporate limits of the City and shall be known as the Hiawatha Building Code.



155.02     AMENDMENTS TO THE BUILDING CODE.



   Certain sections and portions of sections of the International Building
Code and International Residential Code are hereby amended, deleted, modified
or added to as more specifically set forth in the following sections of this
chapter.



155.03     REFERENCED CODES.



   Certain sections of IBC Section 101.4 shall be amended as follows;



   IBC 101.4.1 Gas. The provision of the Iowa State Plumbing Code adopted
in Iowa Administrative Code 641—25 shall apply to the installation of gas
piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as
covered in this code.



   IBC 101.4.2 Mechanical. The provisions of the Hiawatha Mechanical Code
as adopted in Hiawatha Code of Ordinances Chapter 158 shall apply to the
installation , alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems,
including  equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances,
including  ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration
systems, incinerator and other energy-related systems.



   IBC 101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the Hiawatha Plumbing Code as
adopted in Hiawatha Code of Ordinances Chapter 156 shall apply to the
installation , alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems
including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and
where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas
system.



   IBC 104.4.6 Energy. This section of the International Building Code is
amended by adding the following.



   EXCEPTION: Buildings complying with the Iowa Energy Code as adopted by
Iowa Administrative Code 661—303.1(103A) Scope and applicability of energy
conservation requirements:



155.04     SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION.



   The International Residential Code is hereby amended by deleting
Chapter One and replacing it as follows: 



   101   The scope, application and administration of the International
Residential Code shall be in accordance with Chapter One of the International
Building Code as adopted and amended herein



155.05     WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT.



   The Hiawatha Building Code is hereby amended by replacing Item 2 and
adding Item 14 in Section 105.2 of the International Building Code as follows.



   2.   The replacement of up to two windows, and/or one exterior door
within a one-year period when replaced with windows or doors of similar size,
style and material, and no structural change is required for the framing of
the rough opening for said windows or door.



   14.   Decks accessory to one and two family dwellings meeting all of
the following limits:



      a. Less than 200 square feet in area and,



      b. Less than 30 inches above grade at all points and,



      c. Not attached to the main structure.



155.06     SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES.



   The Hiawatha Building Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 109.2
of the International Building Code and by replacing said section with a new
section as follows:



   109.2   SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES.  On buildings, structures or
alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as set
forth in Table 1-A SCHEDULE OF FEES as adopted by resolution.



155.07     VALUATION.



   The Hiawatha Building Code is hereby amended by adding a new Section
109.3.1 to the International Building Code as follows:



   109.3.1  VALUATION.  Valuation for the purpose of establishing permit
fees for new construction, additions or alterations to existing buildings
shall be determined by the Building Official from the HIAWATHA VALUATION
SHEET as adopted by resolution of the City of Hiawatha City Council.



155.08    REINSPECTION FEES.



   The Hiawatha Building Code is hereby amended by adding a new Section
109.7 to the International Building Code as follows:



   109.7   REINSPECTIONS.  A reinspection fee may be assessed for each
inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is
called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made.



   This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees
the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with requirements of
this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before
the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection.



   Reinspection fees may be assessed when the inspection card is not
posted or otherwise available on the work site, the property and building
address are not properly posted, the approved plans are not readily available
to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which
inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval
of the Building Official.



155.09     BOARD OF APPEALS.



   Section 113 of the International Building Code shall be replaced as
follows:



   113.   Board of Appeals: Any appeals arising from any act of the
administrative authority in the determination of the suitability of alternate
materials and methods of installation or construction and provide reasonable
interpretations, and of variances from the Hiawatha Building Code shall be
heard by the Board of Appeals (hereinafter “Board”) as set forth in
Chapter 159 of the Code of Ordinances.



155.10     DESIGN CRITERIA. 



   The Hiawatha Building Code is hereby amended by inserting climate and
geographical design criteria into Table R301.2 (1) of the International
Residential Code, as follows:



 

Ground Snow Load
 
Wind Speed MPH
 
Seismic Design Category
 
Subject to Damage From:
 
Winter Design Temp
 
Ice Shield Under- Layment Required
 
Flood Hazards
 
Air Freezing Index
 
Mean Annual Temp


Weathering
 
Frost Line Depth
 
Termite
 
Decay
 
NFIP Adoption
 
FIRM Maps


30 PSF
 
115
 
A
 
Severe
 
42"
 
Moderate-Heavy
 
Slight- Moderate
 
-5 F
 
Yes
 
1982
 
4/5/10
 
1784
 
48.9



 



155.11     OPENING PROTECTION. 



   The Hiawatha Building Code is hereby amended by repealing Section
R302.5.1 of the International Residential Code, and by replacing said section
with a new Section R302.5.1 as follows:



   R302.5.1Opening protection.  Openings from a private garage directly
into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted.  Other
openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood
doors not less than 1 3/8 inches in thickness, solid or honeycomb-core steel
doors not less than 1 3/8 inches thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors.



155.12     FIRE PROTECTION OF FLOORS. 



   The Hiawatha Building Code is hereby amended by repealing Section
R302.13 of the International Residential Code and leaving said section blank.



155.13     GLAZING ADJACENT TO DOORS. 



   The Hiawatha Building Code is hereby amended by repealing Sections
R308.4.2 of the International Residential Code, and by replacing said section
with a new Section R308.4.2 as follows:



   R308.4.2 Glazing adjacent to doors. Glazing in an individual fixed or
operable panel adjacent to a door where the nearest vertical edge of the
glazing is within a 24-inch arc of either vertical edge of the door in a
closed position and where the bottom exposed edge of the glazing is less than
60 inches above the floor or walking surface shall be considered to be a
hazardous location.



   Exceptions:



   1.  Decorative glazing.



   2.  Where there is an intervening wall or other permanent barrier
between the door and the glazing.



   3.  Where access through the door is to a closet or storage area 3
feet or less in depth. Glazing in this application shall comply with Section
R308.4.3.



   4.  Glazing that is adjacent to the fixed panel of patio doors.



155.14     REPEAL OF SECTION (WINDOW SILLS). 



   The Hiawatha Building Code is hereby amended by repealing Section
1015.8 of the International Building Code, and Section 312.2.1 of the
International Residential Code, and leaving said section blank.



155.15     AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS. 



   The Hiawatha Building Code is hereby amended by repealing Section R313
of the International Residential Code, and by replacing said section with a
new section as follows:



   SECTION R313 AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS



   R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems.  An automatic
residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all attached
townhouse dwelling units when any of the following conditions exist:



   1.  The townhouses are constructed in a group of more than four
attached units.



   2.  Any individual townhouse dwelling unit of a structure with four or
fewer attached townhouses has a floor area greater than 4000 square feet on
any one story or greater than 8000 square feet of total floor area for all
stories, excluding non-habitable areas separated from the rest of the
building by a minimum of one-hour fire-resistive construction and containing
smoke or heat detection interconnected with the dwelling unit smoke detectors.



   3.  The floor area of the structure, excluding the basement, exceeds
10,000 square feet regardless of fire separations creating separate
buildings, fire areas or occupancies.



   Exception:  An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not
be required when additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses
that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.



   R313.1.1 Design and installation.  Automatic residential fire
sprinkler systems for townhouses shall be designed and installed in
accordance with NFPA 13D or Section P2904.



   R313.2 One-and two-family dwellings automatic fire sprinkler systems.
An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in one-and
two-family dwellings when the following conditions exist:



   1.  The one-or two-family dwelling has a floor area greater than 4,000
square feet on any one story or greater than 8,000 square feet of total floor
area for all stories, excluding non-habitable areas separated from the rest
of the building by a minimum of one-hour fire-resistive construction and
containing smoke or heat detection interconnected with the dwelling unit
smoke detectors.



   2.   The floor area of the structure, excluding the basement,
exceeds 10,000 square feet regardless of fire separations creating separate
buildings, fire areas or occupancies.



   Exception: Two-family homes separated as required for a townhouse shall
have automatic fire sprinkler requirements as for townhouses.



   Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be
required when additions or alterations are made to existing one-and
two-family dwellings that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler
system installed.



   R313.2.1 Design and installation.  Automatic residential fire
sprinkler systems for one-and two-family dwellings shall be designed and
installed in accordance with NFPA 13D or Section P2904.



155.16    SLAB ON GRADE FOUNDATIONS. 



   The Hiawatha Building Code is hereby amended by deleting exceptions #1
and #2 in Section R403.1.4.1 of the International Residential Code, and
replacing them with exception #1 as follows: Exception #3 to remain unchanged.



   Exception:



   1.  Protection of freestanding accessory structures with an eave
height of 10 feet or less shall not be required.



155.17     SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS. 



   The Hiawatha Building Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 3109
of the International Building Code and by replacing said section with a new
Section 3109 as follows:



SECTION 3109



SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS



3109.1 General. The design and construction of pools and spas shall comply
with the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2018 Edition as amended
herein.



155.18     SWIMMING POOL DRAINAGE SYSTEMS.



   Section 320.1 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall be
amended as follows:



320.1Backwash water and draining water: Backwash water and draining water
shall be discharged to the sanitary or storm sewer, or in an approved
disposal system on the premise, or shall be disposed of by other means
approved by the state or local authority.  Direct connection shall not be
made between the end of the backwash line and the disposal system.  Drains
shall discharge through an air gap.  The site plan for a proposed swimming
pool shall indicate where pool drainage is to be directed in such a manner
that:



   1.  Swimming pool drainage water shall be directed away from any
structure foundation.



   2.  Ponding of surface water shall be avoided.



   3.  Swimming pool drainage water shall be de-chlorinated before being
directed to available drainage tile or storm sewer systems.  If the swimming
pool water is not de-chlorinated, it must be directed to the sanitary sewer
at a controlled flow rate approved by the City.  Please Note: Discharge of
chlorinated water to the storm water system would be a violation of the EPA
Storm Water Discharge Regulations and could result in a Municipal Infraction
for an illicit discharge.



   4.  Surface water shall not be discharged to any adjacent private
property except upon drainage easements or established waterways shall not be
altered so that upstream water flow is adversely affected.



   5.  Water flow shall be controlled to avoid excessive volume or
velocity which could cause soil erosion or create other possible hazards.



   6.  Final graded lots shall comply with the grading plan and any terms
of the memorandum of agreement for the approved subdivision.



155.19     FOUNDATION DRAINAGE SYSTEMS.



   The Hiawatha Building Code is hereby amended by adding a new Section
1805.4.4 of the International Building Code:



   1805.4.4  DRAINAGE DISCHARGES. Sub-soil foundation drains shall also
discharge in accordance with Hiawatha Code Section 97.02.



155.20     CODE ON FILE.



   An official copy of the Hiawatha Building Code hereby adopted,
including a certificate by the Clerk as to its adoption and the effective
date thereof, shall be on file in the Office of the Clerk in City Hall and
shall be kept there on file, and copies shall be available for public
inspection.  Copies of this chapter shall be available in the Building
Department Office.  A copy of the Hiawatha Building Code hereby adopted
shall also be placed in the collection of the Hiawatha Public Library for
public reference.



155.21     CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.



   For the purposes of condominium conversion, structures built prior to
April 25, 2000, and thereafter converted to a horizontal property regime
(condominium) are not required to be updated to comply with the building code
in effect at the time of the conversion, except the following building code
provisions shall be complied with:



   Fire Protection Systems



   Means of Egress



   Structural and Life-Safety concerns specifically noted



   The Building Official may waive compliance with any or all of the above
exceptions where he determines compliance to be unduly burdensome or not
practical or reasonable given the nature of the structure.



CHAPTER 156
PLUMBING CODE



 



156.01  Plumbing Code Adopted
 
156.09  Inspection and Testing of Backflow Prevention Assemblies


156.02  Amendments to Plumbing Code
 
156.10  Cross-Connection Control


156.03  Conflicts
 
156.11  Drinking Fountain Substitution


156.04  Referenced Codes
 
156.12  Size of Meter and Building Supply Pipe


156.05  Permit and Fees Required
 
156.13  Sand Interceptor Requirements


156.06  Reinspection Fee
 
156.14  Drainage Discharges


156.07 Violation
 
156.15  Construction Documents


156.08  Board of Appeals
 
156.16 Code on File




 



156.01     PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.



   Except as hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or amended, there is
hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City that certain Plumbing Code
known as the latest version of the State Plumbing Code; Iowa Administrative
Code 641—25, which code is hereby specifically incorporated by reference
and shall be known as the Hiawatha Plumbing Code.  The provisions of said
Plumbing Code shall be controlling in the erection, installation,
alterations, additions, repair, relocation, replacements, maintenance or use
of any plumbing system within the corporate limits of the City.



156.02     AMENDMENTS TO THE PLUMBING CODE.



   Certain sections and portions of sections of the State Plumbing Code
are hereby amended, deleted, modified or added to as more specifically set
forth in the following sections of this chapter.



156.03     CONFLICTS.



   If conflicts arise in requirements with regards to specifications of
materials or methods between portions of this code, between this code and
other local codes or between this code and applicable State or federal
requirements, the more stringent shall apply.



156.04     REFERENCED CODES.



   Administration: Section 641-25.1(105) Adoption, of the State Plumbing
Code is amended as follows:



   Chapters 1 to 17 of the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), 2018 Edition, as
published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical
Officials, 4755 E. Philadelphia Street, Ontario, California 91761-2816, are
hereby adopted by reference with amendments as the state plumbing code
authorized by Iowa Code section 105.4. Portions of this chapter reproduce
excerpts from the 2015 International Plumbing Code; Copyright 2014;
Washington, D.C.: International Code Council. Such excerpts are reproduced
with permission, all rights reserved. www.ICCSAFE.org



[ARC 8860B, IAB 6/16/10, effective 7/21/10; ARC 1089C, IAB 10/16/13,
effective 11/20/13; ARC 2474C, IAB 3/30/16, effective 6/1/16; ARC 3062C, IAB
5/10/17, effective 6/14/17]



156.05     PERMIT AND FEES REQUIRED. 



   The Hiawatha Plumbing Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 104.5
of the UPC, and replacing said section as follows:



   104.5  The fees for all plumbing work shall be as set forth in Table
1-A as adopted by resolution of the Hiawatha City Council and this section.



156.06     REINSPECTION FEE.



   Section 105.2.6 Reinspections, is amended by deleting the fourth
paragraph in its entirety.



156.07     VIOLATION.



   The Hiawatha Plumbing Code is hereby amended by replacing  Section
106.0 to the UPC, as follows:



   106.0  Penalties.  Specifics of information for Section 106.0,
Violations, shall be as set forth in City of Hiawatha Code of Ordinances
Chapter 4.



156.08     BOARD OF APPEALS.



   The Hiawatha Plumbing Code is hereby amended by replacing Section 107.0
of the UPC as follows:



   107.0 Board of Appeals.  Any appeals arising from any act of the
administrative authority in the determination of the suitability of alternate
materials and methods of installation or construction and provide reasonable
interpretations, and of variances from the Hiawatha Plumbing Code shall be
heard by the Board of Appeals (hereinafter “Board”) as set forth in
Chapter 159 of this Code of Ordinances.



156.09     INSPECTION AND TESTING OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES.



   The Hiawatha Plumbing Code is hereby amended by repealing Section
603.4.2 of the UPC and replacing said section with a new section 603.4.2, as
follows:



   603.4.2  Inspection and testing of backflow prevention assemblies. 
Registration, inspection and testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall
be in accordance with the Hiawatha Water Board Rules and Regulations Section
11 b.



156.10     CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL.



   The Hiawatha Plumbing Code is hereby amended by adding a new Section
603.1.1 to the UPC, as follows:



   603.1.1  All backflow prevention assemblies connected to the Hiawatha
water system shall be registered, tested and inspected in accordance with the
Hiawatha Water Department Rules and Regulations Section 11b, as authorized by
Hiawatha City Council.



156.11     DRINKING FOUNTAIN SUBSTITUTION.



   (Repealed by Ordinance 911).



156.12     SIZE OF METER AND BUILDING SUPPLY PIPE.



   The Hiawatha Plumbing Code is hereby amended by amending Section 610.8
of the UPC, as follows:



   610.8.1 General Requirements: The size and installation of the meter
and the building supply pipe shall be as follows:



   610.8.1.1No building supply pipe shall be less than one inch (25. mm)
in diameter.



   610.8.1.2 Remote Reader Conduit. All buildings using City water shall
have installed a hard metal conduit starting within 12 inches of the water
meter inside location. The conduit shall not have 90 degree right angle
fittings. All bends must be sweeping to let wire feed through easily. All
commercial, industrial and apartments over dwelling units shall install
3/4-inch conduit. All residential buildings dwelling units and less including
single family homes shall have 1/2-inch conduit installed. The conduit shall
end in a location with the other utility metering devices and be flush with
the outside of the building.



   610.8.1.3 Meter Clearances. There shall be suitable place for the
meter, so as to keep it dry and clean with ready access at all times, and
with a minimum clear work space of 30 inches deep by six feet high. All
valves and fittings necessary to provide connection to meter shall be
provided by the owner.



   610.8.1.4 Protection of Meters and Equipment. No one shall in any way
interfere with the proper registration of a water meter, and no one except an
authorized employee of the Water Department shall break the seal of a meter,
except the Water Department may grant written permits to plumbers in case of
emergency to break such seal for draining pipes or stopping water leaks.



   610.8.1.5 All water meters must be installed prior to requesting final
inspections.



   610.8.1.6   All water service lines on commercial buildings shall be
protected with a listed RPZ backflow preventer.



   610.8.1.7 All water service lines shall be single piece and without
joints where located under a building.



   610.8.2 Table 610.4: In addition to the general requirements in
610.8.1.1 through 6108.1.7  the size of the meter shall be determined using
UBC Table 610.4 as directed.



   Items (1) through (6) in UPC Section 610.8  to remain unchanged.



156.13     SAND INTERCEPTOR REQUIREMENTS.



   The Hiawatha Plumbing Code is hereby amended by adding the following
new section 1009.8 to the UPC as follows:



   1009.8 A sand interceptor shall be required in all enclosed buildings
which have doors which could allow driving, storing or loading a vehicle
inside of a building and wherein a floor drain is provided.



156.14   DRAINAGE DISCHARGES.



   The Hiawatha Plumbing Code is amended by adding Section 1101.6.6 to the
UPC as follows.



   1101.6.6  Sub-soil foundation drains shall also discharge in
accordance with Hiawatha Code Section 97.02



156.15   CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS. 



   State Plumbing Code Section 25.4(11) shall be amended as follows:



   a.  Section 1304.6 through 1304.6.3 Construction Documents. Delete the
sections.



   b. Section 1319.3 Report Items. Modify the section by deleting
“Authority Having Jurisdiction” and inserting “responsible facility
authority” in lieu thereof.



156.16     CODE ON FILE.



   An official copy of the Hiawatha Plumbing Code hereby adopted,
including a certificate by the Clerk as to its adoption and the effective
date thereof, is on file in the office of the Clerk in City Hall and shall be
kept there on file, and copies shall be available for public inspection. 
The Community Development Department shall furnish a copy of this Plumbing
Code hereby adopted to the Hiawatha Public library.



CHAPTER 157
ELECTRICAL CODE



 

157.01  ICC Electrical Code and National Electrical Code Adopted
 
157.06  Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable


157.02  Amendments to the Electrical Code
 
157.07  Smoke Detectors and Carbon Monoxide Detectors


157.03  Permits and Fees Required
 
157.08  Receptacles


157.04  Penalties
 
157.09  Remote Water Meter Reader Conduit


157.05  Electrical Board of Appeals
 



 



157.01     ICC ELECTRICAL CODE AND NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   Except as hereinafter amended, there is hereby adopted as the
Electrical Code of the City of Hiawatha that certain Electrical Code known as
the 2018 International Building Code Appendix K, Administrative Provisions as
promulgated by the International Code Council including the referenced
National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, as prepared and edited by the
National Fire Protection Association, which codes are hereby specifically
incorporated by reference and shall be known as the Hiawatha Electrical
Code.  The provisions of said Electrical Code shall be controlling in the
installation, alterations, repairs, removals, renewals, replacements,
connection, disconnection and maintenance of all electrical equipment within
the corporate limits of the City.  For the purpose of this chapter, the term
“electrical equipment” means all materials, wiring, conductors, fittings,
devices, appliances, luminaires, signs and apparatus or parts thereof
comprising an electrical system within a structure or facility.



157.02     AMENDMENTS TO THE ELECTRICAL CODE.



   Certain sections and portions of sections of the National Electrical
Code and International Building Code Appendix K, Administrative Provisions,
are hereby amended, deleted, modified or added to as more specifically set
forth in the following sections of this chapter.



157.03     PERMITS AND FEES REQUIRED. 



   The Hiawatha Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding this sentence
to Section K103.1 of the International Building Code Appendix K,
Administrative Provisions.



   Permit fees shall be as established in Table 1-A by resolution of the
City Council.



157.04     PENALTIES. 



   Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this code or who
fails to carry out an order made pursuant to this code or violates any
condition attached to a permit, approval or certificate shall be subject to
enforcement and penalties as provided section 1.14 of the Code of Ordinances
or may be cited as a municipal infraction under Chapter 4 of this Code of
Ordinances.



157.05     ELECTRICAL BOARD OF APPEALS.



   Any appeals arising from any act of the administrative authority in the
determination of the suitability of alternate materials and methods of
installation or construction and provide reasonable interpretations, and of
variances from the Hiawatha Electrical Code shall be heard by the Board of
Appeals (hereinafter “Board”) as set forth in Chapter 159 of this Code of
Ordinances.



157.06     NONMETALLIC-SHEATHED CABLE.



   The Hiawatha Electrical Code is hereby amended by deleting K111.4 of
2018 International Building Code Appendix K, Administrative Provisions.



157.07     SMOKE DETECTORS AND CARBON MONOXIDE ALARMS. 



   The Hiawatha Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding a new Section
K111.8 to the International Building Code Appendix K, Administrative
Provisions, as follows:



   Section K111.8.  When an electrical service is installed or replaced
in a dwelling or multiple dwelling unit building, smoke alarms and carbon
monoxide alarms shall be of the type as required by Iowa Administrative Rule
661-210 and Chapter 1092 (S.F. 2219), the installation, interconnection, and
power supply requirement shall be as set forth in the 2018International
Residential Code or the 2018 International Building Code which ever applies,
for each dwelling unit.



157.08     RECEPTACLES.



   (Section repealed by Ordinance 927 - May 19 Supp.)



157.09     REMOTE WATER METER READER CONDUIT.



   The Hiawatha Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding a second
paragraph to Article 725.8(b) of the National Electrical Code, as follows:



   Article 725.8(b) 2nd paragraph



   All buildings using City water shall have installed a metallic conduit
starting within 12 inches of the water meter inside location.  The conduit
shall not have 90 degree right angle fittings.  All bends shall be sweeping
to let wire feed through easily.  All commercial and industrial buildings
and apartment buildings over 4-plex shall install ¾ inch conduit.  All
single family dwellings, duplexes, 3-plex and zero lot line dwellings shall
have ½ inch conduit installed.  The conduit shall end with the other
utility metering device(s) on the outside of the building.



CHAPTER 158
MECHANICAL CODE



 

158.01  Mechanical Code Adopted
 
158.06  Fee Refunds


158.02  Amendments to the Mechanical Code
 
158.07  Violation


158.03  Conflicts
 
158.08  Board of Appeals


158.04  Administration and Enforcement
 
158.09  Code on File


158.05  Permit and Fees Required
 



 



158.01     MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   Except as hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or amended, there is
hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City that certain Mechanical
Code known as the State Mechanical Code as adopted in Iowa Administrative
Code 165-61 adopting the International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, as
prepared and published by the International Code Council, which code is
hereby specifically incorporated by reference and shall be known as the
Hiawatha Mechanical Code.  The provisions of said Mechanical Code shall be
controlling in the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use, maintenance or removal of heating,
ventilation, cooling or refrigerating systems, incinerators or other
miscellaneous heat-producing or refrigerating appliances and in all matters
covered by said Mechanical Code within the corporate limits of the City.



158.02     AMENDMENTS TO THE MECHANICAL CODE.



   Certain sections of the State Mechanical Code are hereby amended,
deleted, modified or added to as more specifically set forth in the following
sections of this chapter.



158.03     CONFLICTS.



   If conflicts arise in requirements with regards to specifications of
materials or methods between portions of this code, between this code and
other local codes or between this code and applicable State or federal
requirements, the more stringent shall apply.



158.04     ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. 



   Delete Section 61.2(3) of the State Mechanical Code and accept the
administrative and enforcement sections of the International Mechanical Code
sections 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, and 110 and sections therein.



158.05     PERMIT AND FEES REQUIRED.



   The Hiawatha Mechanical Code is hereby amended by deleting Section
106.5.2 from the International Mechanical Code, and inserting in lieu thereof
the following:



   106.5.2  Fee Schedule.  The fees for mechanical work shall be as set
forth in Table 1-A, as adopted by resolution of the City of Hiawatha Council.



158.06     FEE REFUNDS.



   The Hiawatha Mechanical Code is hereby amended by deleting the words
“[SPECIFY PERCENTAGE]” from Section 106.5.3 (2.) and (3.) of the
International Mechanical Code, and replacing said words with “80 percent.”



158.07     VIOLATION.



   The Hiawatha Mechanical Code is hereby amended by adding a new Section
108.1.1 to the International Mechanical Code, as follows:



   108.1.1  Violations.  Specifics of information for Section 108
Violations shall be as set forth in City of Hiawatha Code of Ordinances
Chapter 4.



158.08     BOARD OF APPEALS.



   Section 109 of the International Mechanical Code shall be deleted and
replaced as follows.



   109.  Any appeals arising from any act of the administrative authority
in the determination of the suitability of alternate materials and methods of
installation or construction and provide reasonable interpretations, and of
variances from the Hiawatha Mechanical Code shall be heard by the Board of
Appeals (hereinafter “Board”) as set forth in Chapter 159 of this Code of
Ordinances.



158.09     CODE ON FILE.



   An official copy of the Hiawatha Mechanical Code hereby adopted,
including a certificate by the City Clerk as to its adoption and the
effective date thereof, is on file in the office of the Clerk in City Hall
and shall be kept on file; and copies shall be available in the Community
Development Department for public inspection.  The Community Development
Department shall furnish a copy of the Mechanical Code hereby adopted to the
Hiawatha Public Library.



CHAPTER 159
BOARD OF APPEALS



 

159.01  Established
 
159.08  Licensure Suspension, Revocation and Renewal


159.02  Membership
 
159.09  Recommendations to Council


159.03  Ex-Officio Members
 
159.10  Vote


159.04  Appointment and Compensation
 
159.11  Chairperson


159.05  Quorum
 
159.12  Variances


159.06  Meetings
 
159.13  Failure to Act


159.07  Appeals Process
 
159.14  Finality of Decision and Necessary Vote



 



159.01     ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established a Board of Appeals, hereinafter called the
Board, for the purpose of making a determination of any appeal arising from
any act of the administrative authority in the determination of the
suitability of alternate materials and methods of installation or
construction and provide reasonable interpretations, and variances from the
Building (Chapter 155), Electrical (Chapter 157), Fire (Chapter 160), Housing
(Chapter 163), Mechanical (Chapter 158), or Plumbing (Chapter 156), or
Property Maintenance (Chapter 164) Codes, provided that the granting of such
variation would not increase the hazard to life or property. 



159.02     MEMBERSHIP.



   Said Board shall consist of at least seven members.  One member of the
Board shall be a building contractor registered with the City Building
Department; one shall be a licensed electrical contractor or a licensed
electrician; one shall be a licensed mechanical contractor or licensed
mechanical journeyman; one shall be a licensed master plumber or a licensed
journeyman plumber; and three shall be private citizens.  All of the Board
members shall have a place of business or residence located in the City and
be qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to
Building, Electrical, Fire, Mechanical and Plumbing construction, provided
such qualified candidates are available.



159.03     EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS.



   The Building Official or authorized representative shall be an
ex-officio member without a vote and shall act as a Secretary of the Board. 
A “Fire Prevention Official,” as designated by the Fire Chief, shall be
an ex-officio member without a vote and shall provide technical expertise and
interpretation in fire related and/or life safety appeals brought before the
Board.



159.04     APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.



   The Board shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to approval of the
Council.  Appointment of members shall be for staggered terms of three
years, with the terms of not more than two members to expire December 31 of
any one year.  All members shall serve without compensation.



159.05     QUORUM.



   A majority of the full membership of the Board shall constitute a
quorum.  Ex-officio members shall not be included in calculation of a quorum.



159.06     MEETINGS.



   The Board shall hold a regular meeting on the third Monday of each
month unless there are no licensing, appeals or business on file for a
hearing.  All requests for hearings shall be submitted in writing to the
Building Official by noon on the Monday preceding the regular meeting.  A
fee shall be charged in appeals matters in accordance with the City Council
fee schedule resolution.  The Board shall adopt rules and regulations for
conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the Building Official for appropriate distribution and filing. 



159.07     APPEALS PROCESS.



   1.   Any person aggrieved by a written notice of the City issued in
connection with any alleged violation of the Building, Electrical, Fire,
Mechanical, Plumbing, or Property Maintenance Codes, of any applicable rule
or regulation issued pursuant to the aforementioned Codes, may apply in
writing to the Board for a reconsideration of such notice or order provided
that such application is made within 30 calendar days after the date of
postmark of notice or proof of service.



   2.   Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the
matter shall be presented at the next regular or special meeting of the Board.



   3.   As soon as practicable after receiving a written appeal, the
Board shall hold a public meeting to consider the appeal.  The applicant
shall be advised in writing of the time and place of such meeting at least
seven days prior to the date of the meeting.  At such meeting, the applicant
shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause why such notice
or order should be modified, extended, withdrawn or variance granted.  The
Board may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing on any matter brought
before the Board.



   4.   The Board, by a majority vote of the full membership of the
Board, may sustain, modify or withdraw the notice or order.  In granting an
extension or variance of any notice or order, the Board shall observe the
following conditions:



      A.   The Board, by a majority vote of the full membership of
the Board, may sustain, modify or withdraw the notice or order.  In granting
an extension or variance of any notice or order, the Board shall observe the
following conditions:



         (1)   That there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in carrying out the strict letter of any notice or
order.



         (2)   That such an extension is in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of the applicable Code in securing the public
health, safety and general welfare.



      B.   The Board may grant a variance in a specific case and
from a specific provision of the applicable Code subject to appropriate
conditions and provided the Board makes specific findings of fact based on
evidence relating to the following:



         (1)   That there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in carrying out the strict letter of any notice or
order.



         (2)   That the effect of the application of the
provisions would be arbitrary in the specific case.



         (3)   That an extension would not constitute an
appropriate remedy for these practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships
in this arbitrary effect.



         (4)   That such a variance is in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of the applicable Code in securing the public
health, safety and general welfare.



   5.   Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to an
administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or to any
portion thereof.



   6.   Enforcement of any notice or order issued under this Code shall
be stayed during the duration of an appeal of the order, which is properly
and timely filed.



159.08     LICENSURE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, AND RENEWAL.



   1.   Suspension or Revocation.  Prior to suspension or revocation
of a license, at least 15 days’ notice shall be given to the holder whose
license is in question by certified mail addressed to holder’s last known
mailing address as shown on license records in the City’s Community
Development Department.  Failure to receive such notice shall not constitute
a defense.  Said notice shall indicate time and place of the hearing and the
general grounds for the contemplated suspension or revocation.  The notice
shall also advise the holder of his or her rights to appear at said hearing
in person, or by counsel, for the purpose of presenting his or her defense.



   2.   Renewal of Revoked License.  A person whose license has been
revoked shall not apply for a new license within six months after the
revocation of the aforesaid.  Said application shall be accompanied by a fee
in accordance with the City Council fee resolution.  The suspension or
revocation of a license shall not entitle the holder to a refund of any part
of the license for which he or she may have paid.



159.09     RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE COUNCIL.



   The Board shall make recommendations from time to time to the Council
for appropriate legislation with respect to rental licensing, or with respect
to the Building, Electrical, Fire, Mechanical, Plumbing, and Property
Maintenance Codes. 



159.10     VOTE.



   All decisions or recommendations of the Board shall require a majority
vote of the full membership of the Board.



159.11     CHAIRPERSON.



   The Board shall elect annually one of its members as Chairperson.  The
Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Board or designate an acting
Chairperson to preside in his or her place.



159.12     VARIANCES.



   Alternative materials and methods and other variances from the
Building, Electrical, Fire, Mechanical, Plumbing, and Property Maintenance
Codes granted by the Board shall be effective only for the specific case
presented in appeal and only for one year following approval. 



159.13     FAILURE TO ACT.



   In case an appellant or applicant does not exercise his or her rights,
or fails to begin construction or operations or occupancy in accordance with
any appeal, variance or permit granted by the Board within one year, such
variance or permit shall be null and void.



159.14     FINALITY OF DECISION AND NECESSARY VOTE.



   All decisions and findings of the Board on any license or appeal for a
variance, after a public hearing, shall in all instances be the final
administrative decision and shall be subject to judicial review as provided
by law.  The concurring vote of the majority of the full membership of the
Board shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Building Official, or decide in favor of the applicant
on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Code or to effect
a variance in such Code.



CHAPTER 160
FIRE CODE



 



160.01  Purpose
 
160.15  Clear Space Around Hydrant


160.02  Adoption of 2018 International Fire Code
 
160.16  Fire Hydrant Installation


160.03  Fees
 
160.17  Construction Documents


160.04  Amendments toFire Code
 
160.18  Qualifications


160.05  Title
 
160.19  Pump and Riser Room Separation


160.06  Permit Applications
 
160.20  Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems


160.07  Required Operational Permits
 
160.21  Existing Sprinkler Systems Monitoring


160.08  Required Construction Permits
 
160.22  Fire Extinguisher Size


160.09  Inspections
 
160.23  Fire Alarm Control Panels and Fire Alarm Annunciator Panels


160.10  Board of Appeals
 
160.24  Existing Fire Alarm Systems Monitoring


160.11  Violation Penalties
 
160.25  FDC Size


160.12  Failure to Comply
 
160.26  Overcrowding


160.13  Emergency Evacuation Drill Frequency
 
160.27  Seizure of Fireworks


160.14  Identification of Interior Doors
 
160.28  Infractions




 



160.01     PURPOSE. 



   The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, hazardous materials, or
explosion.



160.02     ADOPTION OF 2018 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.



   Thereby is hereby adopted by the City that certain Code known as the
International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix B, E, F, G and I,
as prepared and edited by the International Code Council, Inc. thereof, and
the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereafter deleted,
modified or amended; and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully
as if set out in full herein; and the provisions thereof shall be controlling
within the limits of the City effective July 1, 2018.  Appendix C and D in
the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, will be used as a reference guide.



160.03     FEES. 



   Fees for inspections, re-inspections, plans reviews, acceptance
testing, permits and other services related to enforcement of this Code shall
be established by the City Council by resolution and paid to the City.



160.04     AMENDMENTS TO FIRE CODE. 



   Certain sections and portions of sections of the International Fire
Code, 2018 Edition, are hereby amended, deleted, modified or added to as more
specifically set forth in the following sections of this chapter.



160.05     TITLE. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by repealing section 101.1 of
the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, by replacing said section with the
new section, as follows:



   101.1 Title.  These regulations shall be known as the Hiawatha Fire
Code, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”



160.06     PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 105.2 of
the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, by replacing said section with the
new section, as follows:



   105.2 Application.  Application for a permit required by this code
shall be made to the Fire Code Official in such form and detail as prescribed
by the Fire Code Official. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by
such plans as prescribed by the Fire Code Official.  Application for an
operational permit shall be submitted with all required information not less
than 14 days prior to the event requiring a permit.



160.07     REQUIRED OPERATIONAL PERMITS. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 105.6, of
the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, by replacing said section with the
new section, as follows:



   105.6 Required operational permits.  The Fire Code Official is
authorized to issue operational permits for the operations set forth in
Sections 105.6.1 through 105.6.8.



   105.6.1  Amusement buildings.



   105.6.2 Carnivals and fairs. 



   105.6.3 Explosives. 



   105.6.4 Flammable and combustible liquids.



   105.6.5 LP-gas. 



   105.6.6 Open burning. 



   105.6.7 Pyrotechnic special effects material. 



   105.6.8 Temporary membrane structure and tents.



   105.6.9 Mobile Food Preparation Vehicles



160.08     REQUIRED CONSTRUCTION PERMITS. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by repealing Sections 105.7.1
through 105.7.6 of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, by replacing
said sections with the new sections, as follows:



   105.7.1 Automatic fire-extinguishing systems. 



   105.7.2 Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment. 



   105.7.3 Flammable and combustible liquids. 



   105.7.4 LP-Gas. 



   105.7.5 Standpipe systems.



   105.7.6 Temporary membrane structures and tents.



   105.7.7 Fire pumps and related equipment



160.09     INSPECTIONS. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 107.2 of
the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, by replacing said section with the
new section, as follows:



   107.2 Inspections.  The Fire Code Official is authorized to conduct
such inspections as are deemed necessary to determine the extent of
compliance with the provisions of this code and to approve reports of
inspection by approved agencies or individuals.  All reports of such
inspections shall be prepared and submitted in writing for review and
approval. Inspection reports shall be certified by a responsible officer of
such approved agency or by the responsible individual.  The Fire Code
Official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to
report upon unusual, detailed or complex technical issues subject to the
approval of the governing body.  The Fire Code Official at their discretion
shall send plans to an outside agency for review.  The Fire Code Official
shall choose the plans review agency.  The applicant shall pay all fees
associated with the plan review directly to the outside agency.  A
certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the review fees have been
paid.



160.10     BOARD OF APPEALS. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 109 of
the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, by replacing said section with the
new section, as follows:



   Any appeals arising from any act of the administrative authority in the
determination of the suitability of alternate materials and methods of
installation or construction and provide reasonable interpretations, and of
variances from the Fire Code shall be heard by the Board of Appeals
(hereinafter “Board”) as set forth in Chapter 159 of this Code of
Ordinances.



160.11     VIOLATION PENALTIES.



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 110.4 of
the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, by replacing said section with the
new section, as follows:



   110.4 Violation penalties.  Any person, firm or corporation violating
any of the provisions of the Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provisions
of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted and upon conviction of any
such violations such person shall be punished in a manner provided in Chapter
4 of the Code of Ordinances.



160.12     FAILURE TO COMPLY. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 112.4 of
the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, by replacing said section with the
new section, as follows:



   112.4 Failure to comply.  Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
liable to a fine of not less than $750.00 or more than $5,000.00 per day.



160.13     EMERGENCY EVACUATION DRILL FREQUENCY. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 405.2 of
the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, by replacing said section with the
new section, as follows:



   405.2 Frequency.  Required emergency evacuation drills shall be held
at the intervals specified in Table 405.2 or more frequently where necessary
to familiarize all occupants with the drill procedure.  Fire and evacuation
drills in Group E occupancies, excluding daycares and preschools shall be
conducted in accordance with Section 100.31 of the Code of Iowa.  Emergency
evacuation/fire drills shall be conducted at least four times a year.  Not
less than two drills shall be conducted between July 1 and December 31 of
each year and not less than two drills shall be conducted between January 1
and June 30 of each year.



160.14     IDENTIFICATION OF INTERIOR DOORS. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby modified by adding a section to
section 509 of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, as follows:



   509.3 Identification of Interior Doors.  The Fire Code Official may
require that certain interior doors be identified.  The Fire Code Official
shall approve the type, size, and location of the sign.



160.15    CLEAR SPACE AROUND HYDRANT.



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by repealing section 507.5.5
of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, by replacing said section with
the new section, as follows:



   507.5.5 Clear space around hydrants. A 5-foot clear space shall be
maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants except as otherwise
required or approved, as measured from the center of the hydrant.



160.16     FIRE HYDRANT INSTALLATION. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following
sections reference fire hydrant installation to the International Fire Code,
2018 Edition.  The sections shall read as follows:



   507.5.7 Fire hydrant Installation.  Fire hydrants within the City of
Hiawatha shall be installed in accordance with the Hiawatha Water Department
Rules and Regulations, the applicable Engineering Standards adopted by
resolution by the Hiawatha City Council in accordance with Hiawatha Code
Section 165.58 and with regard to the following.



(Ord. 922 - Feb. 19 Supp.)



   507.5.7.1 Fire hydrant outlet direction. All fire hydrants shall be
positioned so that the five (5) inch Storz connection is facing the street or
driveway accessible to fire department apparatus.



   507.5.7.2 Fire hydrants threads. All new fire hydrants within the
limits of the City of Hiawatha shall have National Standard Threads (NST) on
the two and one-half (2 1/2) inch connections and the five (5) inch
connection will have a Storz connection.



   507.5.7.3 Fire hydrant flow.  The minimum flow requirements for a
water main serving a fire hydrant, is the rate of water flow, at a residual
pressure of twenty pounds per square inch (20 psi) and for a specified
duration, as specified in appendix B of this code.



   507.5.7.4 Fire hydrant height.  Fire hydrants shall be installed a
minimum of eighteen (18) inches from the nominal ground level to the center
of the lowest water outlet.



160.17     CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by adding sections 901.2(a)
and 901.2(b), as follows:



   901.2 (a) Water based fire protection systems.  Working plans
submitted to the fire department for water based fire protection systems
shall be stamped and approved by a qualified person to be in compliance with
applicable NFPA standards and the Hiawatha Fire Code. Any changes to the
working plans shall be approved by a qualified person.  A qualified person
shall have a minimum National Institute for Certification in Engineering
Technologies [NICET] Level III certification for Automatic Sprinkler System
Layout.  Other qualifications may be approved by the Fire Code Official.



   901.2 (b) Fire alarm systems.  Working plans submitted to the fire
department by a qualified person for fire alarm systems shall be stamped and
approved by a qualified person to be in compliance with applicable NFPA
standards and the Hiawatha Fire Code. Any changes to the working plans shall
be approved by a qualified person. A qualified person shall have a minimum
National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies [NICET]
Level III certification for Fire Alarm Systems. Other qualifications may be
approved by the Fire Code Official.



160.18     QUALIFICATIONS.



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by adding sections 901.2.2 to
the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, as follows:



   901.2.2 Qualifications.  For the installation, inspection and
maintenance of water-based fire protection systems and fire alarm systems,
the contractor must be certified by the State Fire Marshal’s Office. When
requested by the Fire Code Official, the contractor must provide a copy of
their certificate.



160.19     PUMP AND RISER ROOM SEPARATION. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by adding section 901.4.7 to
the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, as follows:



   901.4.7 Pump and Riser Room Separation.  Fire pump and automatic fire
sprinkler system riser rooms shall be separated from electrical room and have
no electrical panels inside the rooms other than the outlets required for the
use of the fire sprinkler system or fire alarm panel. The fire pump and
automatic fire sprinkler system riser rooms shall have an exterior access
door.



   Exception: Non-mixed use R-2 Occupancies or approval by the Fire Code
Official.



160.20     AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 903.2.8.1
of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, and by replacing said section
with a new section as follows:



   903.2.8.1  Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems.  An automatic
residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all attached
townhouse dwelling units when any of the following conditions exist:



   1.  The townhouses are constructed in a group of more than four
attached units.



   2.  Any individual townhouse dwelling unit of a structure with four or
fewer attached townhouses has a floor area greater than 4,000 square feet on
any one story or greater than 8,000 square feet of total floor area for all
stories, excluding non-habitable areas separated from the rest of the
building by a minimum of one-hour fire-resistive construction and containing
smoke or heat detection interconnected with the dwelling unit smoke detectors.



   3.  The floor area of the structure, excluding the basement, exceeds
10,000 square feet regardless of fire separations creating separate
buildings, fire areas or occupancies.



   903.2.8.1.1  Design and installation. Automatic residential fire
sprinkler systems for townhouses shall be designed and installed in
accordance with NFPA 13D or Section P2904.



   903.2.8.1.2  One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire sprinkler
systems.  An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed
in one- and two-family dwellings when the following conditions exist:



   1.  The one or two-family dwelling has a floor area greater than 4,000
square feet on any one story or greater than 8,000 square feet or total floor
area for all stories, excluding non-habitable areas separated from the rest
of the building by a minimum of one-hour fire-resistive construction and
containing smoke or heat detection interconnected with the dwelling unit
smoke detectors.



   2.  The floor area of the structure, excluding the basement, exceeds
10,000 square feet regardless of fire separations creating separate
buildings, fire areas or occupancies.



   Exception:  Two-family homes separated as required for a townhouse
shall have automatic fire sprinkler requirements as for townhouses.



   Exception:  An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not
be required when additions or alterations are made to existing one- and
two-family dwellings that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler
system installed.



   903.2.8.1.3  Design and installation. Automatic residential fire
sprinkler systems for one and two-family dwellings shall be designed and
installed in accordance with NFPA 13D or Section P2904.



160.21     EXISTING SPRINKLER SYSTEMS MONITORING.



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by adding section 907.6.6.3 to
the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, as follows:



   907.6.6.3  Existing sprinkler systems monitoring requirements.
Existing sprinkler systems shall have all valves controlling the sprinkler
system and water flow electrically supervised and monitored by an approved UL
listed Central Station in accordance with sections 903.4 and 903.4.1 within
three months from receiving notice unless otherwise approved by the Fire Code
Official.



160.22     FIRE EXTINGUISHER SIZE. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by adding the following
sentence to the end of section 906.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018
Edition, as follows:



   The minimum size and rating of any required portable fire extinguisher
for Class A, Class B, or Class C hazard shall be 5 lb. 2-A, 10-B C.



160.23     FIRE ALARM CONTROL PANELS AND FIRE ALARM ANNUNCIATOR PANELS.



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by adding section 907.1.4 to
the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, as follows:



   907.1.4  Fire Alarm Control Panel and Fire Alarm Annunciator Panels.
Installation of fire alarm control panels and fire alarm annunciator panels
shall be installed in accordance with section 907.1.4.1 through 907.1.4.5.



   907.1.4.1  Fire Alarm Panel Height.  Installation of fire alarm
panels shall not exceed 6 feet in height measured from the floor to the top
of the panel.



   Exception:  Panel height may be altered by the Fire Code Official.



   907.1.4.2  Number of Fire Alarm Control Panels in Buildings. Only one
listed fire alarm control panel shall be allowed per building and shall lock
in the alarm until the system is reset and shall not be canceled by the
operation of an audible – alarm silencing switch.  This control panel
shall only receive alarm signals from fire protection equipment.



   907.1.4.3  Password/PIN Protection Prohibited. Fire alarm control
panels and/or fire alarm annunciator panels that require a password/PIN to
silence an alarm/supervisory/trouble signal and/or to reset an
alarm/supervisory/trouble signal shall be prohibited.



   907.1.4.4  Fire Alarm Annunciator Panels. The Fire Code Official can
require the addition of fire alarm annunciator panels based on the size of
building and access to the building. These panels shall meet the requirements
of sections 907.1.4 and 907.4.2.



160.24     EXISTING FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS MONITORING. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by adding section 907.6.6 to
the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, as follows:



   907.7.5.2 Existing fire alarm systems monitoring requirements. 
Existing fire alarms systems that are currently not monitored by an approved
UL listed Central Station shall become monitored within three months from
receiving notice in accordance with section 907.7.5 unless otherwise approved
by the Fire Code Official.



160.25     FDC SIZE. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by adding section 912.8 to the
International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, as follows: 



   912.8 FDC Size.  Minimum fire department connection size shall be
2½-inch National Standard Thread.



160.26     OVERCROWDING. 



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by adding section 1004.10 to
the International Fire Code 2018 Edition, as follows:



   1004.10 Overcrowding.  Overcrowding and admittance of persons beyond
the approved capacity in a place of assembly are prohibited.  The Fire Code
Official with assistance from law enforcement, upon finding overcrowding
conditions or obstructions in aisles, passageways, or other means of egress,
or upon finding a condition which constitutes a serious menace to life, is
authorized to cause performance, spectacle, or entertainment to be stopped
until such condition or obstruction is corrected.



160.27     SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS.



   The Hiawatha Fire Code is hereby amended by adding sections 5601.7.1,
as follows:



   5601.7  Seizure of fireworks.  It shall be unlawful for any person ,
or entity, to possess, store, to offer for sale, sell at retail or use or
explode any fireworks, except as allowed by State law. It shall be unlawful
for any person, or entity, to use or explode any fireworks on any City owned
or leased property without a permit approved by City Council.



   The Fire Code Official may issue an Operational Permit for Explosives
and/or Pyrotechnic Special Effects Materials for the use of fireworks by
artisans in pursuit of their trade in accordance with the Fire Code.  Every
such use or display shall be handled by a competent operator approved by the
Fire Code Official and after proper investigation, not be hazardous to
property or endanger any person.



   The Fire Code Official shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be
removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered or
exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of the section.



160.28     INFRACTIONS. 



   The Fire Code Official is herewith authorized to issue and deliver
citations on forms prepared and approved by the City Attorney’s Office to
person accused of violation any of the provisions of this code.



CHAPTER 161
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS



 



161.01  Statutory Authority
 
161.15  General Flood Plain District


161.02  Findings of Fact
 
161.16  Shallow Flooding District


161.03  Purpose
 
161.17  Administration


161.04  Definitions
 
161.18  Flood Plain Development Permit Required


161.05  Lands to Which Chapter Applies
 
161.19  Application for Permit 


161.06  Rules for Interpretation of Flood Hazard Boundaries
 
161.20  Action on Permit Application 


161.07  Compliance
 
161.21  Construction and Use to be as Provided in Application and Plans


161.08  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
 
161.22  Conditional Uses, Appeals and Variances


161.09  Interpretation
 
161.23  Factors Upon Which the Decision to Grant Variances Is Based


161.10  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
 
161.24  Conditions Attached to Conditional Uses or Variances


161.11  Severability
 
161.25  Penalties for Violation


161.12  Establishment of Zoning Districts
 
161.26  Nonconforming Uses 


161.13  Floodway District
 
161.27  Amendments


161.14  Floodway Fringe District
 




 



161.01     STATUTORY AUTHORITY.



   The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter 414, Code of Iowa,
as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to
secure safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.



161.02     FINDINGS OF FACT.



   1.   The flood hazard areas of the City of Hiawatha are subject to
periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare of the community.



   2.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are
caused by:  (i) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
flood damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being
inadequately elevated or otherwise protected from flooding; and (ii) the
cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing increases in
flood heights and velocities.



   3.   This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing
flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources.



161.03     PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges and property of the City and its residents and to preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare and comfort and convenience of its
residents by minimizing flood losses with provisions designed to:



   1.   Reserve sufficient flood plain area for the conveyance of flood
flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased
substantially.



   2.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, or property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in
flood heights or velocities.



   3.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public
utilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the
time of initial construction or substantial improvement.



   4.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited
for intended purposes because of flood hazard. 



   5.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in
the community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood
Insurance Program. 



161.04     DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   1.   “Appurtenant structure” means a structure which is on the
same parcel of the property as the principal structure to be insured and the
use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.



   2.   “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.  (See “100-year flood.”)



   3.   “Base flood elevation” means the elevation floodwaters
would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.



   4.   “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has
its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides.  Also
see “lowest floor.”



   5.   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations.  Development does not include minor projects or routine
maintenance of existing buildings and facilities as defined in this
section.  It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve grading.



   6.   “Existing construction” means any structure for which the
start of construction commenced before the effective date of the
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, and may also be referred to as
“existing structure.” 



   7.   “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a
factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) was completed before the effective date of these flood plain
management regulations.



   8.   “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or
subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to
be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads).



   9.   “Factory-built home” means any structure designed for
residential use which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated,
formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly
and installation on a building site.  For the purpose of this chapter,
factory-built homes include mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular
homes and also includes “recreational vehicles” which are placed on a
site for greater than 180 consecutive days and not fully licensed for and
ready for highway use.



   10.   “Factory-built home park” means a parcel or contiguous
parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or
lease.



   11.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow
of streams or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters
from any source. 



   12.   “Flood elevation” means the elevation floodwaters would
reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood.  For
instance, the 100-year flood elevation is the elevation of floodwaters
related to the occurrence of the 100-year flood.



   13.   “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map
prepared as part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study
which delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community. 



   14.   “Flood Insurance Study” means an examination, evaluation
and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations.



   15.   “Flood plain” means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water as a result of a flood.



   16.   “Flood plain management” means an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting
the wise use of flood plains, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and flood plain
management regulations. 



   17.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including
utility and sanitary facilities which will reduce or eliminate flood damage
to such structures. 



   18.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and
those portions of the flood plains adjoining the channel, which are
reasonably required to carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so
that confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot.



   19.   “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the flood plain,
other than the floodway, which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed
without causing substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.



   20.   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural
elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed
wall of a structure.



   21.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:



      A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places, maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing in the National Register;



      B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;



      C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified by either:  (i) an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior
in states without approved programs.



   22.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area
in a building including a basement except when all the following criteria are
met:



      A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize
hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the
provisions of Section 161.14(4)(A); and



      B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled,
etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access,
parking or storage; and



      C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater,
furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at
least one foot above the 100-year flood level; and



      D.   The enclosed area is not a basement, as defined in this
section.



   In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria A, B, C and
D above, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that
does not satisfy the criteria above.



   23.   “Minor projects” means small development activities,
except for filling, grading, and excavating valued at less than $500.00.



   24.   “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home
parks) means those structures or development for which the start of
construction commenced on or after July 7, 1987.



   25.   “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a
factory-built home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of these flood
plain management regulations.



   26.   “Official Flood Plain Zoning Map” means the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) for Linn County and Incorporated Areas, City of
Hiawatha, Panels 19113C0283D, 0287D, 0291D, dated April 5, 2010, which were
prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Linn County.



   27.   “Principally above ground” means at least 51 percent of
the actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground.



   28.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:



      A.   Built on a single chassis;



      B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projection;



      C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and



      D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   29.   “Routine maintenance of existing structures” means repairs
necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do not
trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general
improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure.  Such repairs
include:



      A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing,
replacing roofing tiles and replacing siding;



      B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling,
carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work;



      C.   Basement sealing;



      D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;



      E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating
or air conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.



   30.   “Special flood hazard area” means the land within a
community subject to the 100-year flood.  This land is identified as Zone A
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.



   31.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement,
and means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.  The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation
of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. 
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.



   32.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the
ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks and other
similar uses.



   33.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained
by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.  Substantial damage also includes
flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions
during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of such
flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.



   34.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a
structure which satisfies any of the following criteria:



      A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value
of the structure either (i) before the start of construction of the
improvement; or (ii) if the structure has been substantially damaged and is
being restored, before the damage occurred.  The term does not, however,
include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are
solely necessary to assure safe conditions for the existing use.  The term
also does not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as a historic
structure.



      B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a
building by 25 percent or more.



      C.   The cumulative cost of any repairs or improvements
undertaken over a period of five years equals or exceeds 50 percent of the
market value of the structure.



   All additions constructed after the FIRM date shall be added to any
proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original floor
space would exceed 25 percent.



   35.   “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the
terms of the flood plain management regulations.



   36.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other
development to be fully compliant with this chapter.



161.05     LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the
jurisdiction of the City shown on the official zoning map as being within the
boundaries of the Floodway, Floodway Fringe, General Flood Plain and Shallow
Flooding Districts shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map, and said
map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter.  The
Official Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Clerk.  The Flood
Insurance Study for the City is attached to and made a part of the Official
Flood Plain Zoning Map.



161.06     RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARIES.



   The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling
distances on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.  When an interpretation is
needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Zoning Administrator shall
make the necessary interpretation.  Any person contesting the location of
the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his
or her case and submit technical evidence.



161.07     COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be
located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply
to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.



161.08     ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall
prevail.  Any ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed
to the extent of the inconsistency only.



161.09     INTERPRETATION.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other powers granted by State statutes.



161.10     WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study.  Larger floods may occur on rare occasions.  Flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and
bridge openings restricted by debris.  This chapter does not imply that
areas outside the flood plain districts or land uses permitted within such
districts will be free from flooding or flood damages.  This chapter shall
not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.



161.11     SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.



161.12     ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.



   The flood plain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are
hereby divided into the following districts: 



   1.   Floodway District (FW)



   2.   Floodway Fringe District (FF)



   3.   General Flood Plain District (FP)



   4.   Shallow Flooding Districts (SF).



   The boundaries are shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map. 
Within these districts all uses not allowed as permitted uses or permissible
as conditional uses are prohibited unless a variance to the terms of this
chapter is granted after due consideration by the Board of Adjustment.



161.13     FLOODWAY DISTRICT.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses shall be permitted within
the Floodway District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not include
placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstruction, the
storage of materials or equipment, excavation, or alteration of a watercourse.



      A.   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture,
grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.



      B.   Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking
areas, airport landing strips.



      C.   Private and public recreational uses such as golf
courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game
farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet
ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.



      D.   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas
and play areas.



      E.   Such other open-space uses similar in nature to the above
uses.



   2.   Conditional Uses. The following uses which involve structures
(temporary or permanent), fill, storage of materials or equipment may be
permitted only upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of
Adjustment as provided for in Section 161.22.  Such uses must also meet the
applicable provisions of the Floodway District Performance Standards.



      A.   Uses or structures accessory to open-space uses.



      B.   Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement
enterprises.



      C.   Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside
stands, signs, and billboards.



      D.   Extraction of sands, gravel, and other materials.



      E.   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, and wharves.



      F.   Utility transmission lines, underground pipelines.



      G.   Other uses similar in nature to uses described in
subsection 1 and in this subsection which are consistent with the provisions
of subsection 3 and the general spirit and purpose of this chapter.



   3.   Performance Standards.  All Floodway District uses allowed as
a Permitted or Conditional Use shall meet the following standards.



      A.   No use shall be permitted in the Floodway District that
would result in any increase in the 100-year flood level.  Consideration of
the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands.



      B.   All uses within the Floodway District shall:



         (1)   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.



         (2)   Use construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



         (3)   Use construction materials and utility equipment
that are resistant to flood damage.



      C.   No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the
channel or floodway or any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or
any other facility or system.



      D.   Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems,
if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the Floodway
Fringe District and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum
possible resistance to flood flows.



      E.   Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage
potential and shall not be for human habitation.



      F.   Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant,
flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited.  Storage of other material may be allowed if readily removable
from the Floodway District within the time available after flood warning.



      G.   Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes
and modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion.  In addition, such alterations or
relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.



      H.   Any fill allowed in floodway must be shown to have some
beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.



      I.   Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the
stream bed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture
due to channel degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows.



161.14     FLOODWAY FRINGE DISTRICT.



   All uses within the Floodway Fringe District shall be permitted to the
extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying
zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance standards of
the Floodway Fringe District.  All uses must be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and shall meet the following applicable performance
standards.



   1.   All Structures.  All structures shall:  (i) be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
(ii) be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage; and (iii) be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.



   2.   Residential Buildings.  All new or substantially improved
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basements,
elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level.  Construction
shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one
foot above the 100-year flood level and extend at such elevation at least 18
feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon.  Alternate methods
of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed, subject to favorable
consideration by the Board of Adjustment and issuance of a Conditional Use
Permit, where existing topography, street grades, or other factors preclude
elevating by fill.  In such case, the methods used must be adequate to
support the structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards
associated with flooding.  All new residential buildings shall be provided
with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the
100-year flood.



   3.   Nonresidential Buildings.  All new or substantially improved
non-residential buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level, or together
with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such level. 
When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer or architect licensed
in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for withstanding the flood
depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors
associated with the 100-year flood; and that the structure, below the
100-year flood level, is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water.  A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum, 1988) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Zoning Administrator.



   4.   All New and Substantially Improved Structures.



      A.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (not
including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters.  Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:



         (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.



         (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade.



         (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.



   Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access and low damage potential storage.



      B.   New and substantially improved structures must be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.



      C.   New and substantially improved structures must be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.



   5.   Factory-Built Homes.



      A.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes
including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. 
Factory-built homes must be anchored in accordance with State law, local
building codes and FEMA guidelines.  In the event that over-the-top frame
ties to ground anchors are used, the following specific requirements (or
their equivalent) shall be met:



         (1)   Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the
four corners of the factory-built home, with two additional ties per side at
intermediate locations and factory-built homes less than 50 feet long
requiring one additional tie per side.



         (2)   Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the
home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and
factory-built homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per
side.



         (3)   All components of the anchoring system shall be
capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.



         (4)   Any additions to factory-built homes shall be
similarly anchored.



      B.   Factory-built homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zone A of the FIRM on sites:



         (1)   Outside of a factory-built home park or
subdivision;



         (2)   In a new factory-built home park or subdivision;



         (3)   In an expansion to an existing factory-built home
park or subdivision; or



         (4)   In an existing factory-built home park or
subdivision on which a factory-built home has incurred substantial damage as
the result of a flood



shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
factory-built home is elevated one foot above the base flood elevation and is
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance
with the provisions of subsection A of this subsection.



      C.   Factory-built homes to be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing factory-built home park or subdivision
within A Zones on the FIRM that are not subject to the preceding provisions
shall be elevated so that either:



         (1)   The lowest floor of the factory-built home is one
foot above the base flood elevation; or



         (2)   The factory-built home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength
that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the
provisions of subsection A of this subsection.



   6.   Utility and Sanitary Systems.



      A.   All new and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters.  Wastewater
treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a
level of flood protection equal to or greater than three feet above the
100-year flood elevation.



      B.   On site waste disposal and water systems shall be located
or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the
system during flooding.



      C.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
Water supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be
provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than three feet above
the 100-year flood elevation.



      D.   Utilities such as gas and electrical systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system
and the risk associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.



   7.   Flammable Materials and Equipment.  Storage of materials and
equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the
100-year flood level.  Other material and equipment must either be similarly
elevated or:  (i) not subject to major flood damage and anchored to prevent
movement due to flood waters; or (ii) readily removable from the area within
the time available after flood warning.



   8.   Flood Control Structures.  Flood control structural works such
as levees, flood-walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a
100-year flood with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall
provide for adequate interior drainage.  In addition, structural flood
control works shall be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.



   9.   Watercourse Alterations.  Watercourse alterations or
relocations must be designed to maintain the flood within the altered or
relocated portion.  In addition, the Department of Natural Resources must
approve such alterations or relocations.



   10.   Subdivision.  Subdivisions (including factory-built home
parks and subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damages and shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.  Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the
installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance
standards of this chapter.  Subdivision proposals intended for residential
development shall provide all lots with a means of access which will be
passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.  Proposals for
subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots (whichever is less) shall
include 100-year flood elevation data for those areas located within the
Flood Plain District.



   11.   Accessory Structures to Residential Uses.



      A.   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are
incidental to a residential use are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation
requirements where the following criteria are satisfied:



         (1)   The structure shall not be used for human
habitation.  The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage
potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage.



         (2)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential.  Its size shall not exceed 600 square feet.  Those
portions of the structure located less than one foot above the base flood
elevation must be constructed of flood-resistant materials.



         (3)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters.



         (4)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, which may result in damage to
other structures.



         (5)   The structure’s service facilities such as
electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at
least one foot above the 100-year flood level.



         (6)   The structure’s walls shall include openings
that satisfy the provisions of Section 161.14 (4) A of this chapter.



      B.   Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements
for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance coverage of the structure and its contents.



   12.   Recreational Vehicles.



      A.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of
Section 161.14(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of
factory-built homes when the following criteria are satisfied.



         (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the
site for less than 180 consecutive days, and



         (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed
and ready for highway use.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.



      B.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for
more than 180 consecutive days and are not ready for highway use must satisfy
requirements of Section 161.14(5) of this chapter regarding anchoring and
elevation of factory-built homes.



   13.   Pipeline Crossings.  Pipeline river and stream crossings
shall be buried in the stream bed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently
protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.



161.15     GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  The following shall be permitted within the
General Flood Plain District to the extent that they are not prohibited by
any other ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not
require placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other
obstruction; the storage of materials or equipment; excavation; or alteration
of a watercourse.



      A.   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture,
grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.



      B.   Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking
areas, and airport landing strips.



      C.   Private and public recreation uses such as golf courses,
tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching
ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting
and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.



      D.   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas
and play areas.



   2.   Conditional Uses.  Any use which involves placement of
structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions; the storage of
materials or equipment; excavation; or alteration of a watercourse may be
allowed only upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of
Adjustment as provided for in Section 161.22.  All such uses shall be
reviewed by the Department of Natural Resources to determine:  (i) whether
the land involved is either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway
fringe; and (ii) the 100-year flood level.  The applicant shall be
responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient
technical information to make the determination.



   3.   Performance Standards.



      A.   All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located
in the floodway as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall
meet the applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway District
(Section 161.13).



      B.   All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located
in the floodway fringe as determined by the Department of Natural Resources
shall meet the applicable standards of the Floodway Fringe District (Section
161.14).



161.16     SHALLOW FLOODING DISTRICT.



   1.   Permitted Uses.  All uses within the Shallow Flooding District
shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet the
applicable performance standards of the Shallow Flooding District.



   2.   Performance Standards.  The performance standards for the
Shallow Flooding District shall be the same as the performance standards for
the Floodway Fringe District with the following exceptions.



      A.   In shallow flooding areas designated as an AO Zone on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection
elevation shall be equal to the number of feet as specified on the Rate Map
above the crown of the nearest street.



      B.   In shallow flooding areas designated as an AH Zone on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection
elevation shall be equal to the elevation as specified on the Rate Map.



161.17     ADMINISTRATION.



   The Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce this chapter and
will herein be referred to as the Administrator.  The duties and
responsibilities of the Administrator include, but are not necessarily
limited to, the following:



   1.   Review all flood plain development permit applications to
insure that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.



   2.   Review all flood plain development permit applications to
insure that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state or
local governmental agencies (such as the Section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act) including approval when required from the Department
of Natural Resources for floodplain contruction.



   3.   Verify and maintain a record of:  (i) the elevation (in
relation to North American Vertical Datum, 1988) of the lowest floor of all
new or substantially improved buildings; or (ii) the elevation to which new
or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.



   4.   Notify adjacent communities and/or counties and the Department
of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.



   5.   Keep a record of all permits, appeals, variances and such other
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this
chapter.



   6.   Submit to the Federal Emergency Management Agency an annual
report concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual
report form supplied by the Federal Insurance Administration.



   7.   Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations
or modifications to the community’s boundaries.



   8.   Review subdivision proposals to insure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Council of
potential conflicts.



161.18     FLOOD PLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A permit issued by the Administrator shall be secured prior to
initiation of any flood plain development (any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations) including the placement of factory-built homes.



161.19     APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Application for a permit shall be made on forms supplied by the
Administrator and shall include the following information when the
development occurs within the flood plain.



   1.   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.



   2.   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be
done (i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that
will readily identify and locate the work to be done.



   3.   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work
is intended.



   4.   Elevation of the 100-year flood.  Where 100-year elevation
data has not been provided in the Flood Insurance Study, a comparable
analysis by another governmental agency, or as prepared by a licensed
professional engineer in the State of Iowa shall be submitted by the
applicant.



   5.   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a
building is to be floodproofed.



   6.   For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.



   7.   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary for the purpose of this chapter.



161.20     ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION.



   The Administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination
as to whether the proposed flood plain development meets the applicable
provisions and standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the
application.  For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing,
of the specific reasons therefor.  The Administrator shall not issue permits
for conditional uses or variances except as directed by the Board of
Adjustment.



161.21     CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATION AND
PLANS.



   Permits issued on the basis of approved plans and applications
authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such
approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or
construction.  Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.  The applicant shall
be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land
surveyor, as appropriate, licensed in the State of Iowa, that the finished
fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing or other flood protection
measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.



161.22     CONDITIONAL USES, APPEALS AND VARIANCES.



   1.   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide:  (i)
applications for Conditional Uses upon which the Board is authorized to pass
under this chapter; (ii) appeals; and (iii) requests for variances to the
provisions of this chapter; and shall take any other action which is required
of the Board.



   2.   Conditional Uses.  Requests for Conditional Uses shall be
submitted to the Administrator, who shall forward such to the Board of
Adjustment for consideration.  Such requests shall include information
ordinarily submitted with applications as well as any additional information
deemed necessary by the Board of Adjustment.



   3.   Appeals.  Where it is alleged there is any error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter, the aggrieved party may
appeal such action.  The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of
Adjustment and with the official from whom the appeal is taken and shall set
forth the specific reason for the appeal.  The official from whom the appeal
is taken shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.



   4.   Variances.  The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request
in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not
be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship.  Variances granted must meet the following applicable
standards.



      A.   No variance shall be granted for any development within
the Floodway District which would result in any increase in floods during the
occurrence of the 100-year flood.  Consideration of the effects of any
development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal
degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.



      B.   Variances shall only be granted upon: (i) a showing of
good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (iii) a
determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public.



      C.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      D.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of
flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this
chapter, the applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the
Zoning Administrator that: (i) the issuance of a variance will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00
for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and (ii) such construction increases risks
to life and property.



      E.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or
approval of the Department of Natural Resources.



   5.   Hearings and Decisions of the Board of Adjustment.



      A.   Hearings.  Upon the filing with the Board of Adjustment
of an appeal, an application for a Conditional Use or a request for a
Variance, the Board shall hold a public hearing.  The Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well as
due notice to parties in interest.  At the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence.  The
Board may require the appellant or applicant to provide such information as
is reasonably deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance
and/or evaluation of a professional engineer or other expert person or
agency, including the Department of Natural Resources.



      B.   Decisions.  The Board shall arrive at a decision on an
appeal, Conditional Use or Variance within a reasonable time.  In passing
upon an appeal, the Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm wholly or in part, or
modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and
it shall make its decision, in writing, setting forth the findings of fact
and the reasons for its decision.  In granting a Conditional Use or
Variance, the Board shall consider such factors as contained in this section
and all other relevant sections of this chapter and may prescribe such
conditions as contained in Section 161.24.



161.23     FACTORS UPON WHICH THE DECISION TO GRANT VARIANCES IS BASED.



   In passing upon applications for conditional uses or requests for
Variances, the Board shall consider all relevant factors specified in other
sections of this chapter and



   1.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments.



   2.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.



   3.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions.



   4.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.



   5.   The importance of the service provided by the proposed facility
to the community.



   6.   The requirements of the facility for a flood plain location.



   7.   The availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.



   8.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.



   9.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and flood plain management program for the area.



   10.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.



   11.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.



   12.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.



   13.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
(sewer, gas, electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.



161.24     CONDITIONS ATTACHED TO CONDITIONAL USES OR VARIANCES.



   Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the Board may attach
such conditions to the granting of Conditional Uses or Variances as it deems
necessary to further the purpose of this chapter.  Such conditions may
include, but not necessarily be limited to:



   1.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.



   2.   Limitation on periods of use and operation.



   3.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.



   4.   Requirements for construction of channel modification, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purposes of this chapter.



   5.   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the
flood protection elevation or the particular area, flood velocities,
durations, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other
factors associated with the regulatory flood.  The Board of Adjustment shall
require that the applicant submit a plan or document certified by a licensed
professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the
regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the
particular area.



   6.   Appeals to the Court.  Any person or persons, jointly or
severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present
to a Court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such
decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of
illegality.  Such petition shall be presented to the Court within thirty
days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board.



161.25     PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.



   Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of Conditional Uses or Variances) shall
constitute a misdemeanor.  Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days.  Each day
such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.  Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action
as is necessary to prevent or remedy a violation.



161.26     NONCONFORMING USES.



   1.   A structure or the use of a structure or land which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to
the following conditions:



      A.   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or
altered in a way which increases its nonconformity.



      B.   No structural alteration, addition, or repair to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall exceed 50
percent of its value at the time of its becoming a nonconforming use, unless
the structure is permanently changed to a conforming use.



      C.   If such use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months,
any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.  The
assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of
nonconforming uses which have been discontinued for 12 months.



      D.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including floods, to an extent of 50 percent or more of its value
prior to destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.



      E.   Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances
shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.



      F.   Except as provided in subsection E, any use which has
been permitted as a Conditional Use or Variance shall be considered a
conforming use.



161.27     AMENDMENTS.



   The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this chapter
may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed.  No
amendment, supplement, change, or modification to this chapter shall be
undertaken without prior approval from the Department of Natural Resources.



CHAPTER 162
STORM WATER RUNOFF CONTROL



 



162.01  Purpose
 
162.13  Detention Facilities in Floodplains


162.02  Other Permits
 
162.14  Flows from Upland Areas


162.03  Definitions
 
162.15  Preliminary and Final Plat Requirements


162.04  Applicability
 
162.16  Drainage and Detention Design Standards


162.05  Design Storm Event
 
162.17  Rooftop, Parking Lot and Other Detention Storage


162.06  Detention of Excess Storm Water Runoff
 
162.18  Certification and Maintenance


162.07  Discharge Rate
 
162.19  Safety Features


162.08  Discharge Velocity
 
162.20  Administration


162.09  Emergency Spillway
 
162.21  Variances


162.10  Freeboard
 
162.22  Special Use Permit


162.11  Joint Development of Control Systems
 
162.23  Official Maps and Profiles


162.12  Early Installation of Control Systems
 
162.24  Interpretation




 



162.01     PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to diminish threats to public health and
safety caused by the runoff of excessive storm waters, reduce the
possibilities of hydraulic overloading of the storm sewer system, reduce
economic losses to individuals and the community at large, enhance broader
social orderly development, and prevent victimizations and fraud.  The
provisions of this chapter further supplement:



   1.   Subdivision Regulations.  The subdivision, layout, and
improvement of lands located within the corporate limits of the City.



   2.   Excavating and Grading Regulations.  The excavating, filling,
and grading of lots and other parcels or areas.



   3.   Building Construction Regulations.  The construction of
buildings and the drainage of the sites on which those structures are
located, to include parking and other paved areas.



   4.   Storm Water Drainage Systems.  The design, construction, and
maintenance of storm water drainage facilities and systems.



162.02     OTHER PERMITS.



   Before starting any construction regulated by this chapter, an
applicant shall comply with the requirements set forth in other applicable
chapters of this Code of Ordinances with respect to the submission and
approval of preliminary and final subdivision plats, improvement plans,
building and zoning permits, inspections, appeals and similar matters, along
with those set forth in this chapter and as may be required by State statutes
and the regulations of any Department of the State of Iowa.



162.03     DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:



   1.   “Base flood elevation” means the elevation of delineating
the flood level having a one-percent probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year (also known as the 100-year flood), as determined from
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) or the best available information.



   2.   “Capacity of a storm drainage facility” means the maximum
capability of a storm drainage facility to convey storm water flows without
causing damage to public or private property; and, in the case of a pipe,
without surcharging.



   3.   “Channel” means a natural or manmade open watercourse with
definite bed and banks which periodically or continuously contains moving
water; or which forms a connecting link between two bodies of water.



   4.   “Compensatory storage” means an artificially excavated
volume of storage within a floodplain used to balance the loss of natural
flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within
the floodplain.



   5.   “Conduit” means any channel, pipe, sewer, or culvert used
for the conveyance or movement of water, whether open or closed.



   6.   “Design standards for public improvements” means standards
formally adopted by the City to which all designs, and the resulting public
improvements, must conform.



   7.   “Detention basin” means a facility constructed or modified
to restrict the flow of storm water to a prescribed maximum rate, and to
concurrently detain the excess waters that accumulate behind the outlet.



   8.   “Detention storage” means the temporary detaining or
storage of storm water in storage basin, on rooftops, in streets, parking
lots, school yards, parks, open space, or other areas under predetermined and
controlled conditions, with the rate of drainage therefrom regulated by
appropriately installed devices.



   9.   “Development” means the change or improvement of any parcel
of land for residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreational,
or public utility purpose, said change or improvement to include but not be
limited to erection of a new structure; expansion of an existing structure;
construction of a new parking area; expansion of an existing parking area; or
construction of a new access drive.



   10.   “Discharge” means the rate of outflow of water from any
source.



   11.   “Drainage area” means the area from which water is carried
off by a drainage system, i.e. a watershed or catchment area.



   12.   “Dry bottom detention basin” means a basin designed to be
completely drained after having provided its planned detention of runoff
during a storm event.



   13.   “Excess storm water runoff” means the volume and rate of
flow of storm water discharged from an urbanized drainage area which is or
will be in excess of that volume and rate which occurred before urbanization.



   14.   “Fifty-year, 24-hour storm” means a precipitation event of
24-hours’ duration, having a two percent chance of occurring in any one
year.



   15.   “Floodplain” means the special flood hazard lands
adjoining a watercourse, the surface elevation of which is lower than the
base flood elevation and is subject to periodic inundation.



   16.   “Hydrograph” means a graph showing, for a stream or
conduit, the runoff flowrate time.



   17.   “One hundred-year, 24-hour storm” means a precipitation
event of 24-hours’ duration, having a one percent chance of occurring in
any one year.



   18.   “Peak flow” means the maximum rate of flow of storm water
at a given point in a channel or conduit resulting from a predetermined storm
or flood.



   19.   “Retention basin” means a structure or feature designed to
retain storm water over a period of time, with its release being positively
controlled over a longer period of time than in a detention basin.



   20.   “SCS method” means a technique for calculating storm water
runoff volume and peak flow described in Soil Conservation Service (SCS)
Technical Release 55.



   21.   “Special use” means all conditional uses or accessory uses
and any use not previously defined or contemplated in this chapter or in the
Zoning Ordinance.



   22.   “Storm water drainage facility” means any element in a
storm water drainage system which is made or improved by man.



   23.   “Storm water drainage system” means all means, natural or
manmade, used for conducting storm water to, through, or from a drainage area
to the point of final outlet, including (but not limited to) any of the
following: open and closed conduits and appurtenant features, canals,
channels, ditches, streams, swales, culverts, streets, and pumping stations.



   24.   “Storm water runoff” means the waters derived from
precipitation within a tributary drainage area, flowing over the surface of
the ground or collected in channels or conduits.



   25.   “Ten-year storm” means a precipitation event having a ten
percent chance of occurring in any one year.



   26.   “Ten-year storm runoff” means the storm water runoff
having a ten percent probability of occurring on any one year.



   27.   “Time of concentration” means the elapsed time for storm
water to flow from the most distant point in a drainage area to the outlet or
other predetermined point.



   28.   “Unprotected channel” means a channel which receives storm
water discharge and which is not paved, rip-rapped, or otherwise improved by
addition of manmade materials so as to reduce the potential for erosion.



   29.   “Urbanization” mean the development, change, or
improvement of any parcel of land consisting of one or more lots for
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreational or public
utility purposes.



   30.   “Water body” means any natural or artificial pond, lake,
reservoir, or other area which ordinarily or intermittently contains water
and which has a discernible shoreline.



   31.   “Watercourse” means any natural or artificial stream,
river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway,
gully, ravine, street, roadway, swale, or wash in which water flows in a
definite direction, either continuously or intermittently, and which has a
definite channel, bed, or banks.



   32.   “Wet bottom detention basin” means a basin designed to
retain a permanent pool of storm water after having provided its planned
detention of runoff during a storm event.



162.04     APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter applies to any new development, subject to the following
conditions:



   1.   Detention Storage Required.  The City retains the right to
require detention storage in all cases in which the proposed development will
generate sufficient excess runoff from the design storm to adversely affect
the carrying capacity of the receiving water body or water course.



   2.   One CFS/Acre Runoff.  New developments generating less than
one cubic foot per second (CFS)/acre runoff for the design storm shall not be
required to provide detention storage, unless condition in subsection 1 is
applicable.



162.05     DESIGN STORM EVENT.



   Storage capacity of detention facilities and discharge rates therefrom
shall be such that the runoff from the “after fully developed area” shall
not exceed the rate of runoff generated by the development area prior to
development during the five-year frequency storm. Storage capacity/volume
shall be adequate to store the excess runoff generated by the fully developed
area up to and including the 100-year rainfall event.



162.06     DETENTION OF EXCESS STORM WATER RUNOFF.



   The increased storm water runoff resulting from the proposed
development shall be detained by the provision of appropriate dry-bottom
reservoir(s); by temporary storage on flat roofs, parking lots, or streets;
or by other acceptable techniques. Capacity will be sufficient to control
excess flows from the design storm.



162.07     DISCHARGE RATE.



   Peak discharge rates from detention storage facilities shall not exceed
the maximum pre-development peak discharge rate as calculated under Section
162.06.



162.08     DISCHARGE VELOCITY.



   Detention facilities shall discharge storm water at a non-erosive
velocity as measured in the unprotected channel. The non-erosive velocity
shall be determined through consultation of appropriate handbooks and
manuals; as approved by the City.  Protected channels receiving detention
discharge shall incorporate features to reduce velocity to non-erosive levels
at the point such discharge enters the unprotected channel.



162.09     EMERGENCY SPILLWAY.



   Emergency spillways shall be provided to permit the safe passage of
runoff generated from rainfall events in excess of the 100-year rainfall
event.  Emergency spillways shall be designed on the assumption that the
pipe outlet is discharging at full capacity for the spillway elevation.



162.10     FREEBOARD.



   Detention storage areas shall have adequate capacity to contain the
storage volume of tributary storm water runoff with at least one foot of
freeboard above the water surface during the 100-year rainfall event. Top of
spillway elevations shall be one foot below the freeboard elevation.



162.11     JOINT DEVELOPMENT OF CONTROL SYSTEMS.



   Storm water control systems may be planned in coordination by two or
more property owners as long as the potential for damage from storm water is
not increased at intervening locations.



162.12     EARLY INSTALLATION OF CONTROL SYSTEMS.



   Storm water control measures shall be installed as soon as possible
during the course of site development.  A schedule of construction shall be
submitted by the owner(s)/developer(s) prior to initiation of construction to
the City.



162.13     DETENTION FACILITIES IN FLOODPLAINS.



   If detention storage is provided within a floodplain, only the net
increase in storage volume above that which naturally existed on the
floodplain shall be credited to the development.  No credit will be granted
for volumes below the base flood elevation at that location unless
compensatory storage is also provided.



162.14     FLOWS FROM UPLAND AREAS.



   The total drainage area must be used in calculating the allowable
release rate.  The required storage volume will be based on the project area
only, with extraneous flows from upland areas being by-passed or discharged
via overflow spillways or other devices.



162.15     PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.



   Accompanying the preliminary and final plats of each proposed
subdivision or any applicable construction there shall be furnished
information consistent with the requirements of the City’s Design Standards
for Public Improvements.  All computations, plans, and specifications
related to the implementation of this chapter must be prepared and sealed by
a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Iowa.



162.16     DRAINAGE AND DETENTION DESIGN STANDARDS.



   All subdivisions and other proposed improvements which fall under the
applicability of requirements of Section 162.04 shall be required to
incorporate design features in accordance with City Standards as defined in
the Unified Development Code adopted by the City.  Variation from these
standards will be permitted only upon submittal of a petition describing in
detail the rationale for the proposed design with subsequent review by the
City Engineer and approval from the Council.



162.17     ROOFTOP, PARKING LOT, AND OTHER DETENTION STORAGE.



   Designs for rooftop detention storage, parking lot storage, and
detention storage in underground tanks, surface swales, oversized storm
sewers, or other facilities shall be submitted to the City Engineer for
approval.



162.18     CERTIFICATION AND MAINTENANCE.



   Detention facilities must be designed in accordance with City Standards
as defined in the Unified Development Code adopted by the City.  The growth
of obnoxious weeds, the creation of conditions which support the growth of
mosquitoes and other insects, and the decrease in available storage by
accumulated sediments shall all be controlled.  The cleanup of accumulated
debris, flotsam, and other materials after runoff events have subsided shall
be assured.  Assignment of responsibility for certifying and maintaining
facilities serving more than one lot or property holding will be documented
and recorded by appropriate covenants to property deeds unless responsibility
is formally assigned to and accepted by a public body.



   1.   Certifications.  The development owner (equitable titleholder)
of a privately owned detention storage facility (“Facility”) must file
with the City Clerk a certification signed by a licensed Iowa professional
engineer (“Certification”).  The Certification must certify the
Facility’s current storage volume and release rate, as well as the storage
volume and release rate for which the Facility was initially designed.  A
newly constructed Facility shall be certified at the completion of the
construction of that Facility.  For those Facilities located on a lot for
which a certificate of occupancy is issued, the construction of that Facility
shall be deemed completed when the first certificate of occupancy is issued
for that lot.



   2.   Maintenance Responsibility.  The development owner (equitable
titleholder) shall be responsible for all future grading, repairs, and
maintenance to the said storm drainage and storm water facilities subject to
the following conditions:



      A.   That said development owner (equitable titleholder) shall
protect, defend and hold the City, harmless from any and all damages or
claims for damages that might arise or accrue as a result of flooding,
erosion from flooding, deposits of sediment in said areas.



      B.   The development owner (equitable titleholder) shall to
not place fill material, to erect no buildings, obstructions, or other
improvements on the area reserved for private storm water purposes.



      C.   The development owner (equitable titleholder) shall
provide a re-certification by a Licensed Iowa Professional Engineer, every
subsequent five years.  A facility that is exclusively constructed, located
and maintained on a paved surface is exempt from the re-certification
requirements of this chapter.  The certification shall include the following:



         (1)   The storm water facility’s storage volume, as
approved by the City, has not decreased.



         (2)   The storm water facility’s release rate, as
approved by the City, has not increased.



   3.   Corrective Measures.  If deficiencies are found by the
inspector, the development owner (equitable titleholder) shall be required to
take the necessary measures to eliminate nuisances and correct structural
deficiencies within a reasonable amount of time.  If the development owner
(equitable titleholder) fails to do so, the City may cause the work to be
completed and shall collect the cost therefore from the development owner
(equitable titleholder) taking appropriate action as necessary.



162.19     SAFETY FEATURES.



   Designs of detention facilities shall incorporate safety features;
particularly at inlets, outlets, on steep slopes, and at any attractive
nuisances.  These features shall include, but not limited to, fencing, hand
rails, lighting, steps, grills, signs, and other protective or warning
devices.



162.20     ADMINISTRATION.



   The administration of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the
Building Official and the City Engineer.



   1.   Creation.  The City of Hiawatha Storm Water Advisory Committee
is hereby created.



   2.   Members.  The Storm Water Advisory Committee will consist of
at least three members.  Members shall be residents of the City of Hiawatha
and shall serve without compensation.  Members will be qualified by
knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the development of
storm water policies.  Members shall not hold any elected office in City
government.



   3.   Removal of Members.  Members of the Storm Water Advisory
Committee may be removed by the City Council for such cause as the City
Council may determine necessary.



   4.   Duties.  The Storm Water Advisory Committee will have such
duties as set forth in this chapter or as prescribed by the City Council. 
Specifically the duties will include:



      A.   Develop and recommend storm water policies.



      B.   Advise City Council in regards to needed storm water
capital improvement projects.



      C.   Review any public input regarding storm water drainage or
erosion control.



      D.   Make such reports to the City Council as may be requested
from time to time.



      E.   Recommend best management practices for development of
storm water management and water quality.



   5.   Meetings.  Meetings will be scheduled quarterly.  All
meetings are open to the public.  Meetings may be cancelled if there are no
agenda items.



162.21     VARIANCES.



   No variance shall be issued without the review and recommendation of
the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval of the Council.



162.22     SPECIAL USE PERMIT.



   No special use permit shall be issued without the prior concurrence of
the City Engineer and approval by the Council.



162.23     OFFICIAL MAPS AND PROFILES.



   Responsibility for all changes to official maps and profiles is
conferred to the City Engineer.



162.24     INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, the provisions
expressed herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the City; and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by the Code of Iowa.



CHAPTER 163
HOUSING CODE



 

163.01  Purpose
 
163.06  Plans of Inspection


163.02  International Property Maintenance Code Adopted
 
163.07  Interference with the Code Enforcement Officer


163.03  Amendments to the Property Maintenance Code
 
163.08  Right to Appeal


163.04  Authority for Enforcement
 
163.09  Failure to Comply


163.05  Registration and Fees
 
163.10  Code on File



 



163.01     PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to designate the responsibilities of
persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property within
the City, to define nuisances as a result of the failure to perform such
maintenance and to provide for the abatement of such nuisances in order to
provide for the safety and preserve the health and welfare of the citizens of
the City.



163.02     INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.



   Except as hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or amended, there is
hereby adopted as the Housing Code of the City of Hiawatha that certain Code
known as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, First
Printing, as prepared and edited by the International Code Council, Inc., as
amended by Chapter 164 of this Code of Ordinances (Property Maintenance
Code), and the provisions of said Property Maintenance Code shall be
controlling in maintaining minimum requirements and standards of structures
and properties within the corporate limits of the City.



163.03     AMENDMENTS TO THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   Certain sections and portions of sections of the International Property
Maintenance Code are hereby amended, deleted, modified or added to as more
specifically set forth in the following sections of this chapter.  The
following sections are amended by the addition of the following information.



163.04     AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   The City Administrator shall be responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter and shall have all the necessary authority to carry out such
enforcement.  Any person designated by the City Administrator to enforce
this chapter shall be known as the Code Enforcement Officer.



163.05     REGISTRATION AND FEES.



   The Hiawatha Housing Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 103.5
of the International Property Maintenance Code, and by replacing said section
with a new section, as follows:



   Section 103.5  Registration and Fees



   1.  Registration Required.  No person shall operate a rental dwelling
unit, rooming house, congregate housing or independent group residence unless
the person has first registered such rental dwelling unit, rooming house,
congregate housing or independent group residence with the City.  There is a
onetime registration fee for all rental properties; fee shall be established
by resolution of the City Council.  Failure to pay the registration fee
within 30 days following occupancy of the dwelling unit, rooming house,
congregate housing or independent group residence may result in the
registration fee being assessed as costs against the property for collection
in the same manner as a property tax.



   2.  Duration of Registration.  Such registration shall remain in
effect until there occurs:



      2.1  A change in ownership or designation of agents of the
rental dwelling unit, rooming house, congregate housing or independent group
residence.  In such event, the owner, operator or agent of such property
shall register such property with the City within thirty (30) days of such
change.  Failure to comply will result in a code violation with an
investigation fee in addition to the registration fee; fee shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.



      2.2  A failure to pay fees associated with registration,
registration renewals, inspections or investigation fees defined herein.



      2.3  A failure to comply with inspection requirements or failure
to correct violations arising from investigations or inspections. 



   3.  Registration Form.  Registration shall not be in effect unless
the owner, operator or agent has first made application on an application
form provided by the City.  At the time of registration, the owner, operator
or agent shall designate an agent for the service of process who is a
resident of the State of Iowa.



   4.  Inspection and Investigation Fees.  Inspection and investigation
fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be levied
as an annual renewal fee.  Failure to pay any inspection or investigation
fee within 30 days following the date of the inspection or investigation or
within 30 days of an annual renewal date may result in the termination of the
registration and in the fee being assessed as costs against the property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.



163.06     PLANS OF INSPECTION.



   The Hiawatha Housing Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 104.2
of the International Property Maintenance Code, and by replacing said section
with new section, as follows:



   The enforcement of the Hiawatha Housing Code shall include:



   1.  A plan for the inspection of all residential dwellings contained
within the City upon receipt of complaints. 



   2.  A plan for the regular inspection of all rental units, rooming
houses, congregate housing, and independent group residences.



163.07     INTERFERENCE WITH THE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   No person shall interfere with the Code Enforcement Officer while
engaged in the enforcement of this chapter.



163.08     RIGHT TO APPEAL.



   The Hiawatha Housing Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 111 of
the International Property Maintenance Code, and by replacing said section
with new section, as follows:



111  Means of Appeal.  Any appeals arising from any act of the
administrative authority in the determination of the suitability of alternate
materials and methods of installation or construction and provide reasonable
interpretations, and of variances from the Hiawatha Housing Code shall be
heard by the Board of Appeals (hereinafter “Board”) as set forth in
Chapter 159 of this Code of Ordinances.



163.09     FAILURE TO COMPLY. 



   The Hiawatha Housing Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 112.4
of the International Property Maintenance Code, and by replacing said section
with new section, as follows:



   Section 112.4 Failure to Comply.



   1.  Any person who shall continue any work after having been served
with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a
municipal infraction as specified by City Code.



163.10     CODE ON FILE.



   An official copy of the Hiawatha Housing Code hereby adopted, including
a certificate by the Clerk as to its adoption and the effective date thereof,
shall be on file in the office of the Clerk in City Hall and shall be kept
there on file, and copies shall be available for public inspection.  A copy
of this chapter shall be available in the Community Development Department
Office.



CHAPTER 164
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



 



164.01  Purpose
 
164.10  Weeds


164.02  International  Property Maintenance Code Adopted
 
164.11  Heat Supply and Occupiable Work Spaces


164.03  Amendments to the Property Maintenance Code
 
164.12  Safety Controls


164.04  Authority for Enforcement
 
164.13  Smoke Alarms and CO Alarms


164.05  Interference with the Code Enforcement Officer
 
164.14  Insect Screens


164.06  Unsafe Structures and Equipment
 
164.15  Nuisances


164.07  Right to Appeal
 
164.16  Notice to Abate


164.08  Definitions
 
164.17  Emergency Abatement Measures


164.09  Pest Elimination
 
164.18  Code on File




 



164.01     PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to designate the responsibilities of
persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property within
the City, to define nuisances as a result of the failure to perform such
maintenance and to provide for the abatement of such nuisances in order to
provide for the safety and preserve the health and welfare of the citizens of
the City.



164.02     INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.



   Except as hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or amended, there is
hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Hiawatha that
certain Code known as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018
Edition, First Printing, as prepared and edited by the International Code
Council, Inc., and the provisions of said Property Maintenance Code shall be
controlling in maintaining minimum requirements and standards of structures
and properties within the corporate limits of the City.



164.03     AMENDMENTS TO THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   Certain sections and portions of sections of the International Property
Maintenance Code are hereby amended, deleted, modified or added to as more
specifically set forth in the following sections of this chapter



164.04     AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   The City Administrator shall be responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter and shall have all the necessary authority to carry out such
enforcement.  Any person designated by the City Administrator to enforce
this chapter shall be known as the Code Enforcement Officer.



164.05    INTERFERENCE WITH THE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   No person shall interfere with the Code Enforcement Officer while
engaged in the enforcement of this chapter.



164.06     UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT.



   The Hiawatha Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by repealing
Section 108.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code, and by
replacing said section with new section, as follows:



   108.1   General.  When a structure or equipment is found by the
code official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human
occupancy, or is found unlawful, the code official shall commence proceedings
to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the structure and the
structure may be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code.



164.07     RIGHT TO APPEAL.



   The Hiawatha Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by repealing
Section 111 of the International Property Maintenance Code, and by replacing
said section with new section, as follows:



   111  Means of Appeal.  Any appeals arising from any act of the
administrative authority in the determination of the suitability of alternate
materials and methods of installation or construction and provide reasonable
interpretations, and of variances from the Hiawatha Property Maintenance Code
shall be heard by the Board of Appeals (hereinafter “Board”) as set forth
in Chapter 159 of this Code of Ordinances.



164.08     DEFINITIONS.



   Section 202 is amended by adding the following definitions.



   1.  “Blighted area” is defined as set forth in Section 403.17 of
the Code of Iowa.



   2.  “Vermin” means any of various insects, bugs or small animals
regarded as objectionable because they are destructive, disease carrying, etc.



164.09     PEST ELIMINATION.



   The Hiawatha Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by replacing
Section 309 of the International Property Maintenance Code as follows:



   309.1 Infestation.  Structures shall be kept free from insect and
rodent infestation.  Structures in which insects or rodents are found shall
be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to
human health.  After pest elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to
prevent reinfestation.



   309.2 Owner.  The owner of any structure shall be responsible for pest
elimination within the structure.



164.10     WEEDS.



   The Hiawatha Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by repealing
Section 302.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code, and by
replacing said section with a new section as follows:



   302.4 WEEDS.



   All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds
or plant growth in excess of eight inches.  All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited.  Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.



164.11     HEAT SUPPLY AND OCCUPIABLE WORK SPACES.



   The Hiawatha Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by adding the
dates of January 1 to December 31 to the respective sections of the
International Property Maintenance Code in Sections 602.3 and 602.4.



164.12     SAFETY CONTROLS.



   The Hiawatha Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by repealing
Section 603.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code, and by
replacing said section with a new section, as follows:



   603.4 SAFETY CONTROLS.



   All safety controls for fuel burning equipment shall be maintained in
effective operation. Any structures using fuel burning equipment shall
protect the residents by complying with the carbon monoxide detector and
smoke detector requirements of the Hiawatha Building Code.



164.13     SMOKE ALARMS AND CO ALARMS.



   The Hiawatha Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by replacing
Section 704.6 of the International Property Maintenance Code as follows.



   704.6 Single-and multiple-station smoke alarms and CO alarms.
Single-and multiple-station smoke alarms and CO alarms shall be installed in
existing Group I-1 and R occupancies in accordance with Sections 704.6.1
through 704.6.3, Section 705 and Iowa Code Chapter 100.18.



164.14     INSECT SCREENS.



   The Hiawatha Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by repealing
Section 304.14 of the International Property Maintenance Code, and by
replacing said section with a new section as follows:



   304.14 INSECT SCREENS.



   During the period from January 1 to December 31, every door, window and
other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food
preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be
included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly
fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and
every screen door used for insect control shall have self-closing device in
good working condition.



164.15     NUISANCES. 



   A failure to satisfy any of the provisions of the Hiawatha Property
Maintenance Code shall constitute a nuisance.



164.16     NOTICE TO ABATE.



   Upon discovery of any violation of Section 164 the City shall within
five days initiate abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this
Code of Ordinances.



164.17     EMERGENCY ABATEMENT MEASURES.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever in the
judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer any nuisance is an immediate and
imminent threat to life and property, the Code Enforcement Officer may, with
or without prior notice as required within, order the nuisance abated and
costs assessed against the property for collection in the same manner as a
property tax. However, prior to such assessment, the City shall give the
property owner notice as provided by the Code of Iowa and this Code of
Ordinances.



164.18     CODE ON FILE.



   An official copy of the Hiawatha Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted, including a certificate by the Clerk as to its adoption and the
effective date thereof, shall be on file in the office of the Clerk in City
Hall and shall be kept there on file, and copies shall be available for
public inspection.  A copy of this chapter shall be available in the
Community Development Department Office.



CHAPTER 165
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE



 



165.01  Title and Authority
 
165.52  Application


165.02  Adoption and Repeals
 
165.53  Minimum Improvements


165.03  Purpose and Intent
 
165.54  Easements


165.04  Applicability
 
165.55  Maintenance Bond Required


165.05  Relationship to Other Requirements
 
165.56  Alternative Systems for Sewer and Water


165.06  Severability
 
165.57  Standards Prescribed


165.07  Effective Date
 
165.58  Construction Standards for Improvements


165.08  Location of Certified Copy and Zoning District Map
 
165.59 – 165.64 Reserved


165.09  Construction and Interpretation
 
165.65  Site Plan Requirements


165.10  Zoning Regulations
 
165.66  Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District Requirements


165.11  Purpose and Intent
 
165.67  Subdivision Requirements


165.12  Applicability
 
165.68 – 165.69 Reserved


165.13  Interpretation of Regulations
 
165.70  Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses


165.14  Establishment of Zoning Districts
 
165.71 – 165.74 Reserved


165.15  Land Use Regulations
 
165.75  Administration and Enforcement


165.16  Land Uses and Regulations by District
 
165.76  Inspection and Enforcement


165.17  Zoning Districts and Zoning District Map
 
165.77  Certificates of Occupancy


165.18 – 165.19 Reserved
 
165.78  Appeals of Decisions


165.20  Reserved
 
165.79  Reserved


165.21  General Supplemental Regulations
 
165.80  Board of Adjustment


165.22  Supplemental Lot Regulations
 
165.81  Jurisdiction


165.23  Supplemental Yard Regulations
 
165.82  Variances


165.24  Adult Entertainment Establishment Regulations
 
165.83  Conditional Uses


165.24A  Pawnbrokers and Delayed Deposit Services
 
165.84  Conditional Expansions


165.25  Residential Child Day Care Facilities
 
165.85  Special Use Permit; Group Child Day Care Home


165.26  Home Occupations
 
165.86  Limitation on Successive Applications


165.27  Communication Towers
 
165.87 – 165.89 Reserved 


165.28  Reserved
 
165.90  Initiation of Amendments to the Zoning District Map


165.29  Performance Standards
 
165.91  Contents of Application for Amendment to the Zoning District Map


165.30  Parking and Loading Regulations
 
165.92  Policies Relating to the Reclassification of Property


165.31  Scope and Application
 
165.93  Reserved


165.32  Off-Street Parking General Requirements
 
165.94  Limitation on Successive Applications


165.33  Shared Off-Street Parking Provisions
 
165.95  Violation and Penalty


165.34  Design and Maintenance of Off-Street Parking Areas
 
165.96  Definitions


165.35  Off-Street Parking Spaces
 



165.36  Off-Street Loading
 
Appendix A – Planting Guidelines and Suggested Tree Planting List


165.37 – 165.46  Reserved
 
Appendix B – Building Layout in District CPR-1


165.47  Landscaping and Shading Regulations
 
Figure I – Land Use Matrix


165.48 – 165.49 Reserved
 
Figure II – Services Matrix


165.50  Procedures for Subdivision
 
Figure III – Application of Rezoning Policies


165.51  Subdivision Regulations
 
Figure IV – Development Constraints




 



165.01   TITLE AND AUTHORITY.



   This chapter shall be known as the “City of Hiawatha Unified
Development Code,” and has been referred to as the “Development Code”
or “Code” when a shortened title is necessary.  This chapter is adopted
by authority of, and for the purposes set forth in the Code of Iowa and shall
be codified as Chapter 165 of the Municipal Code, City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



165.02   ADOPTION AND REPEALS.



   1.   Amending Ordinance.  This is an Ordinance amending
respectively the Hiawatha Zoning Ordinance and the Hiawatha Subdivision
Regulations, which became effective August 1, 1983, and was subsequently
codified as Chapters 165 and 166 of the Municipal Code of Hiawatha, Iowa, by
repealing said Ordinances and all subsequent amendments thereto, except as
hereafter provided in Sections 165.90 and 165.91 of this Code, and enacting a
new Ordinance in lieu thereof to establish a Unified Development Code for
Hiawatha, Iowa, and providing for the administration, enforcement and
amendment thereof; and to repeal all ordinances or resolutions in conflict
therewith.



   2.   Land Use Related Ordinances Previously Adopted.  All
ordinances theretofore passed by the City Council, rezoning specific parcels
of property whereby conditions or site development plans were enacted, or,
other requirements made of the property owners in connection with the
rezoning of said property, are herewith specifically preserved and exempted
from all repealed provisions of this Ordinance. All such conditions, site
development plans, or other requirements are continued in full force and
effect as set forth in such ordinances, and are herewith ratified, confirmed,
and re-enacted the same as set forth in such ordinances.



165.03   PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this Code is to protect, promote, and enhance the public
health and safety; to provide for planned and orderly development in the City
of Hiawatha in a manner consistent with constitutional rights of property
owners; and to balance the needs of a changing population with legitimate
environmental concerns.  It is the intent of this Code to establish a
balance between the legitimate rights of property owners and the achievement
of community goals important to the protection of public welfare.  More
specifically, this Code is adopted to achieve the following objectives:



   1.   Relate proposals for development to the goals, policies and
provisions in the Hiawatha Comprehensive Plan and to use the plan as a
guideline in evaluating development proposals.



   2.   Provide a comprehensive regulatory system for the development
and use of land in the City of Hiawatha.



   3.   Secure equitable handling of all development proposals through
uniform application of procedures and development standards.



   4.   Coordinate the development of land with the City’s and other
agencies’ ability to provide essential services.



   5.   Promote the development of a safe, efficient circulation system.



   6.   Encourage the economic health of the City of Hiawatha.



   7.   Preserve and enhance the natural environment in and around
Hiawatha through sound development practices.



165.04   APPLICABILITY.



   1.   Territorial Application.  This Code shall apply to all
structures, land, and uses within the corporate limits of Hiawatha, Iowa, and
to the land within two miles of which the City of Hiawatha has extra
territorial jurisdiction as set forth in the Code of Iowa.



   2.   General Prohibition.  No building or structure; no use of any
building, structure or land; and no lot of record or zoning lot, now or
hereafter existing, shall hereafter be established, altered, moved, divided,
or maintained in any manner except in accordance with the provisions of this
Code.



   3.   Covenants.  Persons owning property in the City of Hiawatha
may have a covenant recorded against their property which affects how the
land may be used or developed.  It is hereby noted, such covenants
constitute a private party agreement between the property owner imposing the
covenant and subsequent owners.  The City does not have the power or
obligation to enforce such covenants.  If the City is a party to a recorded
covenant, then the City has the authority to enforce its provisions.



   4.   Private Agreements.  This Code is not intended to abrogate,
annul or otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant, or other private
agreement or legal relationship.  However, where the regulations of this
Code are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than
such easements, covenants or other private agreements or legal relationships,
the regulations of this Code shall govern.



165.05   RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   1.   Relationship to Other Laws.  Nothing in this Code shall be
construed as exempting any person from other requirements of the City of
Hiawatha or State and Federal laws and regulations. To the extent the
requirements of this Code differ from other applicable City, State or Federal
requirements, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.



   2.   Minimum Requirements.  In their interpretation and application
the provisions of this Code shall be held to be the minimum requirements for
the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience,
prosperity, and general welfare.



   3.   Application of Regulations.  Where the conditions imposed by
any provision of this Code upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk
of buildings, are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision of this Code or of any other law,
code, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are
more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall
govern.



165.06   SEVERABILITY.



   It is the intention of the City Council that each section, paragraph,
sentence, clause and provision of this chapter is separable and if any
provision is held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision
shall not affect the remainder of this chapter, nor any part thereof other
than that affected by such decision.



165.07   EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This Code shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, and publication as provided by law.



165.08   LOCATION OF CERTIFIED COPY AND ZONING DISTRICT MAP.



   1.   Certified Copy of Code.  Upon approval of this Code, a
certified copy including all official maps referred to in these regulations
shall be recorded and kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.



   2.   Zoning District Map.  The “Zoning District Map” shall not
be set out in the Municipal Code and shall remain on file in the office of
the City Clerk after adoption and publication and shall constitute a part of
this Chapter 165 of the Municipal Code the same as if set out therein.



165.09   CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION.



   1.   General.  Nothing herein shall be construed as creating any
rights or protection for any third party.  The requirements of this Code are
intended to protect and benefit the City of Hiawatha only, and not any third
party beneficiary.



   2.   Interpretation.  In the interpretation of this Code the rules
and definitions of this chapter shall be observed and applied, except when
the context clearly indicates otherwise.



      A.   Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include
other tenses and derivative forms.



      B.   Words in the singular number shall include the plural
number, and words in the plural number shall include the singular number.



      C.   The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the
feminine gender shall include the masculine.



      D.   The word “shall” is mandatory.



      E.   The word “may” is permissive.



      F.   The words “municipal code” or “code” means the
Municipal Code of the City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



      G.   The word “person” includes individuals, firms,
corporations, associates, and any other similar entities.



      H.   The word “county” means the County of Linn, Iowa.



      I.   The word “city” means the City of Hiawatha, Iowa
and/or persons authorized to perform specified functions on behalf of the
City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



      J.   The words “City Council” means the City Council of
the City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



      K.   The words “Planning and Zoning Commission” mean the
Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



      L.   The word “state” means the State of Iowa.



      M.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text
shall control.



165.10   ZONING REGULATIONS.



165.11   PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose and intent of the Hiawatha Unified Development Code, as set
forth in this section are to improve and protect the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare.  The fulfillment of this purpose
and intent is to be accomplished by seeking:



   1.   To lessen congestion on the public streets.



   2.   To avoid undue concentration of population.



   3.   To prevent the overcrowding of land, thereby ensuring living
and working conditions and preventing the development of blight and slums.



   4.   To establish adequate standards for the provision of light, air
and open spaces.



   5.   To facilitate the provision of adequate transportation, and of
other public requirements and services such as water, sewerage, schools and
parks.



   6.   To zone and subdivide property with a view to conserving the
value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land
throughout the City.



   7.   To protect residential, business, commercial, and industrial
areas alike from harmful encroachment by incompatible uses and to ensure that
land allocated to a class of uses shall not be usurped by other inappropriate
uses.



   8.   To avoid the inappropriate development of lands and provide for
adequate drainage, curbing of erosion and reduction of flood damage.



   9.   To fix reasonable standards to which improvements, buildings
and structures shall conform.



   10.   To prevent such additions to, and alterations/remodeling of,
existing buildings or structures as would not comply with the restrictions
and limitations imposed herein.



   11.   To foster a more rational pattern and relationship among
residential, business, commercial and manufacturing uses for the mutual
benefit of all.



   12.   To isolate or control the location of unavoidable nuisance
producing uses.



   13.   To prescribe penalties for any violation of the provisions of
this Code or of any amendment thereto.



165.12   APPLICABILITY.



   1.   Accordance with Comprehensive Plan.  The standards and
requirements contained in this Code, and the district mapping reflected on
the Hiawatha Zoning District Map, have all been made in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan for the City.



   2.   General Application.  All buildings and structures erected
hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established hereafter, all
alterations or relocation of existing structures occurring hereafter and all
enlargements of, additions to, changes in, and relocation of existing uses
occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this Code which
are applicable to the districts in which such buildings, structures, uses or
land are located.  Existing buildings, structures and uses in place on the
date of the passage of this chapter which do not comply with the regulations
of this Code shall be allowed to continue subject to the provisions of
Section 165.70 of this Code relating to nonconforming uses.



   3.   Conversion of Use or Building.  The conversion of any use or
building either to another use or to increase the size or area of the
existing use, including the conversion of any building or the conversion of
any dwelling to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units, families,
or residents, shall be permitted only within a district in which a new
building for similar occupancy would be permitted under this Code, and only
when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements in such
district, with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling unit,
percentage of lot coverage, dimensions of yards and other open spaces,
height, floor area ratio, off-street parking and any other applicable
requirements, except as may be allowed by the provisions of Section 165.70.



   4.   Building Permits Issued Prior to Effective Date of Chapter. 
Where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in
accordance with law prior to the effective date of this chapter, and provided
that construction is begun within six months of such effective date and
diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or structure may be
completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the
building permit has been issued, and further may, upon completion, be
occupied under a Certificate of Occupancy by the use for which originally
designated even if said building or structure is nonconforming under the
terms of this Code.



165.13   INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS.



   1.   Use Determinations.  The purpose of a use determination is to
verify if a proposed use which is not listed in the Land Use Matrix for a
given zoning district may be established in that district.  The City Council
shall determine whether a use not expressly identified shall be allowed in a
district as a permitted use, conditional use, or accessory use.  Action by
the City Council to either approve or disapprove such use shall be by
official resolution.  In issuing such use determination, the City Council
shall be guided by the following standards:



      A.   Permitted or Conditional.  The City Council shall
determine whether a use not listed in the Land Use Matrix is to be considered
a permitted or conditional use in a particular zoning district based on its
similarity to the uses listed.  No use interpretation shall permit any use
in a district as a permitted use if such use is already listed in the
district as a conditional use. 



      B.   Minimum Requirements Met.  No use interpretation shall
permit any use in any district unless it can comply with all regulations
established for that particular district.



      C.   Compliance with Conditional Use Permit Requirements.  If
the proposed use is more similar to uses listed as conditional uses than it
is to the listed permitted uses in the district for which it is proposed,
then any interpretation permitting such use shall identify it as a
conditional use and specify that before such use may be established the
requirements of Section 165.83 herein must be met.



      D.   Accessory.  Uses not listed for a given zoning district
may be established as accessory uses whenever the City determines that they
are clearly incidental and subordinate to a primary use allowed in that
district, are associated with its operation and will not have an adverse
impact on adjacent properties.



      E.   Planned Unit Development Overlay Districts.  Uses which
are not listed in a zone district underlying a PUD designation may be
permitted if determined by the City to be compatible with and/or accessory to
the proposed development and other allowed uses.



   2.   Addition of Uses Permitted by District Through
Interpretation.  All uses permitted by City Council through the use
interpretation procedure described in Section 165.13(1) immediately
preceding, shall, by amendment, be added to the appropriate district of the
Land Use Matrix and Land Use List at the next periodic updating and revision
of this Code.



   3.   Unlawful Existing Uses.  Any building, structure, or use which
was not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this Code shall not
become or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of this Code; and
to the extent or manner that said unlawful building, structure, or use is in
conflict with the requirements of this Code, said building, structure, or use
remains unlawful hereunder.



165.14   ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.



   The zoning districts established by this Code are named and described
below.  They consist of basic districts and overlay districts, both of which
are considered zoning districts for the purposes of this Code.  The
relationship between the zoning districts established by this Code and zoning
districts established under previous enactments of City Zoning Regulations is
stated in Section 165.17(3).



   1.   A-Agriculture Zone District.  The A-Agriculture Zone District
is intended to preserve existing agriculture and other non-intensive uses to
prevent premature development and non-orderly encroachment of intensive urban
uses, and to help guide urban growth into suitable areas.



   2.   R-1 Single Family Residence District.  The R-1 Single Family
Residence District is intended to provide single family areas on lots larger
than other R Districts and protect such areas from the encroachment of
incompatible uses.



   3.   R-3 Single Family Residence District.  The R-3 Single Family
Residence District is intended to provide and maintain residential areas
characterized predominantly by single family dwellings.  This District is
intended to provide for development on lots of moderate size and to protect
these residential areas from encroachment of incompatible uses.



   4.   R-5 Residence District. The R-5 Residence District is intended
to provide areas for a wider range of housing types including one-family
dwellings, homes on zero lot lines, and two-family attached units while
maintaining a moderate density residential character.



   5.   R-7 Multiple Family Residence District.  The R-7 Multiple
Family Residence District is intended to provide and maintain areas for
higher density residential uses with certain compatible institutional housing
types and limited non-dwelling uses.



   6.   R-MH Mobile Home Park Residence District.  The R-MH Mobile
Home Park Residence District is intended to accommodate mobile home parks in
those areas of the city where such use will be compatible with existing and
future development.  This District will generally be associated with
outlying areas of the City and should be well served by arterial streets to
provide adequate access.



   7.   C-ORS Office/Research/Service District.  The C-ORS
Office/Research/Service District is designed to provide areas for the
development of office, research, service, production and assembly.  It is
designated to accommodate office buildings, similar structures and
complementary uses in a mutually compatible environment.



   8.   C-2 Neighborhood Convenience District.  The C-2 Neighborhood
Convenience District is intended to provide convenience shopping for persons
residing in adjacent residential areas, and to permit only such uses as are
necessary to satisfy those basic shopping needs which occur frequently and so
require shopping facilities in relative proximity to places of residence.



   9.   C-3 Restricted Highway Commercial District.  The C-3 Highway
Commercial District is intended to accommodate those motorist-oriented
commercial activities which are compatible with the predominantly retail uses
permitted in other commercial districts, and whose service area is not
confined to any one neighborhood or community.



   10.   C-4 General Highway Commercial District.  The C-4 District is
intended primarily to furnish areas served by a wide variety of services. 
The mix of uses is intended to be extremely broad and more intense than the
C-2 or C-3 districts and provide the transition to I-1 and I-2 Districts.



   11.   C-R Commercial-Recreation District.  The C-R
Commercial-Recreation District is primarily designed to accommodate those
commercial-recreational facilities which occupy large tracts of land and/or
generate substantial volumes of traffic.



   12.   C-WH Commercial Warehouse District.  The C-WH Commercial
Warehouse District is primarily intended to accommodate wholesale
establishments and warehouses and a limited number of heavy commercial uses
whose service area is not confined to any one neighborhood or community. 
Within the district, general retail uses would be incompatible.



   13.   I-1 Restricted Industrial District.  I-1 Restricted
Industrial District is intended to provide an environment suitable for light
industrial activities that do not create appreciable nuisances or hazards and
which seek a hazard and nuisance free environment.



   14.   I-2 General Industrial District.  The I-2 General Industrial
District is intended to accommodate those industrial activities which may
produce nuisances or hazards in areas that are relatively remote from
residential and commercial development.



   15.   FP Flood Plain Overlay District.  The FP Flood Plain Overlay
District is superimposed over other districts.  The City has established the
Flood Plain Overlay District to address developments which require special
attention and treatment regardless of the underlying land use allowed by the
City’s Zoning Regulations.  The Flood Plain Overlay District is intended
to alert developers to issues they need to address in preparing an
application for development.  This District includes lands subject to
inundation as a result of a 100-year flood, i.e. a flood having a one percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.  Regulations which
apply to the Flood Plain Overlay District are stated in Section 165.16 and
Chapter 161 Flood Plain.



   16.   PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District.  The PUD
Planned Unit Development Overlay District is intended to encourage innovation
and flexibility in planning the development of land so development is
compatible with the site’s physical and environmental characteristics. 
This District allows for flexibility in zone district requirements as well as
permitted uses.  The Planned Unit Development Overlay District provides an
opportunity for the development of a mixture of uses and housing types in a
coordinated manner.  The intent underlying zone district shall guide the
development.  It is incumbent upon the person proposing the PUD to justify
the PUD, and the variations from the underlying zone district.  A PUD is
considered an amendment to the underlying zone district regulations. 
Section 165.66 specifies the PUD requirements and Sections 165.90 and 165.91
refer to amendments.



   17.   CPR Center Point Road District.  The CPR Center Point Road
District is intended primarily to provide areas for the development of
commercial and residential uses in the core area of the City located along
Center Point Road.  The CPR Center Point Road District shall be divided into
districts each with its own requirements including uses and regulations. 
The districts within the Center Point Road zoning district area shall be
designated as follows:  CPR-1, CPR-2 and CPR-3. 



165.15   LAND USE REGULATIONS.



   1.   Types of Uses.  This section regulates the establishment of
land uses in each of the zoning and overlay districts.  Uses have been
divided into four types which are listed and described below:



      A.   Principal Permitted Uses.  Principal permitted uses are
land uses allowed in a given zoning district without special review because
they are considered compatible with the intent of the district.  However,
the buildings or structures which contain such uses, and the site development
necessary for their establishment must meet the development regulations and
plan review requirements established in this Code.  Permitted uses are
indicated in the Land Use Matrix in Figure I by the letter “P.”



      B.   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are land uses which
have potential for causing adverse impacts on other uses because of such
factors as location, method of operation, scale or intensity of activity, or
traffic generated.  Conditional uses as listed for each district may be
permitted within that district upon approval by the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with the procedures provided in Section 165.83 in which conditions
may be imposed to insure compatibility, and a conditional use permit must be
obtained before a conditional use is established.  However, any use lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this Code may so continue without
approval by the Board of Adjustment.  However, for any expansion or addition
of structures, parking areas or driveways, there shall be a site development
plan approved according to the requirements of Section 165.84, prior to
construction or issuance of a building permit if required.  Conditional uses
may also be denied if it is not possible to mitigate adverse impacts. 
Conditional uses are indicated in the Land Use Matrix in Figure I by the
letter “C.”



      C.   Accessory Uses.  Accessory uses are land uses which are
clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a property, and
cannot be established unless the principal use is also established.



         (1)   Accessory uses are located on the same zoning lot
as the principal building, structure, or use served, except as otherwise
expressly authorized by the provisions of this Code.



         (2)   Accessory uses contribute to the comfort,
convenience, necessity, or benefit of the occupants, employees, customers, or
visitors of or to the principal building, structure, or use served. 



      D.   Uses Not Allowed; Uses Not Listed.  Uses not allowed are
land uses which cannot be established in a given zoning district because they
are considered incompatible with the intent of the district.  Uses which are
not listed in the Land Use Matrix are not allowed in a given zoning district
unless indicated otherwise using the procedure for making use determinations
(see Section 165.13).  Uses in addition to those permitted in the underlying
zone of a PUD overlay district must be justified by the applicant and may be
approved as part of the PUD approval.



   2.   Land Use Matrix.  Figure I† 1 is hereby designated as the
City Land Use Matrix.  The Land Use Matrix contains a list of land uses and
indicates if a given land use is allowed as a permitted or conditional use in
Hiawatha Zoning Districts.  Figure I lists land uses allowed by zoning
district.  It is the intent of this Code that Figure I and the text of this
Code be consistent.  Where an inconsistency occurs, the text of this Code
shall govern.  Where regulations for specific land uses have been
established, the regulations appear in Section 165.16 and the Land Use Matrix
in Figure 1.  If a land use is not listed in the Land Use Matrix, Section
165.13 establishes a procedure for determining whether this use is allowed as
permitted or conditional in a given district.



165.16   LAND USES AND REGULATIONS BY DISTRICT.



   Land use regulations and standards for development in all districts are
provided by zone districts.



   1.   A-Agriculture Zone District.


Minimum lot size for single-family dwellings is 1 acre



      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Lot Size, Density and Bulk Requirements.



 

Uses
 
Minimum Lot Size Requirement
 
Minimum Yard Requirements
 
Maximum Height


Lot Area
 
Lot Width
 
Lot Area Per D.U.
 
Front Yard
 
Interior Side Yards
 
Corner Side Yard
 
Rear Yard


Single
 
Combined




Principal
Permitted Uses:


Single-Family Dwellings
 
1 acre
 
150 feet
 
1 acre
 
35 feet
 
15 feet
 
30 feet
 
25 feet
 
35 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 35 feet


Family Home
 
1 acre
 
150 feet
 
1 acre
 
35 feet
 
15 feet
 
30 feet
 
25 feet
 
35 feet
 
35 feet


Agriculture Use Structures
 
???
 
???
 
???
 
35 feet
 
15 feet
 
30 feet
 
25 feet
 
35 feet
 
45 feet


Other Uses
 
1 acre
 
150 feet
 
???
 
35 feet
 
15 feet
 
30 feet
 
25 feet
 
35 feet
 
45 feet


Conditional Uses:


Group Homes
 
1 acre
 
150 feet
 
1 acre
 
35 feet
 
15 feet
 
30 feet
 
25 feet
 
35 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 35 feet


Other Uses
 
As specified by Board of Adjustment


Supplementary
Side Yard
Requirements:
 
For all permitted principal and conditional uses, the minimum width of a
required single side yard shall be increased by one foot for every 200 square
feet that the surface area of a structure wall on the same lot and facing
such side yard exceeds 900 square feet in area.  However, the additional
width required shall not exceed 15 feet.




 



      C.   Special Use Permit.  See Sections 165.25 and 165.85.



      D.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Sections 165.23(9).



      E.   Home Occupations.  Home occupations are permitted
subject to the provisions of Section 165.26.



      F.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166.



      G.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.  Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Section
165.30-165.36.



   2.   R-1 Single Family Residence District.


Minimum lot size for single-family dwellings is 10,000 sq. ft.

      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Lot Size, Density and Bulk Requirements.



 

Uses
 
Minimum Lot Size Requirement
 
Minimum Yard Requirements
 
Maximum Height


Lot Area
 
Lot Width
 
Lot Area Per D.U.
 
Front Yard
 
Interior Side Yards
 
Corner Side Yard
 
Rear Yard


Single
 
Combined




Principal
Permitted Uses:


One-Family Unit, Detached
 
10,000 sq. ft.
 
70 feet
 
10,000 sq. ft.
 
30 feet
 
8 feet
 
17 feet
 
20 feet
 
30 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 35 feet


Family Home
 
10,000 sq. ft.
 
70 feet
 
10,000 sq. ft.
 
30 feet
 
8 feet
 
17 feet
 
20 feet
 
30 feet
 
35 feet


Agriculture Use Structures
 
3 acres
 
???
 
???
 
30 feet
 
15 feet
 
30 feet
 
20 feet
 
30 feet
 
35 feet


Other Uses
 
10,000 sq. ft.
 
70 feet
 
???
 
30 feet
 
15 feet
 
30 feet
 
20 feet
 
30 feet
 
35 feet


Conditional Uses:


Cemetery Use Structures
 
10 acres
 
300 feet
 
???
 
30 feet
 
15 feet
 
30 feet
 
20 feet
 
30 feet
 
35 feet


Day Care Center
 
10,000 sq. ft.
 
70 feet
 
???
 
30 feet
 
15 feet
 
30 feet
 
20 feet
 
30 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 35 feet


Group Homes
 
1 acre
 
70 feet
 
10,000 sq. ft.
 
30 feet
 
8 feet
 
17 feet
 
20 feet
 
30 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 35 feet


Nursery Use Structures
 
10 acres
 
200 feet
 
???
 
30 feet
 
15 feet
 
30 feet
 
20 feet
 
30 feet
 
35 feet


Supplementary
Side Yard
Requirements:
 
For all permitted principal and conditional uses, the minimum width of a
required single side yard shall be increased by one foot for every 200 square
feet that the surface area of a structure wall on the same lot and facing
such side yard exceeds 900 square feet in area.  However, the additional
width required shall not exceed 15 feet.




 



      C.   Special Use Permit.  See Sections 165.25 and 165.85.



      D.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Sections 165.23(9).



      E.   Home Occupations.  Home occupations are permitted
subject to the provisions of Section 165.26.



      F.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166.



      G.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.  Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Sections
165.30-165.36.



   3.   R-3 Single Family Residence District.

Minimum lot size for single-family dwellings is 7,500 sq. ft.

      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Lot Size, Density and Bulk Requirements.



 

Uses
 
Minimum Lot Size Requirement
 

Minimum Yard Requirements

 
Maximum Height


Lot Area
 
Lot Width
 
Lot Area Per D.U.
 
Front Yard
 
Interior Side Yards
 
Corner Side Yard
 
Rear Yard


Single
 
Combined




Principal
Permitted Uses:


One-Family Unit, Detached
 
7,500
sq. ft.
 
60 feet
 
7,500
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 35 feet


Family Home
 
7,500
sq. ft.
 
60 feet
 
7,500
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
35 feet


Other Uses
 
10,000 sq. ft.
 
70 feet
 
???
 
25 feet
 
12 feet
 
25 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
35 feet


Conditional Uses:


Agriculture Use Structures
 
3 acres
 
???
 
???
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
35 feet


Cemetery Use Structures
 
5 acres
 
200 feet
 
???
 
25 feet
 
12 feet
 
25 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
35 feet


Day Care Center
 
7,500
sq. ft.
 
60 feet
 
???
 
25 feet
 
12 feet
 
25 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 35 feet


Group Homes
 
7,500
sq. ft.
 
60 feet
 
7,500
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 35 feet


Supplementary
Side Yard
Requirements:
 
For all permitted principal and conditional uses, the minimum width of a
required single side yard shall be increased by one foot for every 200 square
feet that the surface area of a structure wall on the same lot and facing
such side yard exceeds 900 square feet in area. However, the additional width
required shall not exceed 15 feet.




 



      C.   Special Use Permit.  See Sections 165.25 and 165.85.



      D.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 165.23(9).



      E.   Home Occupations.  Home occupations are permitted
subject to the provisions of Section 165.26.



      F.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166.



      G.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.  Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Sections
165.30-165.36.



   4.   R-5 Residence District.

Minimum lot area per dwelling is 3,000 sq. ft.

      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Lot Size, Density and Bulk Requirements.



 

Uses
 
Minimum Lot Size Requirement
 
Minimum Yard Requirements
 
Maximum Height


Lot Area
 
Lot Width
 
Lot Area Per D.U.
 
Front Yard
 
Interior Side Yards
 
Corner Side Yard
 
Rear Yard


Single
 
Combined




Principal
Permitted Uses:


One-Family Unit, Detached
 
6,000
sq. ft.
 
50 feet
 
6,000
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 35 feet


Family Home
 
6,000
sq. ft.
 
60 feet
 
6,000
sq. feet
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 35 feet


Group Home
 
6,000
sq. ft.
 
60 feet
 
6,000
sq. feet
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 35 feet


Zero Lot Line
 
3,500
sq. ft.
 
40 feet
 
3,500
sq. feet
 
25 feet
 
7 feet
 
15 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 35 feet


Two-Family Unit, Attached
 
6,000
sq. feet
 
60 feet
 
3,000
sq. feet
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 35 feet


Conditional Uses:


Day Care Center
 
5,000
sq. ft.
 
50 feet
 
???
 
25 feet
 
12 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 35 feet


Other Uses
 
As specified by Board of Adjustment


Supplementary
Side Yard
Requirements:
 





 



      C.   Special Use Permit.  See Sections 165.25 and 165.85.



      D.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 165.23(9).



      E.   Home Occupations.  Home occupations are permitted
subject to the provisions of Section 165.26.



      F.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166.



      G.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.  Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Sections
165.30-165.36.



   5.   R-7 Multiple Family Residence District


Minimum lot size per dwelling is 1,200 sq. ft.

      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Lot Size, Density and Bulk Requirements.



 

Uses
 
Minimum Lot Size Requirement
 

Minimum Yard Requirements

 
Maximum Height


Lot Area
 
Lot Width
 
Lot Area Per D.U.
 
Front Yard
 
Interior Side Yards
 
Corner Side Yard
 
Rear Yard


Single
 
Combined




Principal
Permitted Uses:


Family Home
 
6,000
sq. ft.
 
60 feet
 
6,000
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 45 feet


Row House Dwellings
 
???
 
30 feet 1
 
4,000
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
8 feet 2
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 45 feet


Two-Family Unit, Attached
 
5,000
sq. ft.
 
50 feet
 
2,500
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
15 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 45 feet


Zero Lot Line
 
3,500
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
3,500
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
15 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 45 feet


Group Home
 
6,000
sq. ft.
 
60 feet
 
6,000
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 45 feet


Multiple-Family Units
 
???
 
60 feet
 
1,200
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
8 feet
 
20 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
45 feet


Rooming and Boarding House
 
???
 
60 feet
 
1,200
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
8 feet
 
20 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
45 feet


Fraternities and Sororities
 
???
 
60 feet
 
600
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
8 feet
 
20 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
45 feet


Other Uses
 
???
 
60 feet
 
???
 
25 feet
 
8 feet
 
20 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet
 
45 feet


1 Per row house dwelling
2 Interior side yards for other than end row house units are 0.


Conditional Uses:


One-Family Unit, Detached
 
5,000
sq. ft.
 
50 feet
 
5,000
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
15 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or 45 feet


Other Uses
 
As specified by Board of Adjustment


Supplementary
Side Yard
Requirements:
 
For all permitted principal and conditional uses, the minimum width of a
required single side yard shall be increased by one foot for every 200 square
feet that the surface area of a structure wall on the same lot and facing
such side yard exceeds 900 square feet in areas.  However, the additional
width required shall not exceed 15 feet.




 



      C.   Special Use Permit.  See Sections 165.25 and 165.85.



      D.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 165.23(9).



      E.   Home Occupations.  Home occupations are permitted
subject to the provisions of Section 165.26.



      F.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166.



      G.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.  Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Sections
165.30-165.36.



   6.   R-MH Mobile Home Park Residence District.



      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Lot Size, Density and Bulk Requirements.



 

Uses
 
Minimum Lot Size Requirement
 
Minimum Yard Requirements
 
Maximum Height


Lot Area
 
Lot Width
 
Lot Area Per D.U.
 
Front Yard
 
Interior Side Yards
 
Corner Side Yard
 
Rear Yard


Single
 
Combined




Principal
Permitted Uses:


Family Home
 
6,000 sq. ft.
 
60 feet
 
6,000
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or
45 feet


Conditional Uses:


One-Family Unit, Detached
 
5,000 sq. ft.
 
50 feet
 
5,000
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
15 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or
45 feet


Two-Family Units, Attached
 
5,000 sq. ft.
 
50 feet
 
2,500
sq. ft.
 
25 feet
 
5 feet
 
14 feet
 
15 feet
 
25 feet
 
3 habitable stories or
45 feet


Other Uses
 
As specified by Board of Adjustment


Supplementary
Side Yard
Requirements:
 
For all permitted principal and conditional uses, the minimum width of a
required single side yard shall be increased by one foot for every 200 square
feet that the surface area of a structure wall on the same lot and facing
such side yard exceeds 900 square feet in area. However, the additional width
required shall not exceed 15 feet.




 



      C.   Additional Standards and Regulations.  See Chapter 146
Manufactured Mobile and Modular Homes and Chapter 147 Mobile Home Parks for
standards and regulations governing the R-MH district.



      D.   Special Use Permit.  See Sections 165.25 and 165.85.



      E.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 165.23(9).



      F.   Home Occupations.  Home occupations are permitted
subject to the provisions of Section 165.26.



      G.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166.



   7.   C-ORS Office/Research/Service District.



      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Minimum Yard Requirements:



         (1)   Front yards:  25 feet.



         (2)   Corner side yards:  25 feet.



         (3)   Rear yards:  25 feet.



         (4)   Interior side yards:  15 feet.



         (5)   Transitional yards:  If C-ORS property is
adjacent to an agricultural or residential zone district, the requirements of
Section 165.23(6) shall be followed.



      C.   Maximum Height Requirement:  35 feet.



      D.   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted
subject to Section 165.83.



      E.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 165.23(9).



      F.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166.



      G.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.  Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Section
165.30-165.36.



      H.   Outdoor Lighting.  Outdoor lighting shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 168.



   8.   C-2 Neighborhood Convenience District.



      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Conditions For Uses Permitted.  Uses permitted in the
C-2 District are subject to the following conditions:



         (1)   All business establishments shall be retail or
service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on
the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced.



         (2)   Business establishments are restricted to a
maximum gross floor area of 12,000 square feet each, exclusive of any floor
area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities.



         (3)   All activities, except for off-street parking or
loading shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.



         (4)   Establishments of the “drive-in” type offering
goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor vehicles are
not permitted.



      C.   Minimum Lot Size Requirements.  1,800 square feet of lot
for each dwelling unit.



      D.   Minimum Yard Requirements.



         (1)   Front yards:  25 feet.



         (2)   Corner side yards:  15 feet.



         (3)   None for rear yard, except for transitional yards.



         (4)   None for interior side yards, except for
transitional yards.



         (5)   Transitional yards:  If C-2 property is adjacent
to an agricultural or residential zone district, the requirements of Section
165.23(6) shall be followed.



      E.   Maximum Height Requirement.  35 feet.



      F.   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted
subject to Section 165.83.



      G.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of paragraph B of this subsection and Section 165.23(9).



      H.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166.



      I.   Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Section
165.30-165.36.



      J.   Outdoor Lighting.  Outdoor lighting shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 68.



   9.   C-3 Restricted Highway Commercial District.



      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Conditions For Uses Permitted.  Uses permitted in the
C-3 District are subject to the following conditions:



         (1)   All business, servicing, or processing shall be
conducted within completely enclosed buildings, with the following
exceptions: 



            a.   Establishments of the “drive-in” type,
offering goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor
vehicles and which are permitted in a C-3 zone.



            b.   Outside storage and display of merchandise
for sale to the public in accordance with Section 165.23(9).



            c.   Off-street park and loading.



            d.   Activities specifically permitted unenclosed
in the Land Use Matrix Figure 1.



         (2)   Drive-in establishments are permitted for any use
permitted in the C-3 District unless other restrictions are specified.



         (3)   Repair and servicing of any article, the sale of
which is a permitted use in the C-3 District, is permitted unless other
restrictions are specified.



      C.   Minimum Lot Size Requirements. 



      D.   Minimum Yard Requirements.



         (1)   Front yards:  25 feet.



         (2)   Corner side yards:  15 feet.



         (3)   Rear yards:  15 feet.



         (4)   Interior side yards:  0 feet.



         (5)   Transitional yards:  If C-3 property is adjacent
to an agricultural or residential zone district, the requirements of Section
165.23(6) shall be followed. 



   EXCEPTION: For every three feet that a structure exceeds 45 feet in
height, the required front, rear, and side yards shall be increased by one
foot.



      E.   Maximum Height Requirement.  100 feet.



      F.   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted
subject to Section 165.83.



      G.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of paragraph B of this subsection and Section 165.23(9).



      H.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166.



      I.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.  Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Section
165.30-165.36.



      J.   Outdoor Lighting.  Outdoor lighting shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 68.



   10.   C-4 General Highway Commercial District.



      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Conditions For Uses Permitted.  Uses permitted in the
C-4 District are subject to the following conditions:



         (1)   All business, servicing or processing shall be
conducted within completely enclosed buildings, with the following exceptions:



            a.   Establishments of the “drive-in” type,
offering goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked motor
vehicles.



            b.   Off-street parking and loading.



            c.   Outside storage and merchandise displays
complying with Section 165.23(9).



            d.   Other activities specifically permitted
unenclosed in the Land Use Matrix Figure 1.



         (2)   Repair and servicing of any article the sale of
which is a permitted use in the District is allowed.



      C.   Minimum Lot Size Requirements. 



      D.   Minimum Yard Requirements.



         (1)   Front yards:  25 feet.



         (2)   Corner side yards:  15 feet.



         (3)   Rear yards: 15 feet.



         (4)   Interior side yards:  0 feet.



         (5)   Transitional yards:  If C-4 property is adjacent
to an agricultural or residential zone district, the requirements of Section
165.23(6) shall be followed.



   EXCEPTION: For every three feet that a structure exceeds 45 feet in
height, the required front, rear, and side yards shall be increased by one
foot.



      E.   Maximum Height Requirement:  100 feet.



      F.   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted
subject to Section 165.83.



      G.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of paragraph B of this subsection and Section 165.23(9).



      H.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166.



      I.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.  Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Section
165.30-165.36.



      J.   Outdoor Lighting.  Outdoor lighting shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 68.



   11.   C-R Commercial-Recreation District.



      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Minimum Yard Requirements.



         (1)   Front yards:  25 feet.



         (2)   Corner side yards:  25 feet.



         (3)   Rear yards:  25 feet.



         (4)   Interior side yards:  15 feet.



         (5)   Transitional yards:  If C-R property is adjacent
to an agricultural or residential zone district, the requirements of Section
165.23(6) shall be followed.



   EXCEPTION: For every three feet that a structure exceeds 45 feet in
height, the required front, rear, and side yards shall be increased by one
foot.



      C.   Maximum Height Requirement.  100 feet.



      D.   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted
subject to Section 165.83.



      E.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 165.23(9).



      F.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166.



      G.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.  Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Section
165.30-165.36.



      H.   Outdoor Lighting.  Outdoor lighting shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Section 165.28.



   12.   C-WH Commercial Warehouse District.



      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Minimum Yard Requirements.



         (1)   Front yards:  25 feet.



         (2)   Corner side yards:  25 feet.



         (3)   Rear yards:  25 feet.



         (4)   Interior side yards:  15 feet.



         (5)   Transitional yards:  If C-WH property is adjacent
to an agricultural or residential zone district, the requirements of Section
165.23(6) shall be followed.



   EXCEPTION: For every three feet that a structure exceeds 45 feet in
height, the required front, rear, and side yards shall be increased by one
foot.



      C.   Maximum Height Requirement.  100 feet.



      D.   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted
subject to Section 165.83.



      E.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 165.23(9).



      F.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166.



      G.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.  Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Section
165.30-165.36.



      H.   Outdoor Lighting.  Outdoor lighting shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 68.



   13.   I-1 Restricted Industrial District.



      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Conditions For Uses Permitted.  Uses permitted in the
I-1 District are subject to the following conditions:



         (1)   All business, servicing, or processing, except for
off-street parking and off-street loading shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings, unless otherwise indicated hereinafter.



         (2)   All storage except for motor vehicles in operable
condition shall be within completely enclosed buildings or effectively
screened with landscaping and building elements or by a solid wall or fence,
including solid entrance and exit gates, not less than 6 feet nor more than 8
feet in height.  Surfaces of the storage area and accesses shall comply with
165.23(9)(C)(7).  Accessory vehicle parking shall be as regulated by Section
165.30 through 165.36.  Non-accessory vehicles, machines and equipment shall
be regulated by Section 165.23(9) or shall be parked on a parking lot
complying with Section 165.30 through 165.36.



         (3)   Use of a lot on which the owner desires to use for
storage purposes only without constructing a principal building will have the
following requirements:



            a.   No servicing of vehicles or equipment or
sales of any items will be allowed for this storage area.



            b.   Storage area shall not have any signage or
product representation except what is required for emergency or safety
related signs.



            c.   A person shall not store outside a legally or
mechanically inoperative or wrecked motor vehicle for a period in excess of
30 days.



            d.   This storage area must have screening as
required in Section 165.23(6)(B).



            e.   Access through required screening may be
provided only by an opaque gate equaling the height of the screening.  Gate
must be set at the specified line of the front yard setback for that zoning
district and must remain closed except when in actual use.  A landscape plan
meeting the requirements of the actual zoning district must be supplied with
the site plan.



            f.   Storm water detention must be allowed for in
the site development process.



            g.   A minimum of 500 feet is required between
this use and any residential uses in the Unified Development Code.



            h.   Entrance and access drive shall be of PCC
Concrete.



            i.   Rock, gravel or dust free surfaces approved
by the City Engineer required on any areas used for storage.



            j.   Storage area shall not be the location of
multiple semi-trailers which have the effect of creating interior enclosed
storage spaces.



      C.   Minimum Yard Requirements.



         (1)   Front yards:  35 feet.



         (2)   Corner side yards:  25 feet.



         (3)   Rear yards:  25 feet.



         (4)   Interior side yards:  15 feet.



         (5)   Transitional yards:  If I-1 property is adjacent
to an agricultural or residential zone district, the requirements of Section
165.23(6) shall be followed.



   EXCEPTION: For every three feet that a structure exceeds 45 feet in
height, the required front, rear, and side yards shall be increased by one
foot.



      D.   Maximum Height Requirement.  150 feet.



      E.   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted
subject to Section 165.83.



      F.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of paragraph B of this subsection and Section 165.23(9).



      G.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166.



      H.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.  Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Section
165.30-165.36.



      I.   Outdoor Lighting.  Outdoor lighting shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 68.



   14.   I-2 General Industrial District.



      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Conditions For Uses Permitted:  Uses permitted in the
I-2 District are subject to the following conditions:



         (1)   All business, servicing, or processing, within 300
feet of a Residential or Commercial District, shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings.



         (2)   All storage except for motor vehicles in operable
condition shall be within completely enclosed buildings or effectively
screened with landscaping and building elements or by a solid wall or fence
from the right of way and Residential Districts within 300 feet, including
solid entrance and exit gates, not less than 6 feet nor more than 8 feet in
height.  In the event a solid wall is used to satisfy this requirement the
required yards of this district shall apply exterior to the wall.  Surfaces
of the storage area and accesses shall comply with Section 165.23(9)(C)(7). 
Accessory vehicle parking shall be as regulated by Section 165.30 through
165.36.  Non-accessory vehicles, machines and equipment shall be regulated
by Section 165.23(9) or parked on a parking lot complying with Section 165.30
through 165.36.



         (3)   Use of a lot on which the owner desires to use for
storage purposes only without constructing a principal building will have the
following requirements:



            a.   No servicing of vehicles or equipment or
sales of any items will be allowed for this storage area.



            b.   Storage area shall not have any signage or
product representation except what is required for emergency or safety
related signs.



            c.   A person shall not store outside a legally or
mechanically inoperative or wrecked motor vehicle for a period in excess of
30 days.



            d.   This storage area must have screening as
required in Section 165.23(6)(B).



            e.   Access through required screening may be
provided only by an opaque gate equaling the height of the screening.  Gate
must be set at the specified line of the front yard setback for that zoning
district and must remain closed except when in actual use.  A landscape plan
meeting the requirements of the actual zoning district must be supplied with
the site plan.



            f.   Storm water detention must be allowed for in
the site development process.



            g.   A minimum of 500 feet is required between
this use and any residential uses in the Unified Development Code.



            h.   Entrance and access drive shall be of PCC
Concrete.



            i.   Rock, gravel or dust free surfaces approved
by the City Engineer required on any areas used for storage.



            j.   Storage area shall not be the location of
multiple semi-trailers which have the effect of creating interior enclosed
storage spaces.



      C.   Minimum Yard Requirements.



         (1)   Front yards:  35 feet.



         (2)   Corner side yards:  25 feet.



         (3)   Rear yards:  25 feet.



         (4)   Interior side yards:  15 feet.



         (5)   Transitional yards:  If I-2 property is adjacent
to an agricultural or residential zone district, the requirements of Section
165.23(6) shall be followed.



   EXCEPTION: For every three feet that a structure exceeds 45 feet in
height, the required front, rear, and side yards shall be increased by one
foot.



      D.   Maximum Height Requirement.  150 feet.



      E.   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted
subject to Section 165.83.



      F.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of paragraph B of this subsection and Section 165.23(9).



      G.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166.



      H.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.  Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Section
165.30-165.36.



      I.   Outdoor Lighting.  Outdoor lighting shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 68.



   15.   FP Flood Plain Overlay District.  Any development on or
proposed for lands within the jurisdiction of the City which is shown on the
Official Zoning Map as being within the boundaries of one floodway, floodway
fringe, general flood plain and shallow flooding districts shown on the
Official Flood Plain Zoning Map of the City is determined to be within the
Flood Plain Overlay District and subject to the flood plain regulations of
the City, Chapter 161 of this Code.



   16.   PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District.  The PUD
district is established as an overlay district to be used in conjunction with
all the base districts as established in Section 165.14(1) through 165.14(17).



      A.   General Requirements.  Planned Unit Developments are
permissible on any size tract of land.



         (1)   Permitted Uses.  When the PUD is to be developed
within an A or R District, any use listed as a permitted use in any A or R
District may be permitted provided any development adjacent to a district
boundary is similar in design to the requirements of the adjacent district or
meets the minimum requirements of Section 165.23(6) transitional yards. 
When the PUD is to be developed in any district other than an A or R
District, only the uses listed as permitted uses in the district within which
the PUD is to be located may be permitted, except for the C-ORS and C-4
Districts which may include additional uses with approval of the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council.



         (2)   Density and Design.  The density and design of a
PUD shall comply with the following requirements.



            a.   The average land area for each dwelling unit
contained in the site, exclusive of the area occupied by private streets or
public right-of-way, shall not be less than the lot area per dwelling unit
required in the district within which the development is located.



            b.   Each development shall provide reasonable
visual and acoustical privacy for any dwelling units included therein. 
Fences, walks, barriers, and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for
the protection and aesthetic enhancement of property and the privacy of its
occupants, screening of objectionable views or uses, and reduction of
noise.  Any high-rise buildings included within a PUD shall be located in
such a way as to minimize any adverse impact on any adjacent low-rise
buildings and shall not unduly encroach on the privacy of the occupants of
adjoining low-rise buildings.



            c.   Yard, setback, lot size, type of dwelling
unit, height and frontage requirements may be modified in any PUD, and use
restrictions may be also modified in a residential PUD as specified in
Section 165.16(16)(A)(1) above provided that the spirit and intent of this
section is complied with in the total development plan, as determined by the
City Council after report by the City Planning and Zoning Commission. The
City Planning and Zoning Commission may determine that certain setbacks shall
be required within all or a portion of the site, and shall determine whether
the total development plan complies with the spirit and intent of this
section and shall so state in its report to City Council.



         (3)   PUD Approval.  The approval of a PUD shall be by
the City Council after recommendation of the City Planning and Zoning
Commission, subject to procedures provided in Sections 165.66 and 165.91, and
building permits shall not be issued until approval of the Final Development
Plan.



         (4)   Development by Stages.  If the sequence of
construction of various portions of the PUD is to occur in stages, then the
off-street parking and any open space and/or recreational facilities, or any
other shared facilities as contained in the Approved Final Development Plan,
shall be developed, or committed thereto, in proportion to the number of
dwelling units or other establishments intended to be developed during the
given stage of construction. Furthermore, at no time during the construction
of the project shall the number of constructed dwelling units or other
establishments per acre of developed land exceed the overall density per acre
established in the Approved Final Development Plan.



   17.   CPR Center Point Road District CPR-1, CPR-2, CPR-3.



      A.   Land Uses.  Land uses shall be as designated in the Land
Use Matrix Figure 1.



      B.   Conditions For Uses Permitted.



         (1)   In CPR-1 dwelling units and rooming units are not
permitted below the second story.



         (2)   All activities, except for off-street parking or
loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.



      C.   Minimum Lot Size Requirements.  None.



      D.   Minimum Yard Requirements.



 

Description
 
CPR-1
 
CPR-2
 
CPR-3


Front Yards
 
0 feet
 
20 feet
 
25 feet


Corner Side Yards
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
15 feet


Rear Yards
 
15 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet


Interior Side Yards – Residential
 
0 feet
 
0 feet
 
0 feet


Interior Side Yards – Commercial
 
0 feet
 
0 feet
 
20 feet


Transitional Yards
 
0 feet
 
0 feet
 
0 feet



 



      E.   Maximum Height Requirements.



         CPR-1   55 feet



         CPR-2   45 feet



         CPR-3   45 feet



   In the CPR-1 district no building can exceed three stories.  No height
of building exceptions permitted in the CPR-1 district.



      F.   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted
subject to Section 165.83.



      G.   Accessory Uses.  Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional permitted use are permitted subject
to the provisions of paragraph B of this subsection and Section 165.23(9).



      H.   Signs.  Signs shall be permitted according to the
provisions of Chapter 166. 



      I.   Off-Street Parking and Loading.  Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
Section 165.30 – 165.36 and the provisions of this section with the
provisions of this section taking precedence over the provisions of Section
165.30 – 165.36.



         (1)   In District CPR-1 no off-street parking shall be
allowed between the right-of-way of Center Point Road and any building except
for parking that existed prior to August 1, 2013, and parking in accordance
with an approved plan.



         (2)   The maximum number of parking stalls required in
District CPR-1 shall be four stalls per 1,000 square feet of non-residential
space, plus two stalls per residential space. 



         (3)   In commercial areas parking may be located in the
yard setback areas.



      J.   Outdoor Lighting.  Outdoor lighting shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 68. 



      K.   Building Location.  In District CPR-1 all buildings with
any building face adjoining Center Point Road shall be constructed with the
primary or front face of the building toward Center Point Road.  The
preferred location for new buildings in District CPR-1 shall be in accordance
with Layout 1 or Layout 2 in Appendix B.



   Buildings configured in accordance with Layout 3 considered acceptable
as an expansion of an existing building or new building where Layout 3 is
approved by the City Council as part of a Conceptual Plan.  Buildings and
parking generally in accordance with Layout 4 in Appendix B are discouraged
and are allowed only with approval by the City Council as part of a
Conceptual Plan.



      L.   Architectural Requirements.  All buildings located in
District CPR-1 and CPR-2 shall be constructed with the primary building
material being an architectural masonry product.  The desired architectural
style or appearance is a distinctive style using clean or simple lines and
features.  Decorative and ornate architectural features generally not
allowed.  Individual building must comply with the architectural guidance
standards. 



      M.   Access Management and Control.  To minimize traffic
congestion and conflicting traffic movements along Center Point Road from
Blairs Ferry Road to Boysen Road the following access management and control
standards shall generally be applicable.



         (1)   No driveway access directly to Center Point Road
shall be permitted within 200 feet of any public street intersecting Center
Point Road.



         (2)   No driveway shall be permitted within 200 feet of
an existing driveway.



         (3)   All driveways and parking lots along Center Point
Road shall be developed in a manner in which there will be connectivity
between lots.  The connectivity requirement is to encourage the movement of
vehicles to public streets by means other than direct driveway access to
Center Point Road.



      N.   Conceptual Plan Approval.  The standards set forth for
building location, architectural requirements and access management and
control in the CPR District are inherently discretionary.  The final
decision with respect to building location, architectural requirements and
access management and control requirements in the CPR District rests with the
City Council.  Any party considering a development with the CPR District
that would need to comply with any or all of these three standards is
encouraged to submit a Conceptual Plan for review and consideration by the
City Council.



         (1)   A Conceptual Plan must show the building layout
including driveway and access.  The Conceptual Plan must show an
illustration of the architectural features of the building and identify
proposed building materials.  It is preferred, but not required, for the
Conceptual Plan to illustrate the architectural style in color. 



         (2)   The Conceptual Plan must be sufficiently complete
to allow the City to review and consider the issues of building location,
architectural requirements and access.  The Conceptual Plan is not required
to meet additional standards set forth for a site plan.



         (3)   The Conceptual Plan shall be submitted on drawings
not larger than 11-inch by 17-inch.



         (4)   The Conceptual Plan shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator.  The number of copies required shall be as determined
by the Zoning Administrator.



         (5)   Within 35 days after receipt of a Conceptual Plan
the Zoning Administrator shall complete its review in writing.



         (6)   Following completion of the review by the Zoning
Administrator, the Zoning Administrator will be reviewed by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.  The Zoning Administrator shall place the Conceptual Plan
on the next agenda of the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (7)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider
the Conceptual Plan within 45 days after referral from the Zoning
Administrator.  Following review by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or
the passage of 45 days without consideration by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the Conceptual Plan will be placed on the next available agenda
of the City Council for consideration.



         (8)   The City Council shall consider and take action on
the Conceptual Plan within 45 days after referral.  In the event the City
Council takes no action within 45 days the Conceptual Plan shall be deemed to
be denied, unless both parties mutually agree to an extension of the 45 day
period.



         (9)   Construction of the proposed buildings set forth
in an approved or conditionally approved Conceptual Plan must be initiated
within 36 months following final action by the City Council to approve or
conditionally approve the Conceptual Plan.  The period of validity of a
Conceptual Plan may be extended by the City Council.



165.17   ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING DISTRICT MAP.



   1.   Zoning District Map.  The Zoning District Map is on file in
the office of the City Clerk and is hereby incorporated into and made a part
of this Code.  The boundaries and classifications of the various zoning
districts have been enacted and established as shown on said Map, subject to
the provisions hereafter set out relating to subsequent district boundary
classification changes and amendments.  This Map shall be revised from time
to time and after approval by resolution of the City Council shall be
considered as incorporated into this Code.  Said Map is designed and
intended as a method and means of setting forth the boundaries and
classifications of various zoning districts as the same are shown on said
Map.  All notations, references, markings, and other information shown
thereon are hereby enacted and established as a part of the official
“District Map” for the City of Hiawatha, Iowa, and are made a part of
this chapter subject to the manner and method hereafter set out for
subsequently changing the district boundary classifications.



   2.   District Boundary Rules.  The following rules shall apply with
respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the Zoning
District Map:



      A.   General Rule.  District boundary lines are the
centerlines of highways, streets, and alleys; right-of-way lines of railroads
and freeways; section, division of section, tract and lot lines; or such
lines extended unless otherwise indicated.



      B.   Special Areas.  In areas not subdivided into lots and
blocks, and wherever a district is indicated as an area adjacent to and
paralleling a street or highway, the depth of such areas shall be in
accordance with dimensions scaled on the Map at right angles from the
centerline of the street or highway, and the length of frontage shall be in
accordance with dimensions scaled on the Map from section, quarter section,
or division lines, or centerlines of streets and highways, or railroad
rights-of-way, unless otherwise indicated.



      C.   Vacated Streets.  Whenever any street, alley, or other
public way is vacated by official action of the Council the district
adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall be
automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and all area included
in the vacation, shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate
regulations of the extended districts.



      D.   Submerged Areas.  All areas within the corporate limits
of the City, which are under water and not shown as included within any
district, shall be subject to all of the regulations of the district which
immediately adjoins the water area.  If the water area adjoins two or more
districts, the boundaries of each district shall be construed to extend into
the water area in a straight line until they meet the other district.



   3.   Relationship Between Districts and Prior Enactments.



      A.   Districts Remaining in Effect.  The regulations for
zoning districts listed in this Section 165.17(3)(A) shall remain in effect
for land so designated as of the date of enactment of this Code, unless a
designation is later repealed or amended by the City Council.



         (1)   FP   Flood Plain



         (2)   PUD   Planned Unit Development.  Where a PUD
District has been adopted, the PUD agreement or designation in effect as of
the date of enactment of this Code shall remain in effect except if amended
in accordance with Section 165.66(12) of this Code.



      B.   Modified Districts.  City zoning regulations in effect
prior to enactment of this Code included zoning districts which have been
retained but have been modified by adoption of this Code.  Upon enactment of
this Code, land included in a modified district shall be governed by
regulations for the district as set forth in this Code.  Modified districts
include:



         (1)   A   Agriculture



         (2)   R-1     Residential Single Family



         (3)   R-3   Residential Single Family



         (4)   R-5   Residential



         (5)   R-7   Multiple Family Residence



         (6)   R-MH   Residential Mobile Home



         (7)   C-ORS   Commercial Office, Research, Service



         (8)   C-2   Neighborhood Convenience



         (9)   C-3   Highway Commercial



         (10)   C-4   Highway Commercial



         (11)   C-R   Commercial Recreation



         (12)   C-WH   Commercial Warehouse



         (13)   I-1   Industrial



         (14)   I-2   Industrial



         (15)   CPR-1, CPR-2, CPR-3 Center Point Road District



      C.   Deleted Districts.  Certain districts have been deleted
because the provisions of the districts have been included with another
district or the differences between the deleted district and another district
were minimal. Deleted districts include:



         (1)   R-2   Residential



         (2)   R-4   Residential



         (3)   R-6   Residential



         (4)   C-1   Commercial



         (5)   I-1A   Industrial



         (6)   I-2A   Industrial



         (7)   I-3A   Industrial



   4.   Map Update.  The Map shall be updated periodically and become
the new “District Map.”



      A.   Changing District Boundary Classifications.  In
accordance with Section 414.4 of the 1995 Iowa Code, as the same now exists
or may be hereafter amended, superseded or replaced by subsequent sections of
said Iowa Code, the Council herewith provides the following manner to amend,
supplement or change the district boundary classifications as shown on said
“District Map.”  Such amendments, supplements, or changes shall be set
out in an ordinance identifying the property by legal description and
identifying the zoning district as the same that exists, and the new district
to be established for said property.  Such ordinance shall, after adoption
and publication, be then recorded by the City Clerk as other ordinances. Such
ordinance shall make reference to the Zoning Ordinance and “District Map”
and shall constitute a part of the City Zoning Ordinance; however, such
ordinance shall not repeal or reenact said Map and said Map or Map
periodically revised, shall continue to exist and define and establish the
boundaries and classifications, as the same exist on said Map except that
after such subsequent ordinances are adopted and published as above provided,
the boundaries and zoning district classifications as defined in said
subsequent ordinances shall supersede the district map and boundaries as
shown on any such “District Map” for the particular property described in
the subsequent ordinance.  Further, such subsequent ordinances shall be
considered as special ordinances, and not required to be set out in the
Municipal Code.



      B.   Annexed Territory.  All territory which may be annexed
to the City of Hiawatha after adoption of this chapter shall be zoned
automatically classified in the Agricultural District until otherwise amended
according to procedures established in Sections 165.90 and 165.91 of this
Code.



         (1)   Voluntary Annexation.  All applications for
voluntary annexation of land to the City of Hiawatha may, in addition to the
necessary requirements for annexation, include a request by the applicant for
a zone classification for the property other than agricultural.  Upon
receipt thereof, the application shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for recommendation on the requested zoning pursuant to Sections
165.90 and 165.91 of this Code.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
consider zoning requests in accordance with the land use portion of the
Comprehensive Plan and Sections 165.90 and 165.91 of this Code.



         (2)   Involuntary Annexation.  All territory which may
be annexed shall be automatically classified in the Agriculture District
until otherwise amended according to procedures established in Sections
165.90 and 165.91 of this Code.  However, if a majority of the property
owners who also represent a majority of the property being annexed, request a
zone classification which the Planning and Zoning Commission finds compatible
with the land use portion of the Comprehensive Plan, the Commission may
consider the request in a report to the City Council.



165.18 and 165.19 - Reserved



165.20   Reserved.



165.21   GENERAL SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.



   1.   Essential Services.  Existing facilities of public and private
utilities, railroads and the City, may continue to be operated and maintained
in all districts.  Certain related new facilities and structures may also be
erected, constructed, installed and utilized in all districts.  These
include buildings, over-head, surface or underground gas, electrical, steam,
or water distribution or transmission systems, collection, communication,
supply or disposal systems, including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
tunnels, wires, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, public parking
lots, parks, traffic signals, hydrants, towers and poles, railroad switches
and signals, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by
such public or private utility, railroad or the City for the public health,
safety, or general welfare.  However, no new buildings, nor such new
structures and uses as substations, railroad lines, generating plants, relay
towers, sewage treatment, sanitary landfills and the like, nor any expansion
of such existing buildings, structures, and uses by more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the existing size shall be permitted in a district where
such use is not allowed as a permitted use, except when so approved by the
Board of Adjustment as a conditional use following the procedures contained
in Sections 165.83 and 165.84 of this Code.



   2.   Private Sewage Disposal and Water Supply Systems.  Where
public sewage disposal or water supply systems are unavailable, there shall
be sufficient ground area left unoccupied by structures or paving to allow a
proper system of sewage disposal and/or water supply conforming with the
applicable standards and requirements of City, County, and State regulations
regardless of other provisions of this chapter.  Site plans accompanying
building permit or certificate of occupancy applications shall clearly show
the proposed sewage disposal system and/or water supply system.  All such
proposed systems shall be subject to approval of the appropriate health and
other agencies prior to issuance of a building permit.  Coverage of any part
of a septic tank field by a building or hard surface shall not be permitted.



   3.   Temporary Buildings and Structures.  Temporary buildings and
structures, including mobile homes, that are used for office or storage
purposes in conjunction with construction work only, may be permitted on the
same lot or one adjacent thereto, in any district during the period that the
construction work is in progress but such facilities shall be removed upon
completion of the construction work.  The City Council may by resolution
permit the temporary establishment in a district of a Portland concrete or
asphaltic concrete mixing plant in conjunction with the construction of a
highway or other large scale project.  Such permissions shall contain a
termination time and any other conditions deemed necessary and proper to
protect surrounding properties.  Any temporary buildings and structures
permitted by this section need not comply with district yard requirements,
but shall be set back from all lot lines and otherwise be located on the
property as may be required by the City to reduce any potential safety
hazards to vehicles and pedestrian traffic on adjacent public ways, and to
also reduce any adverse effects on adjacent properties.  However, no
permanent structures shall be erected except in conformance with the
regulations of the district within which the property is located.  Temporary
accessory structures shall be permitted in accordance with Section 165.23(9).



   4.   Restriction on Use of a Residential Lot for Provision of Access
to Adjacent Property.  No part of any lot located in an R district shall be
used for vehicular access purposes to any other property which is located in
any district other than an A or R district, or to any other property being
used for a purpose not allowed in an A or R district as a permitted or
conditional use.



   5.   Building and Structures Destroyed or Damaged.  Any building or
structure which is damaged, partially destroyed; or destroyed or reduced by
fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity which renders such building
or structure unsafe or unsightly shall be reconstructed, repaired, or altered
to restore it to a safe and slightly condition.  Such restoration shall be
started within one year from the date of such destruction, damage or
reduction and shall be diligently prosecuted to completion.  If such
restoration is not made, the residual building or structure shall be removed
by the owner thereof at his expense within said one year period and the
premises shall be made safe and slightly.  If the owner does not comply with
said provision, the Zoning Administrator shall give written notice of said
requirement to the owner and give the owner ninety (90) days to comply. 
Upon the owner’s failure to comply with such notice, the Zoning
Administrator shall be authorized to cause removal of the premises to a safe
and slightly condition and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the
owner.



   6.   Use of Air Rights.  The development of air rights above land
located in any district and utilized for public or private use shall be
permitted subject to all the requirements of the district within which such
development is located.  Total development on the lot shall be in accordance
with requirements of the district within which it is located.



   7.   Exceptions to Height Limitations.  In those districts where
height limitations are imposed, such height limitations shall not apply to
the following appurtenances and structures:



      A.   Church spires



      B.   Belfries



      C.   Monuments



      D.   Ornamental towers and spires



      E.   Radio, telephone and television antennas, aerials, and
relays



      F.   Chimneys



      G.   Smoke stacks



      H.   Flag poles



      I.   Silos



      J.   Windmills and Wind Generators



      K.   Emergency sirens and similar devices



      L.   Elevator and stairway bulkheads, and air conditioning
equipment



      M.   Water towers and cooling towers



   8.   Corner Visual Clearance Required.  In all districts nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow on a corner lot in such
a manner as to significantly impede vision between a height of two and
one-half feet and ten feet above the center line street grades of the area
described as follows: that triangular shaped area bounded by the street or
road right-of-way line of a corner lot or tract and a straight line joining
points on said right-of-way lines, 30 feet from said corner.



   9.   Manufactured Homes and Mobile Homes.



      A.   A manufactured home may be located in an approved mobile
home park, subject to the provisions of Section 165.16(6) of this Code and
Chapter 147 of the Municipal Code, or may be located in any district in which
single family dwellings are permitted, subject to all applicable requirements
with this Code, and including the following:



         (1)   Have been manufactured after June 15, 1976, and
bear a label certifying compliance with the National Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and have not been subsequently
altered in violation of such standards.



         (2)   Have met all City required inspection and/or
permits required for any dwelling unit and lot, other than for the factory
manufactured structure itself which is governed by Federal standards.



         (3)   Be attached to a permanent foundation and be
classified and taxed as real property.



      B.   A mobile home used for residential purposes, if not
meeting the standards and qualifications contained within the definition of a
Manufactured Home in this Code, shall be located only in an approved mobile
home park subject to the provisions of Section 165.16(6) of this Code and
Chapter 147 of the Municipal Code.  A mobile home which does meet the
Manufactured Home definition’s standards and qualifications shall be
classified as a Manufactured Home and be regulated as a single-family
dwelling.



   10.   Tents.  No tent or similar structure shall be erected, used,
or maintained for human residence.  Erection, use, and maintenance of tents
and similar structures for other uses shall be subject to the fire prevention
regulations and other applicable regulations of the City.



   11.   Signs.  Signs shall be allowed in each district in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 166 of this Code.



   12.   Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities.  Off-street
parking and loading facilities shall be provided for each use or structure in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 165.30-165.36 of this Code.



   13.   Flood Plain Regulations.  The regulations contained in this
Code shall be supplementary to flood hazard and damage prevention regulations
adopted by the City Council in Chapter 161 of this Code, the Iowa Natural
Resources Council and any other public agency having jurisdiction in this
matter.  In the event of conflict the more restrictive provisions shall
apply.



   14.   Airport Zone – Height and Use Limitations.  The Cedar
Rapids Airport Zoning Regulations shall supplement the regulations contained
in this Code.  All properties contained within the jurisdictional boundaries
of the airport zoning regulations, as indicated on the current airport zoning
map, shall be subject to the regulations contained in such airport zoning
regulations for the Cedar Rapids Airport.



   15.   Nonconformance Created.  Uses or structures lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this chapter and rendered
nonconforming by the provisions thereof, or by subsequent amendments thereto,
may continue subject to the provisions of Section 165.70 of this Code.



   16.   Single-Family Dwelling Buildings.  Any building erected or
otherwise established for use as a single-family building after the adoption
of this chapter shall meet the following requirements:



      A.   Have a measured minimum dimension of twenty-four (24)
feet for the main body.



      B.   Have a minimum floor area of six hundred and sixty (660)
square feet.



      C.   Have a continuous and complete frost protected perimeter
foundation for the main body.



   17.   Vehicle Repair and Service Restrictions.



      A.   Residential Zoning Districts.



         (1)   Vehicle repair, service or maintenance, when done
for compensation, shall be limited to only:



            a.   Emergency services as defined in Section
165.96(69); and



            b.   Oil changes, filter replacement, chassis
lubrication, adding or removing of fluids, vacuuming interiors, washing
windows, windshield wiper blade replacement, washing of vehicles, engine
tune-ups limited only to spark plugs and wires, points, distributor cap, and
carburetor adjustment.



         (2)   All persons providing the services described in
subparagraph A(1)(b) above shall be required to first register with the
Building Department of the City of Hiawatha on forms provided by the Building
Official, and at the time of registration also file a copy of any waste oil
disposal permit required by the Department of Natural Resources, have a
permanent place of business in a commercial or other district authorizing
such use, restrict the service and repair activities on all residential lots
to a maximum of four consecutive hours to be conducted only between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any one day, and shall comply with all the
provisions of nuisance laws and the Hiawatha noise ordinance, compliance with
this subsection shall not relieve the person providing the service with
compliance with all other provisions of applicable federal, State and local
laws and regulations.



         (3)   A property owner/occupant shall be permitted to
perform vehicle repair, service or maintenance only upon vehicles owned by
him/her, and also only when such vehicle repair, service or maintenance is
done on a property owned or occupied by such vehicle owner, and also subject
to the following conditions:



            a.   When outside an enclosed structure,
activities shall be limited to washing, lubrication, replacement of tires,
filters, fluids, plugs, points, lights, battery, windshield wipers, fuses,
spot body repair and spot painting.  Once such activities are commenced, the
same shall be completed within 48 hours, and shall be limited to only one
vehicle during such period of time.  Parts, machinery, equipment, fluid, or
debris associated with the repair shall be kept within an enclosed structure.



            b.   When done within an enclosed structure the
following activities are permitted: engine rebuilding, repair or replacement
of drive train, body and frame components, upholstering, painting,
undercoating, repair or replacement of mufflers, tail and exhaust pipes, and
similar heavier service and repairs not authorized in subparagraph (3)(a)
above.



            c.   Repair, service and maintenance on a vehicle
with a maximum gross weight of 5,000 pounds or more shall be prohibited in a
residential zoning district.



      B.   Commercial Zoning Districts.  No vehicle repair, service
or maintenance shall be permitted in unenclosed accessory parking facilities
or any other unenclosed area in any Commercial Zoning District, except
emergency service and repairs defined in Section 165.96(67), and except
washing of vehicles.  No motor fuel or oil shall be sold in conjunction with
any accessory parking facilities provided in C-ORS District.  A property
owner/occupant of a lot within a Commercial Zoning District, which principal
use is residential, will be permitted to perform repair service and
maintenance authorized under Subsection 17(A)(3), subparagraphs a. and b.,
notwithstanding other provisions prohibiting the same.



      C.   Industrial Zoning Districts.  Unless otherwise
permitted, no vehicle repair, service or maintenance shall be permitted in or
in conjunction with any unenclosed accessory parking facilities or any other
unenclosed area in any Industrial District, except emergency service and
repairs defined in Section 165.96(69), and except washing of vehicles.  A
property owner/occupant of a lot within an Industrial Zoning District, which
principal use is residential, will be permitted to perform repair, service
and maintenance authorized under Subsection 17(A)(3), subparagraphs a. and
b., notwithstanding other provisions prohibiting the same.



165.22   SUPPLEMENTAL LOT REGULATIONS.



   1.   Zoning Lot.  In this Code the term “lot” refers to a
“zoning lot” unless the context shall clearly indicate that it refers
instead to a “lot of record.”  A zoning lot is a single tract of
contiguous land which, at the time of filing for a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy or district boundary change, is designated by the
owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit
under single or unified ownership or control and assigned to the particular
use, building, or structure for which the building permit or certificate of
occupancy is issued and including such area of land as may be required by the
provisions of this chapter for such use, building, or structure.



   2.   Minimum Lot Size.  Every lot which is created subsequent to
the effective date of this ordinance shall conform to the minimum lot size
requirements of the district within which it is located.  If not otherwise
specified by the applicable district regulations, a lot for residential use
shall have, as a minimum, sufficient width and depth



   3.   to accommodate, within its boundaries, a rectangle measuring 60
feet in width by 100 feet in depth. In a Planned Unit Development a lot shall
conform to the minimum lot size requirements of the underlying zone district
or 60 feet in width by 100 feet in depth whichever is less.



   4.   Lot Street Frontage and Access Required.  Hereafter no lot
shall be created nor shall any principal building be constructed or placed on
any lot or tract of land unless such lot or tract has frontage on either a
public street or on a private street which has been specifically approved by
the City Council for that purpose.  In order to be approved such street
shall provide permanent and unobstructed vehicular access, have a roadway of
adequate width and surface, and meet all other applicable standards and
requirements, established by the City.  No lot shall be used for residential
purposes unless such lot has at least a 50-foot frontage on such street.



   5.   Division of Lot.  No improved lot shall hereafter be divided
into two or more lots and no portion of any improved lot shall be sold unless
all lots resulting from each division or sale shall conform with all the
applicable bulk regulations of the district in which the property is located.



   6.   Number of Principal Buildings Permitted on a Lot.  More than
one principal institutional, public or semi-public, multi-family, commercial,
or industrial building may be located on a lot provided that no such building
or portion thereof is located outside the buildable area of the lot. 
However, except in the case of Planned Unit Developments not more than one
detached single-family or two-family residential building shall be located on
the same lot with any other principal building.



   7.   Lot of Record.  In any residence district on a lot of record,
on the effective date of this chapter, a single family dwelling may be
established even though the lot area and width do not meet the minimum
district requirements, provided all other requirements of this chapter are
met; however, where two or more contiguous substandard recorded lots are in
common ownership and are of such size that together they constitute at least
one conforming “zoning lot,” such lots or portions thereof shall be so
joined, developed, and used for the purpose of forming an effective and
conforming zoning lot or lots.



165.23   SUPPLEMENTAL YARD REGULATIONS.



   1.   General Provision.  Any building, structure or use hereafter
erected, altered, or established, shall comply with the general yard space
requirements of the district within which it is located, except as specified
herein.



   2.   Location of Required Yard.  The required yard space for any
building, structure or use shall be contained on the same lot as the
building, structure or use and such required yard space shall be entirely
upon land in a district in which the principal use is permitted.



   3.   Reduction or Sharing of Required Yards or Space Prohibited. 
No lot, yard, court, parking area, or other space shall be reduced in area or
dimension so as to make said area or dimension less than the minimum required
for this chapter.  No part of a yard, court, parking area, or other space
provided for any building or structure to comply with the provisions of this
Code shall be included as part of a yard, court, parking area or other spaces
required under this chapter for another building or structure.



   4.   Required Yards For Existing Buildings.  No yards, now or
hereafter provided, for a building existing on the effective date of this
chapter, shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced if already
less than the minimum yard requirements of this chapter for equivalent new
construction.



   5.   Required Yards on Major Streets. 



      A.   Major Streets.  All applicable building setbacks and
yard requirements set forth in this chapter shall be measured and determined
from the existing street right-of-way.



      B.   Private Streets.  All applicable building setbacks and
yard requirements along private streets shall be measured from the nearest
line of the access easement.



   6.   Transitional Yards.



      A.   When a lot within an R-7, or any C and I Zone District
adjoins an A or R District then a transitional yard shall be required.  The
required yard depth shall be either that required for the R-7, C or I
District or that required for the adjoining A or R District, whichever is
greater, and shall be provided along the adjoining A or R lot line.



      B.   In addition, unless separated by a street, public alley
or by an intervening lot, no nonresidential structure within an R-7, or any C
or I Zone District shall be located less than 100 feet from an A or R
District unless said structure is effectively screened from the A or R
District.  Said screening shall consist of a wall, solid or opaque fence or
appropriate plant materials that are between 5.5 and 6 feet in height,
subject, however, to the regulations in Sections 165.21(8), 165.23(8) and
165.47(5)(B) herein.  If plant materials are used for said screening they
may exceed 6 feet in height at maturity, shall be a minimum of three feet in
height immediately after planting and pruning, shall be composed of plants
approved for such use by the City, and shall be installed in a manner to
assure effective year-round visual screening. All walls, fences or plant
material screens shall be maintained in such a manner to assure a continuing
year-round effective visual screen and cause no adverse impact to adjoining
properties due to lack of proper maintenance. Berming may be used in
conjunction with fencing or plantings to provide the required screen,
however, no side slope shall be steeper than 4 to 1, unless approved by the
City Engineer.  When the structure is effectively screened, the minimum yard
separation requirements shall be specified in Subsection A above.



   7.   Front Yards For Double Frontage Lots.  Double frontage lots
shall provide front yards on both street frontages.  Front yard requirements
and restrictions included in the district regulations within which the lot is
located shall apply on both frontages, with the exception that in the portion
of the lot normally considered to be the rear yard the construction of a
fence may be permitted in the same manner as would be allowed on any other
similar standard lot.  This exception shall, however, be subject to the
requirements of Section 165.21(8) Corner Visual Clearance Required and also
subject to Section 165.23(8) Fence or Wall.



   8.   Permitted Encroachments in Required Yards.  Under the terms of
this Code a required yard shall be open, unoccupied, and unobstructed from
grade to sky except for permitted encroachments.  The following identify
such permitted encroachments and in which yards they are permitted along with
limitations imposed thereon:



      A.   In All Required Yards.



         (1)   Open deck not over 8 feet in width or depth, but
not including a permanently roofed-over deck.



         (2)   Steps or ramp which are necessary to provide
access to the first floor of lawful building or for access to a lot from a
street or alley.



         (3)   The following appurtenances shall encroach no more
than two feet into the required yard, as measured from the building, except
when the required yard is nine feet or more in depth they shall encroach no
more than three feet.



            a.   Chimney or fireplace, when no more than six
feet in width.



            b.   Air conditioner.



            c.   Architectural features such as sills, eaves,
and cornices.



            d.   Gutters and down spouts.



            e.   Awnings and canopies except as provided for
in Section 165.23(9)(D)(5).



            f.   Bay windows.



            g.   Unenclosed porches, stairs and fire
escapes.  For open decks, see subparagraph A(1) of this subsection.



            h.   Solar energy collectors and heat storage
units of up to 200 square feet of collector surface area.



            i.   Any combination of the above listed
appurtenances.



         (4)   Landscaping, vegetation, arbors, trellises,
flagpoles and the like, shall be allowed in all yards subject, however, to
the restrictions imposed in Section 165.21(8) of this Code, Corner Visual
Clearance Area Required.



      B.   In Rear Yards.  Customary play equipment, clothes lines
and poles, and underground shelters, outside elements of central air
conditioners projecting no more than six feet into the required yard but in
no case within less than eight feet of an adjacent lot line.



      C.   Solar Energy Collectors.  A solar energy collector and
heat storage unit to supply the building to which it is appurtenant shall be
considered an accessory building and be so regulated.



      D.   Fences.  A non-opaque fence as defined in Section
165.96, shall not exceed a height of 10 feet above ground level when erected
in a required yard or along a lot line.



   EXCEPTION: In or abutting A or R Districts the height of such fence
erected in a required yard or along a property line:



         (1)   Shall not exceed six feet when located in the rear
or side yard.



         (2)   Shall not exceed four feet when located in the
front yard.



      E.   Vision Barriers.  An opaque fence as defined in 165.96,
wall, dense shrubs or combination thereof shall not exceed a height of 10
feet above ground level when erected in a required yard or along a lot line
with the following exceptions:



         (1)   A and R Districts:  In or abutting A or R
Districts the height of such vision barrier erected in a required yard or
along a property line;



            a.   Shall not exceed six feet when located in the
rear or side yard.



            b.   Shall not exceed two and one-half feet when
in the front yard.



            c.   Shall not exceed two and one-half feet when
located in a required corner side yard that is in the front yard or side
yard. 



         (2)   All Districts: Such visual barrier shall not
exceed two and one-half feet in height when placed in the following
locations: 



            a.   When located in a required front yard;



            b.   When located within twelve and one-half feet
of the rear lot line on a double frontage lot if the abutting right-of-way is
less than 100 feet and is across from the front yard of a residential
property. 



            c.   When such visual barrier is located within
the rear 20 feet of a lot which abuts  an adjacent lot and is within 20 feet
of an existing or potential driveway in the adjacent lot, a Visual Clearance
Area shall be provided.  Such Visual Clearance Area shall be triangular in
shape and described as follows: beginning at the point of intersection of the
corner side lot line (property) with the rear lot line (property line) and
extending 30 feet along each lot line.  The end points shall be connected by
a straight line.  Within said triangular area nothing shall be erected,
placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to significantly
impede vision between a height of two and one-half and 10 feet above the
adjacent center line street grade.



         (3)   Any fence, wall, dense shrub, or combination
thereof, legally established or constructed prior to the adoption of this
section and not complying with all requirements of this section as amended,
shall be classified as legally nonconforming.



         (4)   Electric fences and barbed wire are restricted in
accordance with Chapter 41 of the Hiawatha Code of Ordinances.



      F.   Additional Provisions.  Additional provisions for
permitted yard encroachments of accessory uses and structures are provided in
Section 165.23(9) of this Code, Accessory Uses and Structures.



   9.   Accessory Uses and Structures.  This section supplements the
regulations contained in this Code as they apply to accessory uses and
structures, except for accessory signs which are governed by the provisions
of Section 165.15(2), Figure I and Chapter 166 of this Code.



      A.   Time of Construction.  No accessory structure or use
shall be constructed or established more than one hundred and twenty days
(120) prior to the time of completion of the construction or establishment of
the principal structure or use to which it is necessary.



      B.   Use as a Dwelling Restricted.  No accessory structure
shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes except by
domestic employees employed on the premises and the immediate families of
such employees and only when said structure has been constructed for
residential purposes and meets all City Codes relating to residential
construction and occupancy, and has been issued a certificate of occupancy. 
Additionally, no such occupancy shall be permitted prior to issuance of an
occupancy permit for the principal structure.



      C.   Temporary Accessory Structures.  Temporary accessory
structures shall be permitted in all zones except residential zones in
accordance with this section.



         (1)   Shall require a building permit. The fee shall be
in accordance with Council resolution.



         (2)   Shall comply with all codes applicable to the
specific use.



         (3)   Shall comply with the setback requirements of the
principal structure for the zone in which it is located.



         (4)   Shall be of membrane or tent construction.



         (5)   Shall remain no longer than three continuous
months.



      D.   Parking and Storage Restrictions.



         (1)   General Parking Regulations.  All access ways and
driveways to parking and storage areas, pads and parking areas shall be
surfaced and maintained with asphaltic concrete, brick, asphaltic macadam or
similar method to be approved by the City Engineer unless otherwise noted as
specific exceptions.  All accessory parking shall comply with Section 165.30
through 165.36.  Additionally, no vehicle parked in any required yard shall
obstruct a public sidewalk.  If no public sidewalk exists, then no such
vehicle shall be parked closer than five feet to the street right-of-way. 
No vehicle, machine or equipment shall be parked within the corner visual
clearance area as described in Section 165.21(8).  No such vehicles or
equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes while
so parked or stored.



         (2)   Front Yards.  Vehicular parking and vehicular
storage shall not be permitted in any required front yard other than in C and
I Districts, except that in the Agriculture and Single Family Residential
Districts and on lots being used for a single-family or a two-family dwelling
passenger motor vehicles may be parked upon a driveway located within a
required front yard.  In addition, no more than one recreational vehicle may
be parked within a required front yard and only if in operable condition and
if parked upon a hard surfaced driveway.  The driveway shall be considered
to be that designated area to provide access from the street to a parking
area, an attached or basement garage, carport or detached garage.  A
driveway or hard surfaced pad may extend no more than ten feet in width into
that part of the required front yard which is located between and in a direct
line from the street and the principal structure.  For the purposes of this
section the principal structure will exclude an attached or basement garage.



         (3)   Side Yards.  Vehicular parking or vehicular
storage may be permitted in a side yard in any district. 



         (4)   Rear Yards.  Vehicular parking or vehicular
storage shall be permitted in a rear yard in any district.  No more than a
combination of two passenger motor vehicles, recreational vehicles or light
duty machine or equipment, or similar vehicles and equipment shall be parked
or stored in the rear yard in the Agriculture, R-1, R-3 and R-5 Residential
Districts unless effectively screened on each side adjoining a street or
property situated in a residence district by screening as required in Section
165.23(6)(B) and the parking surface defined in 165.23(9)(D)(1) shall not be
required.



         (5)   Trucks, Commercial Vehicles, and Heavy Machines
and Equipment.  No trucks with a net legal carrying capacity exceeding one
and one-half tons; commercial vehicles and heavy machines and equipment shall
be parked or stored upon any lot or tract of land in an R District except if
such vehicles, equipment, and machinery are in temporary usage to actively
accomplish permitted temporary activities on the premises such as
construction, repair, moving, and other similar activities.  In such cases
they shall, upon completion of said activity, be removed from the lot or
tract of land.  Commercial vehicles and heavy equipment and machines parking
in I Zoning Districts shall be on rock, gravel, dust free surface approved by
the City Engineer or on a hard surface as described in Section
165.23(9)(D)(1).



         (6)   Miscellaneous Parking and Storage.  No person
shall park, keep or store, or permit the parking or storage of an inoperable
vehicle, vehicle component parts, or miscellaneous junk and debris on any
public or private property, in any zoning district, unless it shall be in a
completely enclosed building.  This regulation shall not apply to legitimate
businesses operating in a lawful place and manner, in accordance with the
zoning regulations, provided, however, that any outside areas used for
parking and storage shall be screened from public view in accordance with
Section 165.23(6)(B) if required by the regulations of the zoning district
within which they are located.  The parking surface for this type of use
shall be rock, gravel, a dust free surface approved by the City Engineer or a
hard surface as described in Section 165.23(9)(D)(1).



         (7)   Outside Storage.  Where outside storage is
permitted in Section 165.16 it shall comply with this section.  Outside
storage shall not be permitted in any required yard.  Outside storage shall
not be permitted in any front yard in a Residential District.  All outside
storage shall be effectively screened with landscaping and building elements
or opaque fences or walls  as specified in 165.23(6)(B), from the right of
way and from off-site views.



   EXCEPTION:  Screening is not required on property lines adjacent to
lots zoned as 1-2.



   Screening shall comply with specific requirements for the Zoning
District in which the storage occurs.  Access to outside storage shall be
hard surfaced as described in Section 165.23(9)(D)(1) and screened if in view
of the right of way.  Outside storage surfaces shall be hard surfaces as
described in Section 165.23(9)(D)(1) except storage areas in Industrial
Zoning Districts shall be on rock, gravel, or a dust free surface approved by
the City Engineer or on a hard surface as described in Section
165.23(9)(D)(1).  Storage containers shall be considered as outside storage
and shall comply with this section and the following.



            a.   Commercial storage containers shall not be
stacked.



            b.   Commercial storage containers shall be
allowed only in C-4, C-WH, I-1 and I-2 zones.



         (8)   Outdoor Displays Areas.  The outdoor display of
motor vehicles, machines, equipment and merchandise held for sale or rental
is permitted only in Commercial and Industrial Districts where such display
is incidental to a Permitted or Conditional Use legally existing thereon and
is subject to the following:



            a.   Outdoor display areas are in addition to and
exclusive to required parking and driveway areas.



            b.   Outdoor display areas shall not be located on
a right-of-way.



            c.   Outdoor display areas shall not be located in
a detention basin or drainage area.



            d.   Outdoor display areas shall be properly
maintained to prevent any unsightly appearance, weeds and erosion.



            e.   Outdoor displays located on a hard surface as
described in Section 165.23(9)(D)(1) may remain in place during on and off
business hours.



            f.   Outdoor displays not located on a hard
surface as described in Section 165.23(9)(D)(1) shall only be permitted
during the business hours of the business to which the display is incidental.



            g.   Outdoor displays shall cover no more than 10%
of the landscape area of the yard in which the display area is located.



            h.   Properties legally not in compliance with
this Section 165.23(9)(D)(8) shall have three years from the date of
enactment (May 16, 2015) in which to comply with the outdoor display area
hard surface regulations.



      E.   Bulk Regulations For Accessory Structures and Buildings.



         (1)   Attached Buildings and Structures.  Attached
accessory buildings and structures shall meet all the requirements of this
chapter which apply to the principal structure to which they are attached,
except as modified in Section 165.23(8) of this Code, Permitted Encroachment
in Required Yards.



         (2)   Detached Buildings and Residential or Commercial
Satellite Antenna Dish.  Detached accessory buildings or satellite antenna
dishes including all directional movements from extremes, except for
satellite dishes with less than seven square feet of area within the
perimeter of the rim of the satellite dish, shall:



            a.   Not be closer than 10 feet to a principal
building on the same lot.  Distances between such buildings shall be
measured horizontally between the closest building walls.



            b.   Not be closer than three feet to any lot line.



            c.   Not exceed the height limit for the principal
building to which it is accessory.



            d.   Not be located in a required front yard.



            e.   If located partially or completely in a
required rear yard, not to exceed 15 feet in height nor occupy more than 40
percent of the required yard.



            f.   Not to exceed 15 feet in height nor occupy
more than 40 percent of the non-required side yard and shall meet the minimum
side yard requirements established for the principal building to which it is
accessory unless it is located totally outside of the area of a required side
yard.  In such case the accessory building may be located within three feet
of the side lot line.



            g.   Be set back from any adjacent street in
accord with the minimum distance required for a principal building on the
same lot.



            h.   If accessory to a one or two family dwellings
also be limited to a cumulative total area not to exceed:  (i) 1,000 square
feet for lots less than 10,000 square feet; (ii) 10 percent of the lot area
for lots greater than 10,000 square feet; and (iii) 3,000 square feet for
lots over 30,000 square feet.



            i.   For temporary accessory structures, see
Section 165.23(9)(C).



         (3)   On a Reversed Corner Lot.  On a reversed corner
lot in a residence district, and within 15 feet of any adjacent property to
the rear in a residence district, no detached accessory building or portion
thereof located in a required rear yard, shall be closer to the side lot line
abutting the street than a distance equal to the least depth which would be
required under this chapter for the front yard on such adjacent property to
the rear.  Further, in the above instance, all such accessory buildings
shall meet the minimum side yard requirements of such adjacent property which
coincides with the side lot line or portion thereof of property in any
residence district.



         (4)   Dispensing Devices.  Filling station fuel pumps,
air, drink, ice, and food dispensing devices located in districts where
allowed, and with a height not exceeding six feet, shall be exempt from the
established front yard or corner side yard requirements, but on a corner lot,
all such dispensing devices shall be subject to the restrictions provided in
Section 165.21(8) of this Code, Corner Visual Clearance Area Required.



         (5)   Awnings and Canopies.  Awnings and canopies that
provide shelter for fuel pumps may encroach into required yards no closer
than three feet from the lot line, but on a corner lot all such awnings and
canopies shall be subject to the restrictions provided in Section 165.21(8)
of this Code, Corner Visual Clearance Area Required.



      F.   Accessory Commercial Service Uses Permitted in R-7
District.



         (1)   Uses Permitted.  A coffee shop, snack bar, gift
shop, tea room, cafeteria, newsstand, barber shop, pharmacy or beauty shop
may be established as an accessory use within a principal building in an R-7
District wherein the principal use is for multiple dwelling, dormitory,
apartment, hotel, hospital or nursing home provided such building, or related
complex of buildings for which it is a part, contains the following minimum
units:



            a.   Multiple dwelling or apartment hotel:  50
apartments.



            b.   Dormitory:  50 rooms.



            c.   Hospital or nursing home:  50 patient rooms.



         (2)   Limited to Convenience of Occupants.  Such
accessory uses shall be primarily for the convenience of and for service to
the patients, residents, guests or employees occupying the building.  No off
premise advertising of any kind shall be allowed in connection with such an
accessory use, except that the facility may be listed by name in the City
telephone directory, if served by a separate telephone or telephones.



         (3)   Signs Limited.  No exterior signs shall be placed
on the premises indicating to the general public that a portion of the
premises is being used for an accessory use.  Interior directional signs may
be permitted to designate the location of that portion of the premises at
which such an accessory use is located.



      G.   Accessory Child Day Care Facilities.  Child day care
facilities, including nursery and preschool, shall be permitted as an
accessory use in churches and public or private institutional buildings,
subject to compliance with the City Building Codes and other applicable
State, County, and City regulations.



165.24   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS.



   1.   General Statement of Intent.  Adult Entertainment
Establishments, because of their special characteristics are recognized as
having potential deleterious impacts on surrounding establishments and areas,
thereby contributing to creation of blight and to the decline of
neighborhoods.  These negative impacts appear to increase significantly if
several Adult Entertainment Establishments concentrate in any one area. 
Recognized also is the need to protect lawful rights of expression and use of
property and to not unduly restrain general public access.  Therefore, it is
the intent of these regulations to prevent the concentrations of Adult
Entertainment Establishments in all areas, to more severely limit their
locations in areas where minors would be expected to live or congregate, and
to otherwise regulate their locations in order to protect and preserve the
welfare of the community.  It is the intent also to provide for sufficient
locations for such establishments to protect basic legal rights of expression
and public access.  These regulations have been enacted with full
consideration of the legal and constitutional issues heretofore adjudicated.



   2.   Definitions.  The following terms as defined in Section 165.96
shall govern the interpretation of the regulations of Adult Entertainment
Establishments:



      A.   Adult artist-body painting studio



      B.   Adult book store



      C.   Adult cabaret



      D.   Adult entertainment establishment



      E.   Adult massage parlor



      F.   Adult mini motion picture theater



      G.   Adult modeling studio



      H.   Adult motion picture theater



      I.   Adult sexual encounter center



      J.   Adult theater



      K.   Specified anatomical areas



      L.   Specified sexual activities



   3.   Regulations Governing the Location of Adult Entertainment
Establishments.



      A.   Zoning Districts Where Allowed.



         (1)   All Adult Book Stores, Adult Motion Picture
Theaters, Adult Mini Motion Picture Theaters, Adult Massage Parlors, Adult
Theaters, Adult Artist-Body Painting Studios, Adult Modeling Studios, Adult
Sexual Encounter Center, Adult Cabaret, and all other Adult Entertainment
Establishments shall be allowed in the I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts as a
Principal Permitted Use.



         (2)   All such establishments described in subparagraph
A(1) immediately above shall be allowed in C-4 and C-WH Zoning Districts as a
Conditional Use.



      B.   Establishment of Adult Entertainment Establishment.  The
establishment of an adult entertainment business shall include the opening of
such business as a new business, the relocation of such business, or
conversion of an existing business location to any of the uses described as
an Adult Entertainment Establishment in subparagraph (3)(A)(1) immediately
above.



      C.   Minimum Separation Requirements:



         (1)   No such establishment described in subparagraph
(3)(A)(1) immediately above shall be located within 1,000 feet of another
adult entertainment business, or any school, place or worship, public park,
public or private playground, public plaza, day nurseries, day care center,
nursery school, regularly scheduled school bus stop or any dwelling
(one-family, two-family or multiple-family dwelling), or any residential or
agriculture zoning districts as defined in this chapter.



         (2)   To determine minimum separation distances,
measurements shall be taken on the direct line from the closest point on the
property line of such adult entertainment business to the closest point on
the property line of such uses or Residential Zoning District referenced in
(3)(C)(1) above.



         (3)   No person shall cause or permit the establishment
of any adult entertainment business as described in subparagraph (3)(A)(1)
above within two hundred (200) feet of the public right-of-way for any
arterial street in Hiawatha.



         (4)   An adult entertainment establishment may not be
operated in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, containing
another adult entertainment establishment.



      D.   Exterior Portions of Adult Entertainment Establishments.



         (1)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of
an adult entertainment establishment to allow the merchandise or activities
of the establishment to be visible from a point outside the establishment. 
All building openings, entries, windows, etc., shall be covered or screened
in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any public or
semi-public area.  Displays or other promotional materials shall not be
shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the pedestrian
sidewalks, walkways, or other public or semi-public areas.  It shall be
unlawful for an owner or operator of an adult entertainment establishment to
allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a
point outside said establishment.



         (2)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of
an adult entertainment establishment to allow the exterior portion of the
adult entertainment establishment to have flashing lights or any words,
lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations
of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provision of this chapter
and Chapter 166.



         (3)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of
an adult entertainment establishment to allow exterior portions of the
establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color.
This provision shall not apply to an adult entertainment establishment if the
following conditions are met:



            a.   The establishment is part of a commercial
multi-unit center; and



            b.   The exterior portions of each individual unit
in the commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the
business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a
way as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the
commercial multi-unit center.



         (4)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
require the painting of an otherwise unpainted portion of an adult
entertainment establishment.



      E.   Signage.



         (1)   Signs for adult entertainment establishments shall
have no more than two (2) display surfaces. Each display surface shall:



            a.   Not contain any flashing lights;



            b.   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape.



         (2)   Signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes,
drawings, or pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only
the name of the enterprise.



         (3)   Each letter forming a word on a sign shall be of
solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and
color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a
primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.



         (4)   Any wall signs shall have only one display
surface.  Such display surface shall:



            a.   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape.



            b.   Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of
the enterprise.



            c.   Not contain any flashing lights.



            d.   The provisions of subsections 2 and 3 shall
also apply to wall signs.



      F.   Other Provisions.



         (1)   No alcohol shall be permitted in any adult
entertainment business, unless specifically authorized by Iowa Law.  This
prohibition applies equally to the proprietor and the patrons of the adult
entertainment establishment.



         (2)   No minors, as defined by Chapter 728 of the Code
of Iowa shall be permitted in any adult entertainment establishment.



165.24A   PAWNBROKERS AND DELAYED DEPOSIT SERVICES.



   1.   General Statement of Intent.  Pawnbrokers and delayed deposit
service facilities have potential deleterious side effects on surrounding
areas containing residential, public and family uses.  These negative
impacts are lessened when such facilities are located in areas with
compatible uses.  Therefore, it is the intent of these regulations to
prevent the location of pawnbrokers and delayed deposit service facilities in
areas with residential, public and family uses.  Further, it is the intent
of these regulations to provide for sufficient locations for the
establishments in areas with compatible facilities and uses.



   2.   Definitions.



      A.   “Delayed deposit service” means a person or entity
who, for a fee, does the following:



         (1)   Accepts a check dated subsequent to the date it
was written.



         (2)   Accepts a check dated on the date it was written
and holds the check for a period of time prior to deposit or presentment
pursuant to an agreement with, or any representation, express or implied,
made to the maker of the check.



      B.   “Pawnbroker” means any person or entity whose
business consists of buying personal property subject to the right of
repurchase or redemption, or of receiving actual possession of personal
property as security for loans with or without a mortgage or bill of sale. 
This definition does not include banks, trust companies, building and loan
associates and similar businesses.



   3.   Location.



      A.   Pawnbroker or delayed deposit services may be owned and
operated in Restricted Industrial Districts (I-1) and General Industrial
Districts (I-2).  However, pawnbrokers and delayed deposit services may not
be located or operated within 1,000 feet of:



         (1)   Any residentially zoned property.



         (2)   Childcare facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
elementary schools, junior high schools, or high schools.



         (3)   A church, synagogue, mosque or other religious
house of worship.



         (4)   Park or recreational facilities operated and
improved by the City, Linn County, the Linn County Conservation Board or the
State of Iowa.



         (5)   Adult oriented business, pawnbroker, or delay
deposit service facility.



      B.   The distance between the properties and/or facilities
identified in (3)(A)(1)-(4) and a pawnbroker or delayed deposit facility
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, from the closest property line of the pawnbroker or delayed
deposit facility to the closest property line of the properties and
facilities identified in (3)(A)(1)-(4). 



      C.   The distance between any two pawnbrokers or delayed
deposit facilities or between adult entertainment establishments and
pawnbrokers or delayed deposit facilities shall be measured in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior
wall of each business. 



   4.   Restrictions.



      A.   A person shall not operate a delayed deposit service in
the City of Hiawatha unless the person is licensed by the State of Iowa to
conduct such a business, as required by the Code of Iowa, Chapter 533D.



      B.   Visibility into the store shall be maintained by
utilizing clear, transparent glass on all windows and doors, and by keeping
all windows free of obstructions for at least three (3) feet into the
store.  Product may be displayed for sale in the window provided that the
display, including signage, does not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of
the window area.  Interior and exterior bars, grills, mesh or similar
obstructions, whether permanently or temporarily affixed, shall not cover any
exterior door or window.



165.25   RESIDENTIAL CHILD DAY CARE FACILITIES.



   1.   General Statement of Intent.  The City Council finds that,
there is a need for affordable, good-quality and licensed child day care
within the City of Hiawatha which cannot be entirely fulfilled by commercial
day care centers. Furthermore, the City Council recognizes that this type of
care is critical to the well-being of parents and children in the
community.  Therefore, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the
needed smaller residential care facilities while at the same time imposing
standards to preserve the residential character of neighborhoods.  The
chapter will provide a means to establish and operate State registered child
day care facilities in residential neighborhoods through a simplified review
and approval process.  This proposed review process does provide for public
notice and discussion before the Board of Adjustment for residential
facilities with over five children in Section 165.85.  Standards are also
provided in order to preserve the residential character of the neighborhoods
and provide protection to adjacent residences from noise or other intrusion.



   2.   Group Child Day Care Home.  A group child day care home (less
than 12 children), may be allowed in all districts permitting a residential
use or any district where a residential use is legally established, if a
special permit is approved by the Board of Adjustment.  Criteria which must
be met to obtain a special use permit are as follows:



      A.   State registration requirements shall have been met and
the applicant agrees to meet any requirements of the Building Code, fire
safety regulations, health codes and any other applicable local codes and
ordinances.



      B.   No structural or decorative alteration that will alter
the residential character of an existing structure or be otherwise
incompatible with surrounding residences shall be permitted.



      C.   The resident occupant shall be the principal care
provider, shall be registered by the State, shall be present during operating
hours. When there are five or fewer children being cared for, the resident
occupant need not be present.  However, an employee of the resident occupant
must be present when there are five or fewer children being cared for and the
resident occupant is not present.  Both the resident occupant and the
employee, must be present when there are more than five children being cared
for.  Only one employee, over the age of 14, shall be permitted.  Family
members are not considered employees.



      D.   Any required outside play area shall be effectively
screened from adjacent residential uses.



      E.   If located on a major street, as herein, an off-street
drop-off/pickup area must be provided.



      F.   One off-street parking space must be provided for a
non-resident/non-family member employee when located in a single family
residence district.  A residential driveway is acceptable for this purpose.



      G.   One unlighted sign, under two square feet in area, and
stating only the resident-occupants name and the wording “Group Day Care
Home” shall be allowed.



      H.   Any child group day care home which has been established
and has obtained a State of Iowa Certificate of Registration prior to the
effective date of this chapter and in addition, meets all of the foregoing
criteria, shall be considered as being a lawful use under the terms of these
regulations and may so continue without approval of the Board of Adjustment.



165.26   HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   1.   Statement of Purpose.  The regulations of this section dealing
with Home Occupations are designed to protect and maintain the residential
character of a neighborhood while permitting certain limited commercial
activities which have traditionally been carried out in a home.



   2.   Limitations on Home Occupation Activities.



      A.   No more than one part-time person who is not a member of
the immediate family and residing on the premises shall be employed in the
activity on the premises.



      B.   The activity shall be conducted entirely within the
principal dwelling unit or in a permitted accessory building.



      C.   The activity shall not involve any outside storage nor in
any way create, outside the building, any external evidence of the operation.



      D.   No alteration of a building shall be made which changes
the character and appearance thereof as a residential building.



      E.   No more than 25 percent nor, in any event, more than 350
square feet of floor area of the principal building, and no more than 250
square feet of floor area of an accessory building, shall be devoted to the
activity.



      F.   Not more than one motor vehicle and trailer shall be
permitted in conjunction with the activity.



      G.   No mechanical, electrical, or other equipment shall be
used except of a type normally used on a residential premises.



      H.   No sign other than one unlighted sign not over 2 square
feet in area and stating only the resident’s name and occupation shall be
allowed.



      I.   No activity shall be permitted which is noxious,
offensive or hazardous by reason of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or by
creation of noise, odor, refuse, heat, vibration, smoke, radiation or any
other objectionable emissions, or by interference with televisions or radio
reception.



      J.   No commodities shall be sold on the premises.



   3.   Home Occupations Permitted;  Representative Activities. 
Permitted home occupations include, but are not limited to, the following
list of activities; provided, however, that each permitted home occupation
shall be subject to the limitations in Section 165.26(2) above, and to all
other regulations applicable to the district in which it is located.



      A.   Facilities used by a physician, surgeon, dentist, lawyer,
clergyman, or other professional person, for emergency consultation or
treatment, but not for general practice of their profession.



      B.   Professional services such as accounting, computer,
architectural and other services provided client contact consists of no more
than an average of one client per day.



      C.   Providing instruction to no more than four students at a
time.



      D.   Day care or baby-sitting of not more than five
nonresident children.



      E.   Studio of an artist, photographer, craftsman, writer, or
composer.



      F.   Renting of rooms by a resident owner to no more than two
roomers.



      G.   Millinery, dressmaking, tailoring, canning, laundering,
and similar domestic service activities.



   4.   Bed and Breakfast Homes, Subject to the Following:



      A.   Only within a single family, owner-occupied dwelling unit.



      B.   If the dwelling unit has less than 1,000 square feet of
floor area, then one guest room is permitted.  If the dwelling unit has
1,000 square feet, but less than 2,000 square feet of floor area, then two
guest rooms are permitted.  If the dwelling unit has more than 2,000 square
feet then 3 guest rooms are permitted, three guest rooms shall be the maximum
ever permitted.



      C.   Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of 1
space for each guest room plus the spaces required for the residents. 
Parking spaces may be in tandem – one space directly behind the other with
no separation area – and more than one set of such tandem spaces are
permitted, but each tandem set shall be for no more than two vehicles.



      D.   Short-term lodging only is permitted.



      E.   Meals prepared or presented for remuneration are only for
the overnight guests and only as part of the lodging fee.



      F.   No meetings, receptions, parties, or like activities for
remuneration are permitted.



      G.   No cooking facilities are permitted in guest rooms.



      H.   No bed and breakfast home shall be located closer than
1,200 feet to another unless one or both are located within an officially
designated historic district.



      I.   Prior to operating a bed and breakfast home the owner
shall obtain an appropriate certificate of occupancy from the City of
Hiawatha Building Department.  To apply for such certificate the owner shall
file:



         (1)   A site plan of the property showing the location
and dimensions of the residence, accessory buildings, parking areas, and
proposed signs;



         (2)   A floor plan of the residence showing the location
and dimensions of the guest rooms and also showing location of exits, fire
alarms, fire extinguishers and any other safety features required by State or
local codes.



      J.   The bed and breakfast home shall meet all applicable
local and state inspection, licensing and permit requirements.



      K.   The bed and breakfast home shall adhere to the
limitations on sign size contained in Chapter 166 except that a sign may be
placed in a required front or side yard.



      L.   All other limitations on home occupation activities
contained herein shall also apply.



   5.   Occupations Prohibited.



      A.   Barber and beauty shops.



      B.   Automobile repair shops.



      C.   Taxicab and limousine businesses.



165.27   COMMUNICATION TOWERS.



   1.   General Statement of Purpose.  The purpose of this section is
to set forth minimum requirements to regulate the location, use, and height
of communication towers in order to protect the welfare of the community
while also considering the need for effective electronic communications
facilities, including particularly the accommodation of amateur radio
operation.  Communication towers shall also comply with the applicable
regulations contained in Iowa Municipal Code entitled “Communications
Towers.”



   2.   District Regulations.



      A.   Agriculture District.  Communication towers shall be
permitted as an accessory use and shall be subject to the following
regulations.



         (1)   Height.  A communication tower no more than 70
feet in height and a tower with attached antenna(s) with a combined height of
no more than 80 feet in height shall be permitted.  Towers and towers with
attached antenna(s) which exceed those height limits may be permitted as a
conditional use, subject to the provisions of Section 165.83.



         (2)   Required Yards.  A communication tower shall meet
the minimum yards required for a principal building.  Guy wires and anchors
shall meet the minimum yards required for an accessory building.  The Board
of Adjustment shall establish minimum yard requirements when approving a
conditional use permit for a communication tower.



      B.   Residence Districts.  Communication towers are permitted
only as an accessory use and are subject to the following regulations.



         (1)   Height.  A communication tower no more than 70
feet in height, and a tower with attached antenna(s) with a combined height
of no more than 80 feet in height shall be permitted.  Towers and towers
with attached antenna(s) which exceed those height limits may be permitted as
a conditional use, subject to the provisions of Section 165.83.  However, a
conditional use shall not be approved for a tower nor for a combined tower
and antenna(s) exceeding 125 feet in height.



         (2)   Required Yards.  A communication tower shall meet
the minimum yards required for a principal building for the district within
which the tower is located.  Guy wires and anchors shall meet the minimum
yards required for an accessory building.  The Board of Adjustment shall
establish minimum yard requirements when approving a conditional use permit
for a communication tower.



      C.   Commercial Districts.  Communication towers need not be
differentiated between principal or accessory uses since the regulations are
the same for both.



         (1)   Height.  A communication tower with or without
attached antenna(s), shall not exceed a total height of 125 feet.  Towers
exceeding 125 feet in height may be permitted as a conditional use, subject
to the provisions of Section 165.83.



         (2)   Required Yards.  A communication tower and any
associated guy lines, guy line anchors, or other supporting components shall
meet the minimum yard requirements for the district within which the tower is
located.  However, in no instance shall any such setback be less than 25
feet from the nearest lot line.



         (3)   Drives and Parking.  Parking spaces are not
required for a communication tower itself. Any associated uses and buildings
shall be provided parking spaces as required by Section 165.30-165.36.  Any
drives to the tower shall be constructed and maintained with a dust-free
surface.



      D.   Industrial Districts.  Communication towers need not be
differentiated between principal or accessory uses since the regulations are
the same for both.



         (1)   Height.  There are no height limits imposed by
this ordinance.



         (2)   Required Yards.  A communication tower and any
associated guy lines, guy line anchors or other supporting components shall
meet minimum yard requirements for the district within which the tower is
located. However, in no instance shall any such setback be less than 25 feet
from the nearest lot line.



         (3)   Drives and Parking.  Parking spaces are not
required for a communication tower itself.  Any associated uses and
buildings shall be provided parking spaces as required by Section
165.30-165.36.  Any drives to the tower shall be constructed and maintained
with a dust-free surface.



165.28   Reserved.



165.29   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   The operation of any use permitted in this chapter is subject to the
standards of performance, as follows:



   1.   Vibration.  Every use shall be so operated that the maximum
ground vibration generated is not perceptible without instruments at any
point on the lot line of the lot on which the use is located.



   2.   Odor.  Every use shall be so operated that no offensive or
objectionable odor is emitted.



   3.   Smoke and Air Pollution.  Every use shall be so operated that
no smoke from any source shall be emitted that exceeds the requirements set
by the State Air Pollution Control Act, as amended June 1967, and as the same
may hereafter from time to time be amended.



   4.   Toxic Matter.  The release of airborne toxic matter from any
operation or activity shall not exceed the fractional quantities permitted
below; the Threshold Limit Values adopted by the American Conference of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists.  If a toxic substance is not listed,
verification that the proposed level of toxic matter will be safe and not
detrimental to the public health or injurious to plant and animal life will
be required.  The measurement of toxic matter shall be on the average of any
24-hour sampling period.



      A.   In all C Zone Districts, the release beyond lot lines of
airborne toxic matter shall not exceed one-eighth of the Threshold Limit
Values.



      B.   In all I Zone Districts, the release of airborne toxic
matter shall not exceed one-eighth of the Threshold Limit Values beyond zone
boundary lines.



   5.   Radiation.  Every use shall be so operated that there is no
dangerous amount of radioactive emissions in accordance with the standards of
the Federal Radiation Council.



   6.   All lighting shall be of a type, design, and placement, and
also be directed away from and shielded in a manner to minimize impact on
residential districts or uses and shall comply with Hiawatha Code Chapter 168.



   7.   Any external sound system shall be designed, located and
operated to minimize impact on residential districts or uses and all sounds
generated on the premises shall, in any event, not exceed the maximum
permissible sound levels established in the City’s Noise Ordinance, Chapter
53 of the Municipal Code.



(Ord. 887 – Dec. 17 Supp.)



165.30   PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.



165.31   SCOPE AND APPLICATION.



   1.   Scope of Regulations.  The off-street parking and loading
provisions of this section shall apply as follows:



      A.   For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of
land established after the effective date of this Code, accessory parking and
loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
this section subject to any restrictions contained elsewhere in this Code.
Building permits issued prior to the effective date of this Code, may provide
parking and loading facilities in the amounts required for the issuance of
said building permit in lieu of any different amounts required by this Code,
provided construction is begun within six (6) months of the date of issuance
and diligently prosecuted to completion.



      B.   When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or
premises shall be increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross
floor area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein
for required parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as
required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.



      C.   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure
shall hereafter be converted to a new use, parking or loading facilities
shall be provided as required for such new use.



   2.   Existing Parking and Loading Facilities.  Off-street parking
and loading facilities in existence on the effective date of this Code, and
located on the same lot as the building or use served, shall not hereafter be
reduced below the requirements of this Code.  If such existing facilities
are already below the required amount, they shall not be further reduced.



   3.   Permissive Parking and Loading Facilities.  Nothing in this
Code shall be deemed to disallow the voluntary establishment of off-street
parking or loading facilities exceeding minimum requirements to serve any
existing use of land or buildings, provided that all regulations herein
governing the location, design, and operation of such facilities are
satisfied.



   4.   Damage or Destruction.  For any conforming or legally
nonconforming building or use which is in existence on the effective date of
this Code, which subsequently thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire,
collapse, explosion, or other cause, and which is reconstructed,
reestablished or repaired, off-street parking or loading facilities shall be
provided as required by this section.



   5.   Submission of Site Plan.  Any application for a Building
Permit, or for a Certificate of Occupancy where no Building Permit is
required, shall include therewith a Site Plan, drawn to scale and fully
dimensioned, showing any off-street parking or loading facilities and points
of access to be provided.



165.32   OFF-STREET PARKING GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   1.   Location.  All parking spaces required to serve buildings or
uses erected or established after the effective date of this Code shall be
located on the same lot as the building or use served, except that parking
spaces to serve buildings or uses in the I-1 and I-2 Districts may be located
within 500 feet of the buildings or use served. In the C-2, C-3 and C-4
Districts parking may be located within 300 feet of such building or use
served, but only if said spaces are located in a district wherein such
parking use is permitted and when such parking is developed in accordance
with all the applicable district regulations.



   2.   Existing Buildings and Uses.  Buildings or uses existing on
the effective date of this Code which are subsequently altered or enlarged so
as to require the provision of additional parking facilities located on land
other than the lot on which the building or use served is located, must
provide such facilities within 500 feet walking distance of a main entrance
to the use served in I-1 and I-2 Districts and within 300 feet in C-2, C-3
and C-4 Districts.  Owners of property, nonconforming as to parking
requirements, who elect to provide additional parking may locate such parking
on land other than the lot on which the building or use is located subject to
the provisions listed immediately above.  In addition thereto, the owner of
an existing multiple-family dwelling, which is nonconforming as to parking,
and who elects to provide additional parking, may locate such parking on land
other than the lot on which the building is located.  However, such location
shall be within 300 feet of such building and within a district wherein such
parking is permitted, and such parking shall be developed in accordance with
all the applicable district regulations.



   3.   Off-Street Spaces.  Off-street spaces, including the adjacent
area used for turning movements necessary to enter or leave the parking
spaces, when open to the sky, may be located in any yard except the required
front yards in the Agriculture and Residential Districts, and unless
otherwise specifically restricted by this Code.  Enclosed buildings and
carports containing off-street parking shall be subject to the applicable
district yard requirements.



   4.   Control of Off-Site Parking Facilities.  In cases where
parking facilities are permitted on land other than the lot on which the
building or use served is located, such facilities shall be in the same
possession as the lot occupied by the building or use to which the parking
facilities are accessory.  Such possession may be either by deed or
long-term lease, the term of such lease to be determined by the City Council;
and such deed or lease shall be filed with the Recorder of Deeds of Linn
County.  The deed or lease shall require such owner or his or her heirs and
assigns to maintain the required number of parking facilities for the
duration of the use served or of the deed or lease, whichever shall terminate
sooner.



   5.   Size and Vertical Clearance.  All minimum requirements as to
size, shape, and design of spaces, aisles and drives shall meet standard
Traffic Engineering Department specifications. Such space shall have a
vertical clearance of at least seven and one half-feet.



   6.   Access.  Except on lots accommodating single-family dwellings,
each off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway
of a width and design meeting Standard Traffic Engineering Department
specifications.  All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movement; and all such points of access
must be approved by the City’s Traffic Engineer.



   7.   Access to Parking Areas in the C-2 District.  With the
exception of shopping centers in this district, access should be provided
from an alley or other secondary access facility, such as frontage roads,
where feasible.  Access to such parking areas by curb cuts or driveways
across the front lot line should be avoided whenever possible.



   8.   Computation.  When determination of the number of off-street
parking spaces required by this Code results in a requirement of a fractional
space, any fraction shall be counted as one parking space.  Required parking
spaces based on the number of employees shall be based on the maximum number
of employees on duty and/or residing on the premises at any one time.



   9.   Utilization.  Accessory off-street parking facilities provided
in accordance with the requirements of this section shall be solely for the
parking of passenger motor vehicles or patrons, occupants, visitors, or
employees of such uses.  Additional parking may be provided for trucks and
other large vehicles in accordance with the requirements of this Code.



165.33   SHARED OFF-STREET PARKING PROVISIONS.



   1.   Private Facilities.  Off-street parking facilities for
separate uses may be provided collectively if the total number of spaces so
provided is at least equal to the sum of the separate requirements governing
the number of accessory parking spaces for each use served.  Further, no
parking space or portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more
than one use unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Adjustment.



   2.   Public Facilities.  Shared public parking can be located where
the City has constructed, or proposes to construct, public off-street parking
facilities, shared parking district within the boundaries of an area set
forth by resolution of the City Council.  The special conditions warranting
such action may relate to preservation of sites or structures of unique
historical or architectural value to the community, a hardship created by
public action, or other unusual circumstances.  When such a shared parking
district has been established, all or a part of the private off-street
parking spaces required within the parking district may be provided by the
public off-street parking facility located within said district.



   3.   Approved Parking and Side Development Plan for Shared Public
Parking.  Prior to property owners within the established parking district
being able to so reduce the number of private off-street parking spaces, such
owners shall submit, and the City Council must approve, a Parking and Site
Development Plan for the affected properties within the parking district.
Such plan shall show proposed development of the area and how the total
number of required off-street parking spaces will be provided by the use of
public and private facilities.  In addition to an Approved Parking and Site
Development Plan, the City Council may, as it deems necessary and
appropriate, require formal agreements with the property owners concerning
land dedications and easements, participation in construction and maintenance
costs of the public parking facilities and other related matters. 
Subsequent to formal execution of agreements, and the availability of the
public parking facilities, property owners may reduce the number of private
off-street spaces required in accordance with the Approved Parking and Site
Development Plan.



   4.   Number of Shared Public Parking Spaces.  The total number of
off-street parking spaces provided by the combined public and private
facilities within the shared parking district shall not be less than the
number required by this Code unless the City Council specifically approves
such a reduction in its approval of the Parking and Site Development Plan.



165.34   DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE OF OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS.



   1.   Plan.  Except for single-family and two-family residential
uses, the design of parking lots or areas shall meet City Standards.



   2.   Character.  Accessory parking spaces may be open to the sky or
enclosed in a building.



   3.   Surfacing.  All open, off-street parking areas, including all
drives and aisles and all turnarounds and loading areas shall be hard
surfaced and maintained so as to provide a durable and dust free surface.
Surfacing methods shall include concrete, asphaltic concrete, brick or
asphaltic macadam surfacing, meeting the construction specifications and City
Standards or such other method approved by the City Engineer as providing an
equally durable and dust-free surface.



   4.   Drainage.  All open off-street parking areas shall be graded
and drained to dispose of surface water accumulation in accordance with City
Standards.



   5.   Screening and Landscaping.  All open vehicle parking areas
containing more than four parking spaces shall be effectively screened on
each side adjoining property situated in a Residential District or any
institutional premises, by a wall, an opaque fence, or by the use of
appropriate plant materials and shall comply with UDC Section 165.23(6)(B). 
Driveways to and from such parking areas, shall also be so screened on any
side which adjoins property in a Residential District or any institutional
premises.  The Board of Adjustment may waive these screening requirements. 



   6.   Lighting.  Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking
areas shall be directed away from residential properties and public streets
in such a way as to not create a nuisance in accordance with Hiawatha Code
Chapter 168.



   7.   Wheel Guards.  All perimeter parking spaces, except for
single- and two-family use, shall be provided with wheel guards or bumper
guards so located that no part of parked vehicles will extend beyond the
property line.



   8.   Signs.  Accessory signs shall be permitted on parking areas in
accordance with the provisions specified in Chapter 166 of this Code.



   9.   Vehicle Repair and Service Restrictions.  Regulations for all
zoning districts are set forth in Section 165.21(17).



165.35   OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES.



   1.   Specific Requirements.



      A.   Design Standards.  All off-street parking spaces
required by this chapter, except those required for single- and two-family
dwellings, shall be designed in accordance with City Standards.



      B.   Off-Street Parking Table – Parking Classes. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the specific
Parking Classes as hereinafter set forth in the Off-Street Parking Table –
Parking Classes.



      C.   Parking Spaces for Accessory Uses.  Parking spaces for
major accessory uses which are specifically enumerated within a Parking Class
shall be provided in addition to those required by the principal use. Parking
spaces for accessory uses not specifically enumerated within a parking class
shall be assumed to be included in the principal use requirement.



      D.   Determination of Number of Spaces.  If, for any reason,
the classification of any use for the purpose of determining the amount of
off-street parking, or the number of spaces to be provided by such use is not
readily determinable hereunder, the parking class for such use or the number
of spaces to be provided shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator,
after recommendation by appropriate City departments.



   2.   Off-Street Parking Table.† 2



   3.   



 

USE DEFINITIONS
 
NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES




ANIMALS AND AGRICULTURAL USES


Agricultural:  Uses as defined in Section 165.96.
 
Spaces as required by the Board of Adjustment after recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.


Agricultural limited:  Limited to production of crops and pasturing/shelter
of grazing livestock on lots of three acres and larger.
 
Spaces as required by the Board of Adjustment after recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.


Vegetation Production Limited:  Includes nurseries, green houses, truck
gardens and similar uses.  Product sales shall be limited to produce grown
on site.
 
Retail uses:  1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 2 for each
employee, based on the largest number of employees on the premises at any one
time.


Game and forest reserves
 
Spaces as required by the Board of Adjustment after recommendation by the
City Planning Commission.


Riding/boarding stables.
 
Spaces as required by the Board of Adjustment after recommendation by the
City Planning Commission.


Animal services limited:  Uses limited to animal clinics/hospitals and pet
grooming all contained within structures.  Incidental accessory boarding is
allowed.
 
Office and work areas: 3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus:

Kennel areas:  1 for each employee, based on the greatest number of
employees on the premises at any one time.


Animal indoor boarding: Uses include indoor boarding kennels and the
allowance for outdoor animal exercise areas.


Kennels as defined in Section 165.96


RESIDENTIAL DWELLING USES


Detached single family dwellings
 
2 per dwelling unit.


Mobile home as defined in 165.96


Two-family dwellings as defined in 165.96


Two-family zero lot line dwellings attached


Attached dwelling units as defined in 165.96


Multi-family dwellings as defined in 165.96


Lodging houses as defined in 165.96
 
1 per dwelling unit (habitable living unit)


Family homes, group homes and emergency shelters as defined in Section 165.96
 
1 per each employee of the shift having the greatest number of employees, plus

1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area


Health care facilities as defined in 165.96
 
1 per each employee of the shift having the greatest number of employees, plus

1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area


Mixed use dwelling structure or development as defined in 165.96
 
1 per dwelling unit (habitable living unit), plus the applicable parking for
the additional uses.


Watchman’s quarters
 
1 per dwelling unit (habitable living unit)


Cemeteries
 
Spaces as required by the Board of Adjustment after recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission


RESIDENTIAL TRANSIENT USES


Hospitals
 
2 for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area


Hotels and motels as defined in Section 165.96
 
1 per dwelling unit (habitable living unit)


Rehabilitation houses and crisis counseling centers as defined in 165.96
 
1 per dwelling unit (habitable living unit)


Bed and Breakfast [see also 165.26(4)]
 
1 per dwelling unit (habitable living unit)


Residential Child Day Care Facilities
 
See Sections 165.25, 165.26, 165.85 and 165.96 for limits and registrations


Home Occupations
 
See Section 165.26



 



EDUCATION AND RELIGIOUS OCCUPANCIES


Religious facilities as defined in 165.96
 
1 for each four seats provided in the main seating area.


Schools: junior high and elementary
 
1 for each employee, based on the greatest number of employees on the
premises at any one time.


Schools: senior high schools
 
1 for each employee, plus 1 for every six students, based on design capacity.


Schools up to and through grade 12 for specialized training: dance schools,
music schools
 
3 per 1,000 square fee of gross floor area


Colleges, junior colleges and universities
 
1 for each four students, based on design capacity.


Vocational, technology and trade schools
 
1 for each student based on design capacity.



 



MOTOR VEHICLE RELATED USES [see also 165.21(17)]


Motor vehicle services limited:  uses limited to car washes and interior
detailing.
 
1 for each two employees, plus reserve spaces equal to 5 times maximum
capacity of auto washing unit.


Motor vehicle services limited: uses limited to convenience store with fuel
stations.

 
 
4 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus additional reservoir space
to accommodate five automobiles in each service lane.


Motor vehicle services general: uses include all services related to the
repair and maintenance of motor vehicles including but not limited to
mechanic shops, repair shops and body shops.
 
3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area


Truck stop
 
4 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus additional reservoir space
to accommodate five automobiles in each service lane.


ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATION


Clubs and lodges as defined in 165.96
 
6 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area


Restaurants and bars: includes outdoor seating
 
10 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus

Drive up service: reservoir spaces to accommodate five automobiles in each
service lane.


Entertainment and sports, indoor: Characterized by artistic productions in
theater settings and uses involving physical participation indoors with
limited spectators. Including but not limited to indoor theaters with and
without stages, dance halls, bowling alleys, indoor archery and shooting
ranges, indoor tennis courts, handball, indoor swimming pools, arcades and
casinos. 
 
6 for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for areas not specified
herein.

5 per alley; 

1.5 per driving tee;

4 per court for handball, racquetball, squash or tennis.

1 for each two seats provided (theater)

1 for every 75 square feet of water when public swimming pool is an isolated
use.

10 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; skating rinks

 


Outdoor recreational, non-spectator limited: Characterized by non-spectator
activities including but not limited to mini-golf, driving ranges, paintball,
tennis courts and swimming pools, excluding open space parks, golf courses
and firing ranges.
 
6 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 6 per 1,000 square feet of
gross land area directly utilized for outdoor recreational areas unless
specified herein.

5 per alley; 

1.5 per driving tee; 

4 per court for handball, racquetball, squash or tennis.

1 per 75 square feet of water when public swimming pool is an isolated use

1 for each four seats provided in the main seating area.

Zoo: 1 for every 2,000 square feet of gross land area.


Outdoor recreational, spectator: Characterized by large groups of spectators
or participants in diverse outdoor activities including but not limited to
arenas, stadiums and amusement parks.


Golf courses
 
5 per hole, plus

Parking for other uses as required by this table


Firing ranges outdoor; includes gun and archery ranges
 
1 for every 5,000 square feet of gross land area


Race tracks
 
1 for each four seats provided in the main seating area.


Campground and RV park
 
1 per 5,000 square feet of gross land area, or 1 per 75 square feet of water
when public swimming pool is an isolated use.


Parks: open space



 



BUSINESS SERVICES


Personal professional services: uses characterized by frequent on-site client
services including but not limited to medical clinics, financial
institutions, salons, automatic laundromats, photo and art studios, massage
and tattoo parlors (excluding adult massage parlors as defined in 165.96)
 
3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for all areas not specified
herein.

5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for salons and barbershops

7 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for medical clinics.

plus

drive-up windows or stations: an additional reservoir space to accommodate
five automobiles for each lane of service


Day care centers: Items A and B as defined in 165.96
 
2 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area


Personal service and repair: limited to personal services including but not
limited to dressmaking, tailoring, laundries, interior decorating, domestic
appliance and furniture repair. Incidental sales shall be related to the
service and shall be contained in less than 20 percent of the floor area. 
 
3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area


Business professional uses: characterized by offices and laboratories with
limited on site client services including but not limited to business and
professional offices, attorney offices, realtors, job services, radio/TV
stations, medical offices, research and testing laboratories, and software
developers and support.
 
3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area


Business professional services with public gathering:  uses characterized
with a mix of on-site client services with public gathering occupancy and
increased traffic including but not limited to conference centers without
hotel accommodations, art galleries, health clubs, gymnasiums, funeral homes,
libraries and museums
 
3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for all areas not specified herein

10 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for flexible open gathering
places (convention hall)

1 for each four seats provided in a main seating area.

 


Business services contractor limited:
 
2 for each employee based on the largest number of employees on the premises
at any one time.


Business services contractor industrial:


Adult entertainment establishments
 
3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area


Pawn brokers and delayed deposit services
 
3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area





RETAIL AND REPAIR


Retail convenience limited:  retail related to neighborhood convenience
limited to pharmacies and food stores for pre-packaged foods such as grocery
stores and prepared on-site foods including but not limited to meat markets,
delis, bakeries, and ice cream parlors.
 
4 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for all areas not specified herein

 

Drive-up service: reservoir space to accommodate five automobiles in each
service lane.

 

10 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for accessory seating areas

 


Retail general: retail uses characterized by shops and stores where all
commodities and transactions are inside buildings. Includes rentals but no
additional services such as repairs or installations. Including but not
limited to department stores, clothing stores, malls and specialty stores.


Retail and repair: uses include medium to small commodity sales with
associated repair and rental services including but not limited to computer
sales, appliance sales and residential outdoor equipment.


Retail large commodity: includes retail and rental uses which may rely on
outside storage and display such as cars, boats, building materials, mobile
home sales, grave monuments and nurseries.


Retail industrial commodity: characterized by sales and repair of industrial
equipment and products. Including but not limited to industrial equipment,
construction machines, farm implement, seed and feed stores.
 
1 for each two employees based on the largest number of employees on the
premises at any one time.



 



STORAGE AND WAREHOUSE AND DISTRIBUTION


Storage Limited
 
1 for each two employees based on the largest number of employees on the
premises at any one time.

 


Warehouse and distribution limited


Warehouse and distribution general


Refuse hauling
 
2 for each employee based on the largest number of employees on the premises
at any one time.



 



PRODUCTION AND MANUFACTURING


Production and processing limited
 
Assembly line employees:  1 for each two employees based on the largest
number of employees on the premises at any one time.

 

Office areas: 3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area

 

All others: 1 for each employee based on the greatest number of employees on
the premises at any one time.


Production and processing general


Manufacturing limited


Manufacturing industrial: characterized by the use of heavy equipment and
some exterior processes. Including but not limited to asphalt product
manufacturing, stone and masonry manufacturing, concrete mixing plant
 
1 for each employee based on the greatest number of employees on the premises
at any one time.

 


Heavy industrial activities: characterized by the use of heavy equipment in
production and processes necessarily outside. Including but not limited to
salvage yards.
 
2 for each employee based on the largest number of employees on the premises
at any one time.


Quarries and other extraction uses
 
1 for each employee based on the greatest number of employees on the premises
at any one time.


Sanitary land fills
 
2 for each employee based on the largest number of employees on the premises
at any one time.


Wind generators, commercial
 
1 for each employee based on the greatest number of employees on the premises
at any one time.



 



TRANSPORTATION AND UTILITIES


Bus terminals
 
Spaces as required by the Board of Adjustment after recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.


Airports


Heliports


Railroad facilities
 
Passenger station: 10 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area


Freight station: 1 for each two employees based on the largest number of
employees on the premises at any one time.


Essential services
 
Spaces as required by the Board of Adjustment after recommendation by the
City Planning Commission unless use matches a designation in this table.


Communication towers
 
1 for each employee based on the greatest number of employees on the premises
at any one time (radar and towers)




 



165.36   OFF-STREET LOADING.



   1.   General Requirements.



      A.   Location.  All required loading berths shall be located
on the same lot as the use served. All motor vehicle loading berths which are
within or abut a Residential District or intervening alley shall be
completely screened therefrom by building walls or by a uniformly painted
solid fence, wall, or door, or any combination thereof, not less than 8 feet
in height. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within 30
feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets. No loading
berth shall be located in a required front or side yard.



      B.   Size.  Unless otherwise specified, a required off-street
loading berth shall be at least 12 feet in width by at least 35 feet in
length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical
clearance of at least 15 feet.



      C.   Access.  Each required off-street loading berth shall be
designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a
manner which will least interfere with traffic movement, and shall meet
standard City Engineering specifications. All driveways servicing off-street
loading berths shall be in accordance with applicable City driveway standards.



      D.   Utilization.  Space allocated to any off-street loading
use shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements
for any off-street parking facilities or portions thereof.



      E.   Central Loading.  Central loading facilities may be
substituted for loading berths on individual lots, provided the following
conditions are fulfilled:



         (1)   Each lot served shall have direct access to the
central loading area without crossing streets or alleys at grade.



         (2)   Total off-street loading berths provided shall
meet the minimum requirements herein specified based on the sum of the
several types of uses served.



      F.   Minimum Facilities.  Uses for which off-street loading
facilities are required herein, but which are located in buildings of less
floor area then the minimum prescribed for such required facilities, shall be
provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible to motor vehicle off
any adjacent alley, service drive, parking lot, or open space located on the
same lot.



   2.   Specific Requirements.  The minimum amount of off-street
loading or unloading space to be provided is shown on the following pages:



 

A.   Residence Districts
 
Gross Floor Area
 
Minimum Number of Berths Required
 
Minimum Size of Berths




(1)
 
Multi-family dwellings, rooming houses
 
20,000 sq. ft. to 200,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


Each additional 200,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1
 
12' x 35'


(2)
 
Health, medical, institutional uses
 
10,000 sq. ft. to 100,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


Next additional 100,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1
 
12' x 35'


(3)
 
Educational, cultural, religious institutions
 
10,000 sq. ft. to 200,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


Each additional 200,000 sq. ft. or fraction up to 500,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


(4)
 
Recreational and social
 
10,000 sq. ft. to 100 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


Each additional 100,000 sq. ft or fraction up to 500,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


Each additional 500,000 sq. ft or fraction
 
1
 
12' x 55'


(5)
 
Planned Unit Development
 
As required by individual uses
 
1
 
12' x 35'


(6)
 
All other non-residential uses
 
10,000 sq. ft. to 100,000 sq. ft
 
1
 
12' x 35'


Each additional 100,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1
 
12' x 35'




 



 

B.   Commercial Districts
 
Gross Floor Area
 
Minimum Number of Berths Required
 
Minimum Size of Berths




(1)
 
Any use listed in a Residence District permitted in a Commercial District
shall provide loading spaces as required in Section 165.36(2)(A) above.
 

 

 



(2)
 
Cartage and express facilities, mail order houses, printing & publishing,
restricted production & repair, warehousing, storage & wholesale
establishments
 
Up to 400,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


40,001 sq. ft. to 100,000 sq. ft
 
2 Total
 
12' x 35'


Each additional 100,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1
 
12' x 55'


(3)
 
Banks, financial institutions; medical, dental clinics; business and
professional offices; non-recreation building and community centers
 
Up to 100,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


Each additional 100,000 sq. ft. or fraction up to 500,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


Each additional 500,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1
 
12' x 35'


(4)
 
Nonprofit clubs and non-profit lodges, hotels, and motels containing retail
shops, convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, or business or
professional offices; convention halls; exhibition halls; radio & television
stations & studios; recording studios
 
Up to 20,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


20,001 sq. ft. up to 150,000 sq. ft.
 
2 Total
 
12' x 55'


Each additional 150,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1
 
12' x 55'


(5)
 
Nonprofit clubs, non-profit lodges, hotels and motels containing no retail
shops, convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, or business or
professional offices; meeting halls; music, dance, business or trade schools;
indoor theaters
 
Up to 200,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


Each additional 200,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1
 
12' x 35'


(6)
 
Amusement establishments, bowling alleys, swimming pools, skating rinks
 
Up to 100,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


Each additional 100,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1
 
12' x 35'


(7)
 
Stadiums, auditoriums and arenas
 
Up to 20,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


20,001 sq. ft. up to 100,000 sq. ft.
 
2 Total
 
12' x 55'


Each additional 100,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1
 
12' x 55'


(8)
 
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors
 
Up to 100,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


Each additional 100,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1
 
12' x 35'


(9)
 
Planned Unit Developments
 
As required by individual uses


(10)
 
Parking lots and garages
 
None required


(11)
 
All other uses permitted in Commercial Districts
 
Up to 200,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


20,001 sq. ft. to 35,000 sq. ft.
 
1 Additional
 
12' x 35'


35,001 sq. ft. to 60,000 sq. ft.
 
2 Total
 
12' x 55'


60,001 sq. ft. to 100,000 sq. ft.
 
1 Additional
 
12' x 55'


Each additional 200,000 sq. ft. or fraction thereof over 100,000 sq. ft.
gross floor area
 
1 Additional
 
12' x 55'




 



 

C.   Industrial Districts
 
Gross Floor Area
 
Minimum Number of Berths Required
 
Minimum Size of Berths




(1)
 
Any facility for production, processing, cleaning servicing, testing, repair
or storage of materials, goods, or products
 
Up to 10,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


10,001 sq. ft. to 40,000 sq. ft.
 
1 Total
 
12' x 60'


40,001 sq. ft. to 100,000 sq. ft.
 
2 Total
 
12' x 60'


Each additional 100,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1 Additional
 
12' x 60'


(2)
 
Medical and dental clinics, offices of labor organizations; recreation
buildings or community centers
 
Up to 100,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


Each additional 100,000 sq. ft. or fraction up to 500,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


Each additional 500,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1
 
12' x 35'


(3)
 
Airports & commercial heliports; air and railroad terminals, railroad
switching and classification yards, repair shops and roundhouses; radio and
television stations and studios; sewage treatment plants – municipal;
stadiums, auditoriums & arenas
 
Up to 20,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


20,001 sq. ft. to 100,000 sq. ft.
 
1 Total
 
12' x 60'


Each additional 100,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1
 
12' x 60'


(4)
 
Lodges or labor organizations; trade schools
 
Up to 200,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


Each additional 200,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1
 
12' x 35'


(5)
 
Motor freight terminals
 
Up to 10,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


10,001 sq. ft. up to 40,000 sq. ft.
 
1 Total
 
12' x 60'


40,001 sq. ft. up to 100,000 sq. ft.
 
2 Total
 
12' x 60'


Each additional 100,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1 Additional
 
12' x 60'


(6)
 
Parking lots, weighing stations
 
None required


(7)
 
All other permitted uses
 
Up to 10,000 sq. ft.
 
1
 
12' x 35'


10,001 sq. ft. to 24,000 sq. ft.
 
2 total
 
12' x 35'


24,001 sq. ft. to 40,000 sq. ft.
 
2 Total
 
12' x 60'


40,001 sq. ft. to 100,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
3 total
 
12' x 60'


Each additional 200,000 sq. ft. or fraction
 
1 Additional
 
12' x 60'




 



165.37 through 165.46 – Reserved



 



165.47   LANDSCAPING AND SHADING REGULATIONS.



   The purpose of this section is to promote and protect the safety and
welfare of the public through requirements for landscaping and shading which
prevent soil erosion, improve air and water quality and enhance and preserve
the beauty and appearance of the environment.



   1.   Applicability.  The provisions of this section shall apply to
all new landscaping and trees planted or installed within the City in
conjunction with new construction, reconstruction or structural alteration
projects of a building, parking area, or subdivision after the effective date
of this section.



   2.   Conformance Required.  It is unlawful, after the effective
date of this section, within all projects or developments in R-7, Commercial
and Industrial Districts requiring a building permit, site plan approval, or
subdivision approval by the City, to install, construct, or plant any
landscaping except in conformance with the provisions hereof.



   3.   Goals and Objectives.  The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall take into consideration the following goals and objectives, as well as
the specific criteria enumerated.  When reviewing a landscape plan, the
Commission shall approve the plan if it finds and determines that:



      A.   The plan provides visual, noise and access screening
between conflicting land uses.



      B.   The plan takes into account and does not inhibit the
exercise of solar access rights of neighboring properties.



      C.   The plan tends to decrease soil erosion.



      D.   The plan does not interfere with any line of sight for
vehicular drivers entering or leaving the site.



      E.   The plan enhances the architecture of the property, e.g.,
the landscaping tends to break up large expanses of wall and other
structure(s).



      F.   The plan facilitates the movement of pedestrians and
vehicles on the site and integrates with and helps to conceal parking
facilities on the site.



      G.   The plan utilizes and preserves existing and native
vegetation to the greatest degree possible.



      H.   The plan does not place an unreasonable burden on the
City water system and supply.



      I.   The plan retains all existing trees 18 inches in diameter
or more unless the retention of such trees would unreasonably burden the
development.



   4.   Landscaping and Shading Requirements.  All landscape plans
submitted shall meet the following requirements prior to approval:



      A.   All disturbed areas on the site shall be re-vegetated or
landscaped in a manner as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



      B.   All on-site areas prone to soil erosion shall be defined
on the landscape plan and shall be controlled through landscaping.



      C.   If requested by the City, details must be submitted which
show that no proposed landscaping plan shall cause interference with adjacent
property owners’ solar access rights.



      D.   The landscape plan shall only propose plantings or
construction which do not interfere with the sight line of drivers entering
or leaving the site.



      E.   Where deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the plan must provide for visual and noise screening between lots
or parcels and abutting streets or thoroughfares.  In making their decision,
the Planning and Zoning Commission will take into consideration the types of
land uses on the abutting lots or parcels.



      F.   The plan must provide for transitional yards where
required.  See Section 165.23(6).



      G.   Trees shall be placed to avoid interference with the
construction, maintenance and operation of public and private utilities and
services above or below ground as determined by the utility companies and the
City Engineer.



      H.   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a lot to
maintain and replace, if necessary, trees required by these provisions after
their planting.  Any trees on private property which overhang the public
right-of-way shall be maintained in accordance with City provisions. 
Maintenance of trees within street rights-of-way shall be the responsibility
of the property owner.



      I.   Each tree planted shall be deemed to cover two hundred
(200) square feet for purposes of this chapter. Each tree shall be at least
eight (8) feet tall and have a diameter at breast height of at least two (2)
inches.



      J.   Where fractional numbers of trees result, the number of
trees required shall be rounded up to the closest whole number.



      K.   Evergreen trees, required for screening purposes in
accordance with the provisions of 165.23(6), Transitional Yards, and 165.30
to 165.36, Off-Street Parking Requirements, may be used to satisfy the
requirements of the tree regulations provided they are of a variety suitable
for screening purposes, as listed in Appendix A, and are allowed to grow to
their mature height.



      L.   References to “large” or “small” trees in
subsequent paragraphs refer to the mature height as suggested in the
“Suggested Tree Planting List” in Appendix A.



      M.   Existing on-site trees may be used to comply with the
requirements of the tree regulations.



   5.   Subdivision Landscape and Shade Requirements.



      A.   Landscaping.  In R-1, R-3, and R-5 Zone Districts there
are no landscape or shade requirements.  Landscaping shall be done on a lot
by lot basis in accordance with site plan requirements in R-7, C-ORS, C-2,
C-3, C-4, C-R, C-WH, I-1 and I-2 Zone Districts.  In the R-MH Zone District,
refer to Section 147.09, Soil and Ground Cover Requirements.



      B.   Screening.  When undeveloped land is subdivided and
undeveloped lots only are sold, the subdivider shall not be required to
install any screening. Screening shall be required, if at all, only when the
lots are developed, and shall be the responsibility of the developer of the
lot.



      C.   Shading.



         (1)   Along both sides of all newly created streets in
all R-7, C-ORS, C-2 and C-R Zone Districts that are constructed in accordance
with the public street standards set forth in Section 165.58 there shall
either be planted or retained sufficient trees so that between the paved
portion of the street and a line running parallel to and 50 feet from the
centerline of the street, there is for every 40 feet of street frontage at
least an average of one deciduous tree that has or will have when fully
mature a trunk at least 12 inches in diameter.  When trees are planted
pursuant to this section, the developer shall choose trees that meet the
standards set forth in Appendix A. 



(Ord. 923 - Feb. 19 Supp.)



         (2)   At street intersections, trees shall not be
located within 70 feet of the intersection of curb lines along arterial
streets, within 50 feet along collector streets, or within 30 feet of the
intersection of curb lines along local streets.  In cases where two
different types of streets intersect, the location of the tree shall be
determined by the type of street adjacent to the proposed tree.



   6.   Site Plan Landscape and Shade Requirements.



      A.   Landscaping.



         (1)   In R-1, R-3 and R-5 Zone Districts there are no
landscape or site plan requirements.



         (2)   The following minimum percentages of lot or site
area shall be placed in approved landscaping:



            a.   In R-7 or PUD Zone Districts with a
multiple-family dwelling of three or more units, a minimum of fifteen percent
(15%) of the area of the lot shall be provided as open space. Such open space
shall be provided on the ground and shall not include any of the required
yard areas, nor any area provided for off-street parking or loading, nor any
area in streets or drives.  One-third (1/3) of the total landscaped area
shall be planted with trees.



            b.   In C-ORS, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-R, C-WH, I-1 and
I-2 Districts:  ten percent (10%).  One-third (1/3) of the total landscaped
area shall be planted with trees.  The landscaped area shall be any area
that is not covered by buildings, parking areas or driveways.



      B.   Screening.



         (1)   Transitional yards when required shall be provided
in accordance with Section 165.23(6).



         (2)   Any plan containing an outdoor storage area will
provide visual and noise screening between adjacent lots or parcels and
streets or thoroughfares.



      C.   Shading.



         (1)   Trees are required to be planted along the streets
in all R-7, C-ORS, C-2 and C-R Zone Districts in accordance with the
provisions of Section 165.47(5)(C) and above.



         (2)   Trees are required to be planted in all parking
facilities with a capacity larger than forty (40) vehicles with more than two
(2) aisles.  The landscape plan must provide for interior plantings in order
to provide shade and break up the expanse of hard-surfaced area.  Interior
landscaping shall be a minimum of five percent (5%) of the total parking
area.  This subsection does not abrogate the parking requirements as stated
in any other part of this Code.



165.48 and 165.49 – Reserved



 



165.50   PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION.



   1.   General.  Regulations and standards for zoning, subdivision
and site planning address the following items:



      A.   Availability of access and services.



      B.   Construction design standards.



      C.   Environmental impact.



   2.   Purpose and Intent.  The purpose of this section is to
establish procedures for the following policies which must be met as
development occurs:



      A.   Impacts on services and infrastructure are mitigated.



      B.   Development is at an appropriate scale for the project
site and its surroundings.



      C.   Public health, safety and welfare are protected.



   3.   Services Matrix.  The Services Matrix in Figure II lists the
types of information required at each stage in the development process on
availability of access, fire protection and emergency medical services, the
need for public use areas, and availability of water, sewage disposal and
utilities.  It is important to note that the information in the matrix is
not all inclusive.  It must be used in conjunction with the text in this
Code to identify the requirements applicable to a development.† 3



165.51   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.



   The purpose of this section is provide minimum standards for the
design, development, and improvement of all new subdivisions and
resubdivisions of land, so that existing land uses will be protected, and so
that adequate provisions are made for public facilities and services, and so
that growth occurs in an orderly manner, consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan, and in a manner that promotes the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the City.



165.52   APPLICATION.



   Every owner of any tract or parcel of land who has subdivided or shall
hereafter subdivide or plat said tract or parcel into two or more parts for
the purpose of laying out an addition, subdivision, building lot or lots,
acreage or suburban lots within the City or within two miles from the
corporate limits of the City, shall cause plats of such area to be made in
the form and containing the information, as hereinafter set forth before
selling any lots therein contained or placing the plat on record. The
authority to review an addition, subdivision, building lot or lots within two
miles from the corporate limits of the City is granted to the City pursuant
to Section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa.



   1.   Subdivision Required for Building Permit.  No building permit
shall be issued for construction on any lot, parcel, or tract where a
subdivision is required by this chapter unless and until a final plat of such
subdivision has been approved and recorded in accordance with this chapter,
and until the improvements required by this chapter have been accepted by the
City.



   2.   Improvements Required.  The subdivider shall, at the
subdivider’s expense, install and construct all improvements required by
this section. All required improvements shall be installed and constructed in
accordance with the design standards established for such improvements by the
City and as shown on the approved preliminary plat. The preliminary plat
shall be approved by both the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City
Council.



   3.   Plat of Survey.  A plat of survey may be used for the
subdivision of land with the approval of the City Engineer for one of the
following purposes:



      To convey property ownership prior to any building development.



      For the purpose of vacating public right-of-way.



      To allow for property line adjustments.



      Other situations as determined appropriate by the City Engineer.



165.53   MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS.



   The improvements set forth below shall be considered the minimum
improvements necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
Design of the improvements shall be in accordance with the Engineering
Standards adopted by resolution by the Hiawatha City Council in accordance
with Hiawatha Code Section 165.58.



(Ord. 923 - Feb. 19 Supp.)



   1.   Streets.  The subdivider of land being subdivided shall
provide the grading of the entire street right-of-way, alley, or public place
and provide appropriate paving, including curb and gutter on all streets. All
streets or alleys shall be of such width and shall be so constructed as to
meet City Standards. Under some circumstances, the City may require, as a
condition for approval of the plat, dedication and improvement of a street
having a width greater than necessary to meet the needs of the platted area
but necessary to complete the City street system as it relates to both the
area being platted and other areas. In such event, the City will pay the
subdivider the difference in cost of improving the wider street and the
street width reasonable to meet foreseeable needs of the subdivision taken
alone. The streets shall, upon final approval and acceptance by the City,
become the property of the City.



   2.   Sanitary Sewer System.  The subdivider of the land being
platted shall make adequate provision for the disposal of sanitary sewage
from the platted area with due needs. There shall be constructed, at the
subdivider’s expense, a sanitary sewer system, including all necessary
pumping stations, pumping equipment, manholes, and all other necessary or
desirable appurtenances to provide for the discharge of sanitary sewage from
all lots or parcels of land within the platted area to a connection with the
City’s sanitary sewers. The sanitary sewer system shall be constructed in
accordance with City Standards and at the sewer grades as established by the
City. Under some circumstances, the City may require, as a condition for
approval of the plat, installation of a sanitary sewer that is larger than
necessary to meet the needs of the City sanitary sewer as it relates to both
the area being platted and other areas. In such event, the City will pay the
subdivider the difference in cost of pipe and installation between the larger
sewer and the diameter of sewer reasonable to meet the foreseeable needs of
the area. The above mentioned facilities for the collection and disposal of
sanitary sewage from the platted area shall, upon final approval and
acceptance from the City, become the property of the City.



   3.   Storm Sewer System.  The subdivider of land being platted
shall install and construct a storm sewer system adequate to serve the area,
including anticipated extension of use to serve additional areas.  The storm
sewer design shall comply with the provisions of a storm water management
plan which has been adopted by the City in Chapter 162 of the Hiawatha Code
of Ordinances.  The storm sewer system shall be constructed in accordance
with the City Standards. Such sewers shall, upon inspection, approval and
acceptance by the City, become the property of the City.



   EXCEPTION:  Detention basins and associated inlets and outlets as part
of the runoff control required by Chapter 162 shall not become the property
of the City unless the Council accepts these portions of the system by
resolution.



   4.   Water Main System.  The subdivider of land being platted shall
install and construct a water main system to adequately serve all lots or
parcels of land within the platted area, with due regard to the present and
reasonable foreseeable needs of the entire area, and shall connect the same
to the City’s existing water mains.  The water main system shall be
constructed in accordance with City Standards.  Under some circumstances,
the City may require, as a condition for approval of the plat, installation
of a water main that is larger than necessary to meet the needs of the
platted area, but necessary to complete the City water distribution system as
it relates to both the area being platted and other areas. In such event, the
City will pay the subdivider the difference in cost of pipe and installation
between the larger water main and the diameter of water main reasonable to
meet the foreseeable needs of the area.  The water mains shall, upon
inspection, approval, and acceptance by the City, become the property of the
City.



   5.   Other Improvements.  The owner and subdivider of the land
being platted shall be responsible for the installation of sidewalks within
the street area, as defined in Section 165.58(3), the installation of
walkways as necessary; grading, seeding or sodding of all lots; the planting
of any required trees in the parking as defined in Section 165.47; the
installation of street signs and the provision of street lighting.  All such
improvements shall be under the direction of the City Engineer or director of
the electric utility, as appropriate.



165.54   EASEMENTS.



   1.   Utility Easements.  Utility easements shall be placed where
required by the utilities. The location of these easements shall be shown on
the approved final plat. No building or structures, except as necessary for
utilities, shall be permitted on such easements.



   2.   Drainage Easements.  Wherever any stream or surface
watercourse is located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider
shall, at the subdivider’s own expense, make adequate provisions for the
proper drainage of surface water and shall provide and dedicate to the City
an easement along said stream or watercourse as necessary for the proper
maintenance of the watercourse, and as approved by the City.



165.55       MAINTENANCE BOND REQUIRED.



   The owner and subdivider of the land being platted shall be required to
provide to the City proper maintenance bonds or cashier’s check
satisfactory to the City, so as to ensure that improvements will be
maintained in good repair for a period of years after the date of acceptance
on any such improvements: four years for all roads, curbs, trails, and
surface utilities and two years for water, sanitary sewer and storm water
utilities.     (Ord. 913 – Oct. 18 Supp.)



165.56   ALTERNATIVE SYSTEMS FOR SEWER AND WATER.



   Where connection to the City sewer or water system cannot reasonably be
made, the City may approve alternate facilities for the distribution of water
or the collection and disposal of sanitary wastes.  Such alternate systems
shall be designed to fully protect the public health, safety and welfare, and
shall meet all requirements of State, County or other applicable health
regulations.  Prior to granting approval of such alternate systems, the City
shall require that the owner and subdivider provide to the City a Waiver of
Assessment Protest or such other legally binding documents necessary to
protect the City from the expense of the subsequent installation of sewer or
water facilities.



165.57   STANDARDS PRESCRIBED.



   The standards set forth in this section shall be considered the minimum
standards necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.



   1.   Land Suitability.  No land shall be subdivided which is found
to be unsuitable for subdividing by reason of flooding, ponding, poor
drainage, adverse soil conditions, adverse geological formations,
unsatisfactory topography or other conditions likely to be harmful to the
public health, general welfare, unless such unsuitable conditions are
corrected to the satisfaction of the City. If land is found to be unsuitable
for subdivision for any of the reasons cited in this section, the Council
shall state its reasons in writing and afford the subdivider an opportunity
to present data regarding such unsuitability. Thereafter, the Council may
reaffirm, modify or withdraw its determination regarding such unsuitability.



   2.   Lands Subject to Flooding.  No subdivision containing land
located in a floodway or a flood hazard area shall be approved by the City
without the approval of the Department of Natural Resources.  No lot shall
be located so as to include land located within a floodway or flood hazard
area unless the lot is of such size and shape that it will contain a
buildable area not within the floodway or flood hazard area, suitable for
development as allowed by the zoning ordinance for the zone in which the lot
is located.  Land located within a flood hazard area or a floodway may be
included with a plat as follows, subject to the approval of the City:



      A.   In Lot.  Included within individual lots in the
subdivision, subject to the limitations of this section.



      B.   Open Space.  Reserved as open space for recreation use
by all owners of lots in the subdivision, with an appropriate legal
instrument, approved by the City, providing for its care and maintenance by
such owners.



      C.   Public Space.  If acceptable to the City, dedicated to
the City as public open space for recreation or flood control purposes.



   3.   Plat to Conform to Comprehensive Plan.  The arrangement,
character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets and the general
nature and extent of the lots and uses proposed shall conform to the
Comprehensive Plan of the City, provided such plan has been adopted by the
City; and shall conform to such other plans, including but not limited to a
major street plan, a sanitary sewer system plan, or a parks and open space
plan, provided such plan(s) has been approved by the City.



165.58   CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR IMPROVEMENTS.



   In addition to the standards set forth in this chapter, the City
Engineer shall from time to time prepare, and the Council shall from time to
time adopt by resolution, technical standards for public improvements.  Such
technical standards for public improvements shall contain the minimum
acceptable specifications for the construction of public improvements.  Such
technical standards may vary for classes of improvements, and the extent and
character of the area served by the improvements.  Upon adoption by the
Council by resolution, such technical standards for the public improvements
shall have such force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.



   1.   Street Standards.  The following standards shall apply to all
streets to be located within the subdivision:



      A.   Conform with Street Plan.  Streets shall provide for the
continuation of major streets from adjoining platted areas, and the extension
of major streets from adjoining platted areas, and the extension of major
streets into adjoining unplatted areas.  Where a plat encompasses the
location for a major street proposed in the Comprehensive Plan or major
street plan, the plat shall provide for such major street.



      B.   Grade.  Street grades shall align to existing streets,
and all grades for streets shall be as approved by the City.



      C.   Arterial Streets.  Arterial streets shall be located so
as to not require direct access from the arterial street to abutting lots.



      D.   Width.  Street right-of-way widths and pavement widths
shall be as specified in the City Standards, the Comprehensive Plan, major
streets plan, or other technical standards for public improvements.



      E.   Half-Streets.  Half-streets are prohibited except where
an existing platted half-street abuts the subdivision, then a platted
half-street to complete the street shall be required.



      F.   Minor Streets.  Minor Streets should be designed to
discourage through traffic while safely connecting the major collector or
arterial streets.



      G.   Intersections.  Streets shall intersect as nearly at
right angles as possible, and no street shall intersect any other street at
less than seventy-five degrees (75º).



      H.   Radius of Intersection.  At intersections of major
streets, and otherwise as necessary, lot corners abutting the intersection
shall be rounded with a radius sufficient to provide necessary space within
the right-of-way for sidewalks, traffic control devices, and other necessary
improvements without encroachment onto the corner lots.



      I.   Dead End.  Dead-end streets are prohibited except where
a street is planned to continue past the subdivider’s property, a temporary
dead end may be allowed.



      J.   Cul-de-Sacs.  Streets which connect with other streets,
or loop streets, are preferable for maintenance, fire protection, and
circulation, but cul-de-sacs may be permitted.  Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed
six hundred (600) feet in length and shall be provided with a turn-around
with a minimum right-of-way diameter of one hundred (100) feet.



      K.   Alleys.  In general, alleys shall be prohibited in
residential areas and required in commercial areas with normal street
frontage. Dead-end alleys are prohibited, unless provided with a turn-around
with a minimum right-of-way diameter of one hundred (100) feet.



      L.   Future Streets.  When a tract is subdivided into larger
than normal lots or parcels, such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to
permit the logical location and opening of future streets and appropriate
resubdivision with provision for adequate utility connections for such
resubdivision. Easements for the future openings and extensions for such
streets or utilities may, at the discretion of the Council, be made a
requirement of the plat.



      M.   Street Names.  Streets which are or will become
extensions of existing streets shall be given the same name as the existing
streets.  New street names shall not be the same or sound similar to
existing street names.  All street names shall be at the approval of the
Council.



      N.   Private Streets.  Private streets not dedicated to the
City shall be avoided.  The Council may approve a private street where
unusual conditions make a private street desirable, provided adequate
covenants or other legal documents ensure that the City will not have or need
to assume any maintenance or other responsibility for such street.



   2.   Block and Lot Standards.  The following standards apply to the
layout of blocks and lots in all subdivisions and, to the extent possible, in
all resubdivisions:



      A.   Length and Width.  No residential block shall be longer
than 1,320 feet or shorter than 300 feet, measured from street right-of-way
line to street right-of-way line.  The width of blocks should be arranged so
as to allow two tiers of lots, with utility easements.



      B.   Pedestrian Way – Long Blocks.  In blocks over 750 feet
in length, the Council may require a public way or an easement at least ten
feet in width, at or near the center of the block, for use by pedestrians.



      C.   Size and Shape.  The size and shape of blocks or lots
intended for commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide for
the use intended, and to meet the parking, loading and other requirements for
such uses contained in Section 165.30 to 165.36, Parking and Loading
Regulations.



      D.   Arrangement.  Lot arrangement and design shall be such
that all lots will provide satisfactory building sites, properly related to
topography and surrounding land uses.



      E.   Zoning Compliance.  The size and shape of all lots shall
comply with all requirements of Section 165.16, Land Uses and Regulations by
District and 165.20 to 165.29 Supplementary Regulations.



      F.   Frontage – Access.  All lots shall abut a public
street, or upon an approved private street, with a minimum frontage as
specified in Section 165.16, Land Uses and Regulations by District, measured
as a straight line between the two front lot corners, except cul-de-sac’s
minimum width shall be 50 feet or 60 feet at the building line.



      G.   Access Limited.  Unless unavoidable, lots shall not
front, or have direct access to, arterial streets.  Where unavoidable, lots
shall be so arranged as to minimize the number of access points.



      H.   Lot Lines.  All lot lines shall be at right angles to
straight street lines or radial to curved street lines, except where, in the
judgment of the Council, a variation to this provision will provide a better
street and lot layout.



      I.   Corner Lots.  Corner lots shall have sufficient extra
width to permit the required front yard setback as specified in the zoning
ordinance, oriented to either street.



      J.   Reverse Double Frontage.  Reversed frontage lots are
prohibited. Double frontage lots shall only be permitted where abutting a
major street and a minor street, and such lots shall front only on the minor
street.



      K.   Sanitary Sewage.  Any lot not to be served by a sanitary
sewage system shall have sufficient area to allow for a satisfactory drain
field.  No subdivision to be served by septic systems shall be approved by
the Council until percolation tests have been performed and the results of
said tests have been provided to and reported on by the City Engineer.



   3.   Sidewalks.  Sidewalks shall be installed whenever development
of undeveloped or redeveloped land occurs, particularly when:  (i) platted
under the current subdivision chapter; or (ii) rezoned under the current
zoning chapter; or (iii) granted a conditional use under the current
chapter.  The Council shall not waive the requirement for sidewalks but may
consider granting a delay in their installation under the following
conditions:



      A.   When sidewalks are to be located along streets developed
as a rural cross-section, which are those streets that have gravel shoulders,
open ditches which parallel the driving surface, and right-of-way grades
which do not allow for construction of sidewalks without extensive grading.



      B.   When they are to be located along streets lacking curb
and gutter which would require substantial grade changes from the existing
road surface if curb and gutter were to be installed, thus requiring the
removal and reinstallation of any sidewalks constructed prior to such grading.



      C.   Other limited situations when it can be clearly
demonstrated that no pedestrian, health, safety, or other related problems
will occur for those living, working or traveling in the immediate area. 
The Council may agree to such a delay only through acceptance of an
“agreement to install” sidewalks at a later date when so mandated by the
Council.  Said agreement shall be recorded in the records of the Linn County
Recorder and shall become part of the Abstract of Title.  The petitioners
for deferment consent and agree to be bound by the terms and conditions of
any assessment, whether special or otherwise, relating to the construction or
modification of sidewalks and petitioners waive any right to object or
protest the petition of said assessment.  The City’s costs and expenses
associated with the consultation, preparation and negotiations of petition
for sidewalk deferment, including, but not limited to, attorneys’ fees and
the costs of recording, shall be paid by the petitioner.



   4.   Erosion Control.  The owner shall control erosion occurring in
the subdivision by such methods as seeding, sodding, earth dikes, sediment
basins to trap runoff water, or by other methods as approved by the City
Engineer and as required by the State.



   5.   Maintenance.  The abutting property owner shall be required to
maintain all property outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb
lines upon the public streets, including the maintenance of an island within
a cul-de-sac.  Maintenance shall include, but not necessarily be limited to,
snow removal and repair of the parking spaces, pruning, maintenance and
replacement of the landscape plants and mowing and maintenance of any
grass.  Maintenance shall not include the removal of diseased trees or dead
wood on publicly owned property or right-of-way.  Abutting property owners
to any cul-de-sac with an island shall equally share in the maintenance of
the island, unless the sharing of the maintenance is divided differently in a
written agreement entered into by the abutting property owners or their
successor(s) in interest.



   6.   Collection of Costs.  If the abutting property owner does not
maintain such property, the Council may serve notice on such owner by
certified mail, requiring him to maintain such property within the reasonable
period of time and if such action is not completed within the reasonable
period of time designated by the City, the City may perform appropriate
maintenance and either directly collect the costs from the abutting property
owner or assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the
same manner as a property tax.



165.59 through 165.64 – Reserved



 



165.65   SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   Every application for a building permit, or a certificate of occupancy,
shall be accompanied by a site plan which shall show compliance to all
applicable City Codes.



   1.   Site Plan Review of One- and Two-Family Dwelling Units.  The
Zoning Administrator shall have the site plan reviewed for compliance to all
applicable City Codes prior to issuance of a building permit.



   2.   Site Plans for Uses Other Than One- and Two-Family Units.  The
Zoning Administrator shall submit to the City Engineer, Fire Department and
Water Department a copy of the site plan for every application for a building
permit or a certificate of occupancy which involves:



      A.   Erection of a new structure.



      B.   Expansion of an existing structure.



      C.   Change in use of an existing structure.



      D.   Construction of a new parking area, including
construction of new access and drive(s).



   3.   Departmental Review.  Departments shall review site plans and
return them to the Zoning Administrator along with written findings and
recommendations.



   4.   Action by the City of Hiawatha.  The City shall notify the
applicant within thirty-five (35) days from the date of receipt of the
application with an approval or denial notification.  The denial shall
include the reasons for noncompliance.  The applicant shall have 60 days to
resubmit a corrected site plan or the request will be considered withdrawn
and shall be considered denied.



      A.   The applicant may request that the site plan proposal be
held from further action for an unstated length of time.  However, if the
time exceeds ninety (90) days the City shall notify the applicant that the
site plan application shall be considered withdrawn and that it shall be
reconsidered only upon the filing of a new request for a site plan.



   5.   Issuance of a Building Permit.  No building permits shall be
issued unless the site plan, included as part of the building plans, is in
accordance with the approved site development plan approved by the City of
Hiawatha or subsequently approved as a revised site development plan by the
City of Hiawatha.



165.66   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) OVERLAY DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.



   Each petitioner requesting approval of PUD shall submit the required
material:



   1.   Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District. Constitutes an
amendment to a zone district classification and as such follows the
procedures for amendments in Section 165.91.



   2.   Pre-Application Conference.  Whenever a PUD located within the
planning jurisdiction of the City is proposed, the applicant shall schedule a
pre-application conference with the City to obtain pertinent information, and
determine the general feasibility of the proposed development.  The
applicant and his representative shall confer with City representatives as
determined by the Zoning Administrator in connection with the preparation of
the PUD application.  The purpose of such conference shall be to acquaint
the City with the proposed PUD and to acquaint the applicant with the
requirements, procedures, and any special problems relating to the proposed
PUD.



   3.   Sketch Plan Required.  For the pre-application conference, the
applicant shall provide a map or sketch showing the location of the PUD, the
general location of any proposed streets and other improvements, and the
general layout and arrangement of intended land uses, in relation to the
surrounding area.



   4.   Presentation to Commission and Council.  The applicant may
present the sketch plan to the Commission and Council for review prior to
incurring significant costs preparing the preliminary or final PUD.



   5.   Preliminary Development Plan Requirements.  A preliminary
development plan shall be submitted with each application requesting approval
to the PUD classification.  All preliminary development plans shall include
the following:



      A.   Written documents:



         (1)   A legal description of the total site proposed for
development, including a statement of present and proposed ownership and
present and proposed zoning.



         (2)   A statement of objectives to be achieved by the
PUD through the particular approach proposed by the applicant.  This
statement should include a description of the character of the proposed
development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the
applicant.



         (3)   A development schedule indicating the approximate
date when construction of the PUD, or stages of the PUD, can be expected to
begin and be completed.



         (4)   A statement indicating the applicant’s
intentions with regard to the future subdivision of all or portions of the
PUD.



         (5)   Quantitative data as applicable for the following:
Total number and type of dwelling units, parcel size, proposed lot coverage
of buildings and structures, approximate gross and net residential densities,
total amount of open space, and total amount of nonresidential construction
or other permitted facilities.



         (6)   A description of method developer proposes to use
to insure retention and maintenance of common areas such as open space,
private streets, buildings, etc.



         (7)   Other information deemed necessary by the Planning
and Zoning Commission or City Council.



      B.   Site Development Plan and Supporting Documents.  A site
development plan and any maps, photographs, and supporting documents
necessary to show major details and the location of the proposed PUD shall be
provided, which shall contain the following minimum informational items at a
scale of 1 inch equals 100 feet:



         (1)   The existing site conditions, including contours
at a minimum of five (5) foot intervals; water course(s); flood plains;
unique natural features; and all trees five (5) inches or more in diameter
measured four (4) feet above natural ground line or wooded areas.



         (2)   Proposed lot lines.



         (3)   The location and floor area size of all existing
and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements.



         (4)   Maximum building heights, types and density of
dwelling units, type of nonresidential structures, preliminary elevations,
architectural renderings of typical structures and improvements in sufficient
detail to relay the basic architectural intent of the proposed development.



         (5)   Identification, location and size in acres or
square feet of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved as common open
space, public parks, recreational areas, school sites, and similar public and
semi-public uses.



         (6)   Existing and proposed circulation system of
arterial, collector, and local streets, including off-street parking areas,
service areas, loading areas, and major points of access to public
rights-of-way including major points of ingress and egress to the
development.  Notations of proposed ownership, public or private, shall be
included where appropriate.



         (7)   Existing and proposed pedestrian circulation
system including its inter-relationships with the vehicular circulation
system.  Proposed treatments of any points of conflict shall be indicated.



         (8)   Existing and proposed utility systems including
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water, electric, gas, and telephone lines.



         (9)   Schematic landscape plan indicating the general
type and treatment of materials used for private and common open spaces.



         (10)   Information on land areas adjacent to the
proposed PUD to indicate the relationships between the proposed development
and existing and proposed adjacent areas, including land uses, zoning
classifications, densities, circulation systems, public facilities, and
unique topographic and landscape features.



         (11)   Proposed treatment of the perimeter of the PUD,
indicating materials and techniques used in screens, fences, and walls.



         (12)   Aerial photograph at a scale of 1 inch equals 300
feet (1" = 300') or larger, with the proposed development drawn thereon to
include buildings and roadways.



         (13)   Any additional information deemed necessary by
the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council to evaluate the character
and impact of the proposed PUD.



   6.   Official Action on Preliminary PUD.



   See Section 165.92.



      A.   Action by Planning and Zoning Commission.  The Planning
and Zoning Commission shall review each PUD proposal within sixty days of
receipt of any proper application and report its recommendations within
thirty days from the date of the Commission meeting to the City Council for
final action.  Prior to making its recommendation the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall consider the following:



         (1)   Relationship to the Land Use Policy Portion and
other elements of the Comprehensive Plan.



         (2)   Characteristics of the general area including any
changing conditions.



         (3)   Effect on, and compatibility with, the
neighborhood.



         (4)   Suitability of the property for all uses proposed
in the PUD.



         (5)   Adequacy of street facilities in relation to the
proposed development.



         (6)   Adequacy of utilities and other facilities in the
area.



      B.   Action by the City Council.  The City Council shall not
act upon a proposed PUD until it has received a recommendation from the
Planning and Zoning Commission on the proposed amendment to the zone
classification district, unless such recommendation is not received within
ninety (90) days from the filing date.



         (1)   The City Council may approve, approve with
modifications, or deny any application for a PUD, provided however, that any
protest to the proposed amendment of the regulations or districts, signed and
acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the lots or
parcels to be included in such proposed change, or of those immediately
adjacent in the rear thereof extending the depth of one lot or not to exceed
200 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto extending the depth
of one lot or not to exceed 200 feet from the street frontage of such
opposite lots or parcels, such amendment shall not become effective except by
the favorable vote of at least three-fourths of all the members of the City
Council.



         (2)   If an application for a proposed amendment is not
acted upon finally by the City Council within one hundred eighty (180) days
of the date the Council receives the Planning and Zoning Commission
recommendations, and such time is not extended by mutual consent of Council
and petitioner, it shall be deemed to have been denied.  The applicant may
request that the amendment be held from further action for an unstated length
of time.  However, if the time exceeds 180 days the City Clerk shall notify
the applicant that the amendment shall be considered withdrawn and that it
shall be reconsidered only upon the filing of a new request for a PUD zone
district amendment.



   7.   Final Development Plan.  Within twelve (12) months following
the approval of the Preliminary PUD Development Plan by City Council, the
applicant shall file a Final PUD Development Plan containing, in a final
detailed form, the information required in Section 165.66(5).  At its
discretion, and upon recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission,
the City Council may extend for twelve months the period for filing of the
final development plan.



   8.   Official Action of PUD Final Development Plan.



      A.   Planning and Zoning Commission.  The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall review the Final PUD Development Plan within sixty (60) days
of receipt of any proper plan and report its recommendations within thirty
(30) days from the date of the Commission meeting to the City Council for
final action.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the
following in making its recommendations.



         (1)   Whether or not the final plan is substantially in
accordance with the purpose and intent of the approved preliminary plan.



         (2)   Whether or not all requirements placed on the
preliminary plan at the time of approval have been met.



      B.   Action by the City Council.  The City Council shall not
act upon the Final PUD Plan until it has received a recommendation from the
Planning and Zoning Commission unless such recommendation is not received
within ninety (90) days from the filing date.  The City Council may approve,
approve with modification, or deny the Final PUD Plan.



         (1)   If the Final PUD Plan is not acted upon finally by
the City Council within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date the Council
receives the Planning and Zoning Commission recommendations, and such time is
not extended by mutual consent of Council and petitioner, it shall be deemed
to have been denied.  The applicant may request that the final plan be held
from further action for an unstated length of time; however if such length of
time exceeds one hundred eighty (180) days, the City Clerk shall notify the
applicant that the final plan shall be considered withdrawn and that it shall
be reconsidered only upon the filing of a new Final PUD Plan meeting all
requirements of this chapter.



   9.   Issuance of a Building Permit.  No building permits shall be
issued for the area included in the PUD application until the Final PUD
Development Plan has received the approval of the City Council.



   10.   Failure to Begin Development.  Development pursuant to the
adopted plan shall begin within twelve (12) months after the date of the
approval of the Final PUD Plan.  The City Council may, from time to time,
grant twelve month time extensions when sufficient cause is shown by the
developer for such extensions.  Failure to begin within the allotted time
period shall render the approved plan null and void.  In the event
development does not occur within the approved time period, the plan becomes
void and the property reverts to the underlying zone district unless the City
Council initiates proceedings to reclassify the property to another district
compatible with the Land Use portion of the Comprehensive Plan for the City
of Hiawatha.  Once the plan has become null and void, new approval of a plan
shall only be obtained by the refiling of a Preliminary PUD Plan and
following the procedure required for PUD plan approval as set forth in
Section 165.66.



   11.   Revisions to an Approved PUD Site Development Plan.  If, at
any time, the owner of land included in an approved PUD Site Development Plan
desires to amend said approved plan he or she shall submit a petition
requesting such amendment. A revised site development plan shall accompany
said petition and said plan shall show the proposed revisions to an Approved
PUD Site Development Plan and shall also contain all information required on
the originally approved plan.  The petition and plan shall be submitted to
the Planning and Zoning Commission.  After review of the proposed revisions
a determination shall be made within said Commission as to whether the
proposed revisions constitute a major or minor plan revision.  The City
Council shall be so informed.  After due consideration, the City Council
shall make the final determination.



      A.   Minor Revisions.  Minor revisions shall be those that do
not increase the size of any building or structure by more than ten percent
(10%) nor change the location of any building or structure by more than 10
feet in any direction.  Revised site development plans containing only minor
revisions may be approved, approved with modifications, or disapproved by
official resolution of the City Council after report by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.



         (1)   Changes adjacent to the transitional zone, which
is defined as “that area between a site improvement,” such as structures,
parking areas and driveways, and an adjacent property zoned A, R-1, or R-3,
shall be limited to the following:



            a.   Reduction in length of parking areas, drives,
or other similar facilities;



            b.   An increase in setbacks of site improvements
such as structures, parking areas and driveways;



            c.   A decrease in the height, length, or width of
structures;



            d.   An increase in the height, length, or width
of structures, parking areas, or other facilities of generally no more than
twenty percent (20%) of that portion facing the adjacent property;



            e.   A decrease in setbacks of structures,
parking, or other facilities of generally no more than twenty percent (20%)
of the approved setbacks;



            f.   A shift parallel to the transition zone in
the location of a structure, parking area, or similar facility of generally
no more than twenty percent (20%) of the length or width of the structure,
parking areas, or other facility;



            g.   All changes to Site Development Plans that
are determined by the twenty percent (20%) standard are to be referenced to
the last PUD Site Development Plan approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council.



         (2)   Changes which are not adjacent to the transition
zone and/or are located within the interior of R-7, Commercial, or Industrial
Districts that are minor, relative to the total land area and the scale of
the development for the subject property, and include changes which will have
no significant negative impacts on adjacent property.



      B.   Major Revisions.  Any proposed revisions not classified
as minor shall be considered major revisions.  A petitioner requesting
approval of a revised PUD site development plan, determined to contain
revisions that are major in nature but still substantially in accordance with
the design, intent and purpose of the approved preliminary plan, shall be
required to only submit a revised final development plan.  In the event that
the revised plan is determined not to be in accordance with the approved
preliminary plan then a new revised Preliminary PUD Plan shall be submitted
to the Planning and Zoning Commission and forwarded with recommendations to
the City Council for approval prior to the approval of a revised Final PUD
Development Plan.



      C.   City Council Action.  The City Council may approve,
approve with modifications, or deny approval of a revised site development
plan by resolution after recommendation from the Planning and Zoning
Commission.



      D.   Approved Plans Superseded by Approved Revised Plans. 
All approved Plans superseded by an Approved Revised Plan shall be considered
to be null and void at the time of the approval of the revised plan.



   12.   Delay of Action of a PUD Amendment Request.  An application
for an amendment may be held from further action for up to one hundred eighty
(180) days for either of the following reasons:



      A.   The delay in action is requested by the petitioner.



      B.   The applicant is requested to furnish additional
information by either the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council. 
If such delay exceeds the one hundred eighty (180) day time limit then the
petition shall be considered withdrawn and will be reconsidered only after
the filing of a new request for an amendment.



165.67   SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.



   Whenever land within the platting jurisdiction of the City of Hiawatha
is proposed for division into two or more lots, the subdivider shall follow
the subdivision requirements for the City of Hiawatha.



   1.   Pre-Application Conference.  The owner and subdivider shall
schedule a pre-application conference with the City.  The conference should
be attended by the City and utility representatives, the subdivision owner
and the engineer and/or planner representing the owner, as deemed
desirable.  The purpose of such conference shall be to acquaint the City
with the proposed subdivision, and to acquaint the subdivider with the
requirements, procedures, and any special problems relating to the proposed
subdivision.



   2.   Sketch Plan Required.  For the pre-application conference, the
subdivider shall provide a map or sketch showing the location of the
subdivision, the general location of any proposed streets and other
improvements, and the general layout and arrangement of intended land uses,
in relation to the surrounding area.



   3.   Presentation to Commission and Council.  The subdivider may
present the sketch plan to the Commission and Council for review prior to
incurring significant costs preparing the preliminary or final plat.



   4.   Subdivision Classified.  Any proposed subdivision or
resubdivision shall be classified as a minor subdivision or a major
subdivision.



      A.   Minor Subdivisions.  Any subdivision which contains not
more than four (4) lots fronting on an existing street and which does not
require construction of any public improvements, and which does not adversely
affect the remainder of the parcel shall be classified as a minor plat.



      B.   Major Subdivision.  Any subdivision which, in the
opinion of the Council, does not for any reason meet the definition of a
minor plat shall be classified as a major subdivision.



   5.   Plats Required.  In order to secure approval of any proposed
subdivision, the owner and subdivider shall submit to the City plats and
other information as required by this chapter.  The owner and subdivider of
any major subdivision shall comply with the requirements for a preliminary
plat and the requirements for a final plat.  The owner and subdivider of a
minor subdivision may elect to omit the submission of a preliminary plat.



   6.   Requirements of the Preliminary Plat.  The subdivider shall
prepare and file with the Clerk, twenty-five (25) copies of the preliminary
plat, drawn at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1? = 100') or
larger.  Sheet size shall not exceed twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches
(24? x 36?).  Where more than one sheet is required, the sheets shall show
the number of the sheet and the total number of sheets in the plat, and match
lines indicating where other sheets adjoin.  The preliminary plat shall be
clearly marked “Preliminary Plat” and shall show or have attached thereto
the following:



      A.   Title.  Tile, scale, north point and date.



      B.   Name.  Proposed name of the subdivision which shall not
duplicate or resemble existing subdivision names in the County.



      C.   Identification of Subdivider.  The name and address of
the owner, and the name, address and profession of the person preparing the
plat.



      D.   Key Map.  A key map showing the general location of the
proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding development.



      E.   Adjacent Property.  The names and locations of adjacent
subdivisions and the names of owners or record and location of adjoining
parcels of unplatted land.  A list of all owners of record of property,
whether platted or unplatted, located within two hundred (200) feet of the
subdivision boundary shall be attached.  Within 3 days of filing a
preliminary plat with the Clerk, the subdivider shall provide to each of the
owners described in the prior sentence written notice indicating that a
preliminary plat has been filed and that a copy of the preliminary plat is
available for inspection at City Hall.  The notice must be sent by certified
mail to the owners at addresses shown on the records of the Linn County
Auditor, and a copy of each Certified Mail Receipt and one copy of said
notice shall be filed with the Clerk within ten (10) days of filing
preliminary plat.  Each amendment to the preliminary plat that is filed with
the Clerk requires a new notice to be provided to the owners in the manner
set forth in this subsection, except that the notice shall indicate that an
amendment to the preliminary plat has been filed and that a copy of the
amended preliminary plat is available for inspection at City Hall.  Each
preliminary plat and amendment shall contain the subdivider’s verification
that these notice requirements have been satisfied.



      F.   Existing Features.  The location of property lines,
streets and alleys, easements, buildings, utilities, watercourses, tree
masses, and other existing features affecting the plat.



      G.   Zoning.  Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed
subdivision and adjoining property.



      H.   Contours.  Contours at vertical intervals of not more
than five (5) feet unless there exists unusual circumstances, where contours
at vertical intervals of two (2) feet may be required.



      I.   Legal Description.  The legal description of the area
being platted.



      J.   Boundary Lines.  The boundary of the area being platted,
shown as a dark line, with the approximate length of boundary lines and the
approximate location of the property in reference to known section lines.



      K.   Lots.  The layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of
proposed lots.



      L.   Streets.  The location, width, dimensions and
preliminary alignment and grades of all streets and alleys proposed to be
dedicated for public use.



      M.   Street Names.  The proposed names for all streets in the
area being platted.



      N.   Utilities.  Present and proposed utility systems,
including sanitary and storm sewers, other drainage facilities, water lines,
gas mains, electric utilities and other facilities.



      O.   Easements.  Proposed easements, showing locations,
widths, purposes and limitations, as well as letters from the appropriate
utilities approving the easements as shown.



      P.   Public Uses.  Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated
or reserved for schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public, semi-public or
community purposes, or shown for such purpose in the Comprehensive Plan or
other adopted plans.



      Q.   Protective Covenants.  A general summary description of
any protective covenants or private restrictions to be incorporated in the
final plat.



      R.   Other.  Any other pertinent information, as necessary.



      S.   Fee.  The fee, as required by this chapter.



   7.   Procedures for Review of Preliminary Plats.  The following
procedure shall be used in review of a preliminary plat:



      A.   Copies Filed.  The Clerk upon receipt of twenty-five
(25) copies of the preliminary plat, shall file one copy in the records of
the City, shall retain one copy for public inspection, and shall forward the
remaining copies of the plat to the Plats Officer.



      B.   Review Copies Provided.  The Plats Officer shall provide
copies of the plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission, City Engineer, the
City Council, the Mayor, and such other persons as necessary to review the
plat and shall schedule the plat for consideration by the Commission.



      C.   Planning and Zoning Commission.  The Commission shall
examine the plat and the report of the City Engineer and such other
information as it deems necessary or desirable to ascertain whether the plat
conforms to the ordinances of the City and conforms to the Comprehensive
Plan, City Standards and other duly adopted plans of the City.  The
Commission shall, within sixty (60) days of the filing of the plat with the
Clerk, forward a written report and recommendation regarding the plat to the
Council.  If such recommendation is to disapprove or modify the plat, the
reasons therefore shall be set forth in writing in the report, and a copy of
the report and recommendation shall be provided to the applicant.



      D.   Council.  The Council shall examine the plat, the report
of the City Engineer, the report of the Commission and such other information
as it deems necessary or desirable.  Upon such examination, the Council
shall ascertain whether the plat conforms to the ordinances and City
Standards, conforms to the Comprehensive Plan and other duly adopted plans of
the City, and will be conducive to the orderly growth and development of the
City, in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.  Following
such examination, the Council may approve, approve subject to conditions, or
disapprove the plat.  If the decision of the Council is to disapprove the
plat, or to approve the plat subject to conditions, the reasons therefor
shall be set forth in writing in the official records of the Council, and
such decisions shall be provided to the applicant.  Action on the
preliminary plat by the Council shall be taken within ninety (90) days of the
filing of the plat with the Clerk, unless such time period is extended by
agreement between the subdivider and the City.



   8.   Duration of Approval of Preliminary Plat.  An approved
preliminary plat shall be valid for not longer than two calendar years after
the date of Council approval.  All approved preliminary plats, or portions
thereof, shall be filed with the Linn County Recorder within one calendar
year after the date of Council approval.  If at least some portion of such
approved preliminary plat is not approved in final form within two calendar
years after the date of Council approval, the preliminary plat shall be null
and void, and the subdivider or developer shall be required to resubmit a new
plat for preliminary approval subject to all new zoning and subdivision
regulations, expect upon application an extension of such period of validity
by the Subdivider, and approved of same by the Council.  If some portion of
an approved preliminary plat is approved in final form within two years after
the approved preliminary plat is approved by the Council, the approved
preliminary plat shall continue to be valid for five (5) years from the date
of such portion of the approved preliminary plat that receives final
approval.  Revisions, modifications, or amendments to a preliminary plat
that revise, modify or amend the preliminary plat shall be valid for five
years from the date of such approval by the Council.  The provisions of this
section are applicable to existing preliminary plats which have been approved
by the Council and to preliminary plats that have been filed with the City at
the time of the enactment of this amendment (July 18, 2012).



   9.   Authorization to Install Improvements.  No improvement shall
be constructed or installed until and unless the plans, profiles,
cross-sections and specifications for the construction of such improvements
have been submitted to and approved by the Council.  The approval of the
preliminary plat by the Commission and the Council and the Council’s
approval of the plans, profiles, cross-sections and specifications for the
construction of such improvements shall constitute authorization by the
Council for the installation of such improvements.



   10.   Completion and Acceptance of the Improvements.  Before the
Council will approve the final plat, all of the foregoing improvements shall
be constructed and accepted by formal resolution of the Council. Before
passage of said resolution and acceptance, the City Engineer shall report
that said improvements meet all City specifications and ordinances or other
City requirements, (as well as) the agreements between the subdivider and the
City.



   11.   Performance Security.  In lieu of the requirement that
improvements be completed prior to the approval of a final plat, the
subdivider may post a performance bond, certified check, cashier’s check or
letter of credit with the City, guaranteeing that improvements not completed
shall be completed within a period of two (2) years from the date of approval
of such final plat, but such approval of the plat shall not constitute final
acceptance of any improvements to be constructed. Improvements will be
accepted only after their construction has been completed.



   12.   Alternate Assessment Waiver Agreement.  As an alternative, at
the sole discretion of the Council, the owner shall enter into an agreement
with the City, which agreement shall be binding upon the owner and all
subsequent purchasers of any portion of the subdivision and shall run with
the land, to accept an assessment equal to the actual cost of constructing
said improvement and furthermore, will waive the limitation provided in
Section 384.62 of the Code of Iowa that an assessment may not exceed
twenty-five percent (25%) of the value of the lot, as said waiver is provided
for in Section 384.38 of the Code of Iowa, which agreement shall be duly
acknowledged by the owner and filed of record with the County Recorder as
part of the platting proceeding.



   13.   Final Plat Filed.  The subdivider shall, within two (2) years
from the date of approval of the preliminary plat, unless such time period
has been extended, prepare and file with the Clerk twenty-five (25) copies of
the final plat and required attachments as set forth in Section
165.67(14)-(16).  Except for a final plat for a minor subdivision as set
forth herein, no final plat shall be considered by the Council until and
unless a preliminary plat for the area including in the proposed final plat
has been approved and has not expired as become void as set forth above.



   14.   Size and Scale.  The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of
one inch equals one hundred feet (1? = 100') or larger.  Sheet size shall be
no greater than eighteen inches by twenty-four inches (18? x 24?) or smaller
than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (8½? x 11?) and shall be of
a size acceptable to the Linn County Auditor.  If more than one sheet is
used, each sheet shall clearly show the number of the sheets, the total
number of sheets included in the plat, and match lines indicating where other
sheets adjoin.



   15.   Final Plat Content.  The final plat shall be clearly marked
“Final Plat” and shall show the following:



      A.   Name.  The name of the subdivision.



      B.   Owner.  Name and address of the owner and subdivider.



      C.   Scale.  Scale and a graphic bar scale, north arrow and
date on each sheet.



      D.   Monuments.  All monuments to be of record, as required
by Chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa.



      E.   Boundaries.  Sufficient survey data to describe
positively the bounds of every lot, block, street, easement, or other areas
shown on the plat, as well as the outer boundaries of the subdivided lands.



      F.   Survey Data.  All distance, bearing, curve, and other
survey data as required by Chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa.



      G.   Adjoining Properties – Resubdivision.  All adjoining
properties shall be identified and where such adjoining properties are a part
of a recorded subdivision, the name of that subdivision shall be shown. If
the subdivision platted is a resubdivision of a part of the whole of a
previously recorded subdivision, sufficient ties shall be shown to
controlling lines appearing on the earlier plat to permit an overlay to be
made. Resubdivision shall be labeled as such in a subtitle following the name
of the subdivision where the name appears on the plat.



      H.   Streets and Alleys.  Street names and clear designation
of public alleys.



      I.   Blocks and Lots.  Block and lot numbers.



      J.   Public Areas.  Accurate dimensions for any property to
be dedicated or reserved for public use, and the purpose for which such
property is dedicated or reserved for public use.



      K.   Easements.  The purpose of any easement shown on the
plat shall be confined to only those easements pertaining to public utilities
including gas, power, telephone, cable television, water, sewer, easements
for ingress and egress, and such drainage easements as are deemed necessary
for the orderly development of the land encompassed within the plat.



      L.   Excepted Parcels.  All interior excepted parcels clearly
indicated and labeled “Not a part of this plat.”



      M.   Reserved Land.  A strip of land shall not be reserved by
the subdivider unless the land is of sufficient size and shape to be of some
practical use or service as determined by the Council.



      N.   Accuracy.  The minimum unadjusted acceptable error of
closure for all subdivision boundaries shall be 1:10,000 and shall be 1:5,000
for any individual lot.



      O.   Registered Surveyor.  A statement by a registered land
surveyor that the plat was prepared by the surveyor or under the surveyor’s
direct personal supervision, signed and dated by the surveyor, and bearing
the surveyor’s Iowa registration number or seal, and a sealed certificate
of the accuracy of the plat by the registered land surveyor who drew the plat.



   16.   Attachments to the Final Plat.  The following shall be
attached to and accompany any final plat:



      A.   Owner’s Certificate.  A certificate by the owner and
spouse, if any, that the subdivision is with their free consent and is in
accordance with the desire of the owner and spouse.  This certificate must
be signed and acknowledged by the owner and spouse before some officer
authorized to take the acknowledgment of deeds.



      B.   Title Opinion.  An attorney’s opinion showing that the
fee title to the subdivision land is in the owner’s name and that the land
platted is free from encumbrances, other than those secured by an encumbrance
bond; and, upon request of the Council, a complete abstract of title.



      C.   Treasurer’s Certificate.  A certificate of the County
Treasurer that the land is free from certified taxes and certified special
assessments or that the land is free from certified taxes and that the
certified special assessments are secured by bond in compliance with Section
354.12 of the Code of Iowa.



      D.   Bond.  The encumbrance bond, performance bond, or
maintenance bond, or any other bond that is required to be filed, if any.



      E.   Covenants.  A statement of restrictions of all types
that run with the land and become covenants in the deeds of lots.



      F.   City Engineer’s Certificate.  A certificate by the
City Engineer that all required improvements have been satisfactorily
completed in substantial accordance with the construction plans as approved
and in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plat.  Prior to
such certification, construction record drawings for all improvements shall
have been provided to the City Engineer.  In lieu thereof, the Clerk may
certify that a performance bond, certified check or bank letter of credit
guaranteeing completion has been approved by the City Attorney and filed with
the Clerk, or that the Council has agreed that the City will provide the
necessary improvements and installations and assess the costs against the
subdivider of future property owners in the subdivision.



      G.   Improvements.  Where the improvements have been
installed, a resolution accepting and approving such improvements, along with
the maintenance bond or other security acceptable to the City as required by
this chapter.



      H.   Private Streets or Improvements.  If private streets or
other private improvements have been approved, an agreement in the form of a
covenant running with the land, in a form approved by the City Attorney,
providing for the construction or reconstruction of any improvements to meet
the standards of the City, and the assessment of all costs to the property
owners in the event of annexation and dedication and acceptance, shall be
required.



      I.   Council Resolutions.  A resolution and certificate for
approval by the Council and for signatures of the Mayor and Clerk.



      J.   Fee.  The applicable fee, if any.



   17.   Procedures for the Review of Final Plats.  The following
procedure shall be used in the review of a final plat:



      A.   Copies Filed.  The Clerk, upon receipt of twenty-five
(25) copies of the final plat, shall file one copy in the records of the
City, shall retain one copy for the public inspection, and shall forward the
remaining copies to the Plats Officer.



      B.   Review Copies Provided.  The Plats Officer shall provide
copies of the plat to the Commission, City Engineer, the Council, the Mayor,
and such other persons as are necessary to review the plat, and shall
schedule the plat for review by the Council.



      C.   Plats Officer and City Engineer.  The Plats Officer and
the City Engineer shall examine the plat as to its compliance with the
ordinances and standards of the City, and its conformance with the
preliminary plat and shall set forth their findings in writing.  A copy of
the findings shall be provided to the subdivider.



      D.   Planning Commission.  The Commission shall review the
final plat and shall forward a written recommendation thereon to the Council
within sixty (60) days of the filing of the plat with the Clerk.  If the
recommendation is to disapprove the plat, or to require modification of the
plat, the reasons therefore shall be set forth in writing, and a copy of the
recommendation shall be provided to the subdivider.



      E.   Council Review.  Upon receipt of the plat and written
reports thereon, the Council shall review the plat and attachments thereto. 
If the plat is found to conform to the ordinances and standards of the City
and the Comprehensive Plan and other duly adopted plans, all as of the date
of approval of the preliminary plat, the Council shall approve the plat and
shall cause its approval to be entered on the plat as required by law.



      F.   Action by Council.  Action on the final plat by the
Council shall be taken within sixty (60) days of the date of filing of the
plat with the Clerk, unless such time period is extended by agreement between
the subdivider and the City.  If the action is to disapprove the plat, the
reasons therefor shall be set forth in the official records of the Council
and such decision shall be provided to the subdivider.



      G.   Filing Deadlines.  All plats to be submitted hereunder
shall be filed with the Clerk no later than twelve o’clock noon on the
fourth Monday preceding the Commission meeting at which the owner desires
said plat to be considered. Thereafter, the City Engineer or an alternate as
designated by Council shall examine the plat as to its compliance with this
chapter and amendments hereto, the major street plan, the existing street
system, the good engineering practice, and shall either:  (i) submit a
report to the Commission, the Mayor, and the members of the Council, and such
other persons as necessary to review the plat, as required above; or (ii) if
major deficiencies exist in the plat, return the plat to the owner to correct
such deficiencies.  If the City Engineer or alternate returns the plat to
the owner for the correction of such deficiencies, the owner may resubmit an
amended final plat not less than seven (7) days prior to the Commission
meeting.  The resubmitted plat shall be subject to the same examination by
the City Engineer, who shall submit a report to the Commission, Mayor, and
Council, not less than five (5) days prior to the Commission meeting, without
further rights to cure deficiencies by the owner. Failure to resubmit an
amended final plat within seven (7) days prior to the Commission meeting
shall constitute a retraction of the submitted plat.



   18.   Recording Final Plats.  All approved final plats shall be
recorded with the Linn County Recorder within one year after the date of
Council approval.



165.68 through 165.69 - Reserved



 



165.70   NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.



   Within the districts established by this Code, or by subsequent
amendments thereto, there exist buildings, structures and uses which were
lawful before this Code was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited
or restricted under the terms of this Code or future amendments thereto.



   1.   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to provide for the
regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses and to specify
those circumstances and conditions under which such nonconformities shall be
permitted to continue.  The intent of the regulation is not to force all
nonconforming situations to be immediately brought into conformance. 
Instead the intent is to guide future uses and development in a direction
consistent with city policy, and over time to bring the development into
compliance with the city’s regulations and Comprehensive Plan.



   2.   Authority for Continuance of Nonconformities and Regulation
Thereof.  Any nonconforming building, structure, or use which existed
lawfully at the time of adoption of this Code and which remains nonconforming
by the terms thereof, and any such lawful building, structure or use which
shall become nonconforming upon the adoption of this Code, or any subsequent
amendment thereto, may be continued subject to the regulations following in
this section.



   3.   Nonconformity.



      A.   Nonconforming Use of Land.  Where at the time of
adoption of this Code, or subsequent amendments thereto, lawful use of land
exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this Code,
and where such use does not involve a building or structure, or in connection
with which any building or structure, thereon is incidental or accessory to
the principal use of the land, such use may be continued, provided:



         (1)   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or
increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land.



         (2)   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole
or in part to any adjoining property nor to any other portion of the lot or
tract other than that occupied by such use at the time of adoption of this
Code, or of a subsequent amendment thereto which rendered the use
nonconforming.



         (3)   No additional structure not conforming to the
terms of this Code shall be erected or placed on the lot and no existing
nonconforming structure shall be enlarged or expanded.



         (4)   If no expansion or enlargement is made, the
nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same
classification or to a less nonconforming use.  Whenever a nonconforming use
has been changed to a conforming use or to a less nonconforming use, such use
shall not be thereafter changed to a more nonconforming use.



         (5)   Where the nonconforming use status applies to a
structure or building and the removal or destruction of such structure or
building, or change of such structure or building to a conforming use shall
eliminate the nonconforming status of the land, thereafter the land shall be
used only for a conforming use.



      B.   Nonconforming Structures and Buildings Related to Bulk. 
Where at the time of adoption of this Code, or of subsequent amendments
thereto, lawful use of a structure or building exists or may exist which
could not be erected under the regulations imposed by this Code by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, location on the lot, or
other requirements concerning the structure or building, such structure or
building may be continued, provided no such nonconforming structure or
building shall be altered in any way which would increase its degree of
nonconformity but may be altered if such alteration does not increase its
degree of nonconformity.



      C.   Nonconforming Structures and Buildings Related to Use. 
Where at the time of adoption of this Code, or of subsequent amendments
thereto, lawful use of a structure or building exists which would not be
permitted by the regulations in this Code, such use may be continued,
provided:



         (1)   Enlargement or expansion of a nonconforming
structure may be allowed under the following conditions:



            a.   Nonconforming single family structures
located in the commercial and industrial districts as described in Section
165.16 may be allowed to expand.  Also permitted is the establishment of
additional accessory structures.  All yard requirements of the district in
which the nonconforming structure is located shall be adhered to with the
exception that vertical expansions may be allowed provided the exterior walls
of the addition extend no further than the exterior walls of the ground floor
of the structure.



            b.   Nonconforming multi-family structures may be
allowed to expand provided that the number of dwelling units are not
increased. Also permitted is the establishment of additional accessory
structures or the expansion of existing accessory structures. All yard
requirements of the district in which the nonconforming structure is located
shall be adhered to with the exception that vertical expansions may be
allowed provided the exterior walls of the addition extend no further than
the exterior walls of the ground floor of the structure.



            c.   Nonconforming commercial and industrial uses
may expand under those conditions set forth in Section 165.84 “Conditional
Expansions.”



         (2)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout
any existing parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed
for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this Code, but no such
use shall be extended to occupy any land outside the building.



         (3)   If no expansion or enlargement is made, the
nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same
classification or to a less nonconforming use.  Whenever a nonconforming use
has been changed to a conforming use or to a less nonconforming use, such use
shall not be thereafter changed to a more nonconforming use.



         (4)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a
structure or building and land on the same lot or tract, then the removal or
destruction of such structure or building, or change of such structure or
building to a conforming use eliminates the nonconforming use and the
nonconforming status of the land, thereafter the land shall be used only for
a conforming use.



         (5)   Any nonconforming structure or building allowed
under this chapter may not be connected in any way to any other nonconforming
or conforming structure or building.  Any non-forming or conforming
structure or building allowed under this chapter must have separate utility
connections.  All utility connections must originate from the street and may
not be connected to any existing utilities serving any nonconforming or
conforming structure or building.



      D.   Nonconforming Signs.  Nonconforming signs shall be
regulated by the provisions contained in Chapter 166 of this Code.



   4.   Repairs and Maintenance.  Ordinary repairs and maintenance may
be carried out on land, structures or buildings nonconforming as to use or
bulk, provided that no alterations shall be made which would add to the size,
area, or degree of nonconformity.



   5.   Restoration of a Nonconforming Structure or Building.



      A.   Structure or Building Damaged or Destroyed.  A
nonconforming building or structure which is destroyed or damaged by fire or
other casualty or act of God to the extent that the cost of restoration to
the condition in which it was before the occurrence shall exceed sixty-five
percent (65%) of the fair market value of the building before damage, based
upon insurance value, shall not be restored except in conformity with all of
the regulations of the district in which it is located.



         (1)   If a nonconforming building or structure is
damaged less than sixty-five percent (65%), it may be repaired, restored, or
reconstructed and used as before the time of damage provided that such
repair, restoration or reconstruction is started within twelve (12) months of
such damage and diligently prosecuted to completion.



      B.   Correcting an Unsafe Condition.  Nothing in this Code
shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition
any structure, building, or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any
official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such
official.



   6.   Nonconforming Accessory Uses, Structures and Buildings. 
Nonconforming accessory uses, structures and buildings shall be subject to
the provisions of this section.  In addition, a nonconforming use of land,
structure, or building which is accessory to a principal nonconforming use
shall be discontinued if such principal use or structure is discontinued,
unless such accessory use of land or structure shall therefore conform to all
regulations of the district in which it is located.



   7.   Discontinuance of a Nonconforming Use.  If the nonconforming
use of a building, structure, or premise is discontinued or vacated for a
continuous period of 12 months, it shall not be renewed, and any subsequent
use of the building, structure, or premises shall conform to the use
regulations of the district in which such building, structure, or premises is
located.  However, where it can be established that a delay in reoccupying a
property has been caused by governmental and/or court action, or other
extenuating circumstances, which are clearly beyond control of the property
owner, the time period to retain nonconforming status may, if approved by the
Board of Adjustment, be extended to 24 months.  Application for extension
must be received before the expiration of the 12-month discontinuance or
vacation.



   8.   Termination of Certain Nonconforming Uses and Structures. 
Certain uses involving a high degree of incompatibility and a relatively low
amount of investment shall be terminated, or altered, as herein prescribed,
following adoption of this Code.



      A.   Sight Distances.  Fences, walls and foliage which impair
sight distances at an intersection and thereby constitute a hazard to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall be altered to comply with the
provisions of this Section 165.21(8) herein, with one calendar year from the
date of official notice from the Zoning Administrator.



      B.   Nonconforming Uses in C-ORS, C and I Districts.  All
uses in C-ORS, C and I Districts not now in compliance with the provisions of
this Code setting for specifications for fencing or screening shall be
altered so as to comply within two years from the date of official notice
from the Zoning Administrator.



      C.   Nonconforming Open Storage Activities.  Such uses as
automobile wrecking and salvage, material storage and similar uses wherein no
buildings or structures are used on connection with said use, or when the
only buildings or structures or other physical improvements are accessory or
incidental to such use, shall be terminated or made conforming within five
calendar years from the date of official notice from the Zoning Administrator.



      D.   Adult Entertainment.  Any Adult Book Store, Adult Motion
Picture Theater, Adult Mini Motion Picture Theater, Adult Massage Parlor,
Adult Theater, Adult Artist-Body Painting Studio, Adult Modeling Studio,
Adult Sexual Encounter Center, Adult Cabaret, or any other Adult
Entertainment Establishment which at the time of the adoption of this Code
becomes nonconforming because it does not meet the minimum separation
requirements between it and any other such establishment, or between it and
any school, church, or residential zoning district; or because it is located
in a zoning district wherein such establishment is not a permitted use, shall
terminate all uses defined herein no later than three years after the date of
the adoption of the Adult Entertainment Establishment Regulations Ordinance
adding this section of Adult Entertainment to the 1995 Hiawatha Zoning
Ordinance.  However, if, in the opinion of the owner of the business
involving such use, the termination creates an undue hardship, the owner may
appeal to the Board of Adjustment for extension of time for the
termination.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to show just cause
for a time extension based upon evidence submitted by the owner which
demonstrates by the greater weight of evidence that three years was not an
adequate length of time to amortize the owner’s investment in such
establishment.  The Board shall determine whether such a time extension
shall be granted, and, if so, how long such extension shall be, based upon
the evidence presented.  However, no establishment shall be granted more
than a one-time extension and no such extension shall be for longer than the
minimum time determined necessary by the Board for the owner to amortize the
investment which existed on the date of the Ordinance adding this section to
the laws of Hiawatha was adopted.  Any investments in said nonconforming
establishment(s) subsequent to the adoption of the Code shall not be included
for such amortization value purposes.  Such nonconforming establishments
shall not increase, enlarge, expand, extend or alter such land area, building
or structure involved in such establishment except by change the use to
another use which is permitted in that zoning district by the terms of the
Unified Development Code.



      E.   Outside Vehicular Storage.  When a combination of more
than two vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, campers, trailers or similar
vehicles and equipment shall be parked or stored in the rear yard in the
Agriculture and Single Family Residential Districts and on lots being used
for a single-family or two-family dwelling the property shall be effectively
screened on each side adjoining a street or property situated in a residence
district by a wall, fence, or densely planted compact hedge not less than
five and one-half feet in height.  The fencing or screening shall be
established within 60 days from the date of official notice from the Zoning
Administrator.  The Zoning Administrator may grant an extension until such
time as the ground is frost free.



165.71 through 165.74 - Reserved



 



165.75   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The Zoning Administrator and such deputies or assistants, that have
been or shall be duly appointed, shall have the principal responsibility of
enforcing this Code.  For the purpose of this Code, the Zoning Administrator
shall be the Building Official.  In furtherance of such authority the Zoning
Administrator shall do, or cause to be done, the following:



   1.   Issue all building permits and certificates of occupancy and
make and maintain records thereof.



   2.   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and use of land
to determine compliance with the terms of this Code.



   3.   Maintain permanent and current records of this Code, including
but not limited to all conditional uses, variances, appeals, and applications
therefore.



   4.   Provide and maintain a public information service relative to
all matters arising under his jurisdiction.



   5.   Forward to the Planning Commission copies of all applications
for subdivision, site plans, amendments and conditional uses to this Code
that are initially filed with the office of the Zoning Administrator.



   6.   Forward to the Board of Adjustment applications for appeals,
variances, conditional uses, and other matters on which the Board is required
to pass under this Code; and keep all records of the Board.



   7.   Such other reasonable and appropriate actions necessary to
effectively administer and enforce this chapter when not prohibited nor
assigned to other agents by the terms of this Code.



   8.   Charge and receive such reasonable fees, as set by the City
Council from time to time, to help defray administrative costs related to
applications for building permits and certificates of occupancy.



165.76   INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   In furtherance of the enforcement of this Code the Zoning Administrator
shall undertake such regular and continuing programs of inspection of work
approved and under way and of existing structures and uses as may be feasible
and proper within the limits of staff and funds; shall undertake such
inspections as may be necessary to the performance of his or her duties
hereunder; and shall receive from any person complaints alleging, with
particularity, a violation of this Code and, when appropriate, shall cause
such investigations and inspections as may be warranted by such complaints to
be made.



   1.   The Zoning Administrator shall, upon determination of any
violation of this Code, notify in writing the person responsible for such
violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it; and specifically shall order the discontinuance of
any illegal use of land, buildings or structure, order removal of illegal
buildings, structures, additional, or alterations; order discontinuance of
illegal work being done; or take any other action authorized by this Code to
ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions, and in
particular shall, where necessary or appropriate, recommend to the City
Attorney the institution of legal or equitable actions that may be required
for the enforcement of this Code.



   2.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prevent any
person entitled to relief in law or equity by reason of a violation of the
provisions of this Code from bringing an appropriate action to secure such
relief.



165.77   CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   No building, or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date
of this Code and no addition to a previously existing building shall be
occupied as of the effective date of this Code until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the Zoning Administrator.  No change in a use
shall be made until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Zoning
Administrator.  Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the use or
occupancy complies with the provisions of this Code.



   1.   Application for Certificate of Occupancy.  Every application
for a building permit shall be deemed to be an application for a certificate
of occupancy.  Every application for a certificate of occupancy for a new
use of land, where no building permit is required, shall be made directly to
the Zoning Administrator.



   2.   Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy.  No certificate of
occupancy for a building, or portion thereof, constructed or improved after
the effective date of this Code, shall be issued until construction has been
completed and the premises inspected and certified by the Zoning
Administrator to be in conformity with the plans and specifications upon
which the building permit was based.  No certificate of occupancy for a
building, or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date of this
Code, shall be issued and no addition to a previously existing building shall
be occupied until the premises have been inspected and certified by the
Zoning Administrator to be in compliance with all applicable standards.  The
certificate of occupancy shall be issued, or written notice shall be given to
the applicant stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be issued not
later than fourteen (14) days after the Zoning Administrator is notified, in
writing, that the building or premises is ready for occupancy.



   3.   Issuance of Temporary Certificate of Occupancy.  If the Zoning
Administrator finds that no substantial hazard will result from occupancy of
any building, or premises, or portion thereof before the same is completed,
the Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for
the use of a portion or portions of a building, structure, or premises prior
to the completion of the entire building, structure, or site improvements. 
Pending the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a temporary certificate
may be issued to be valid for a period not to exceed six (6) months from its
date of issuance and to permit partial occupancy of the premises during
completion of the construction.  Prior to the issuance of the temporary
certificate of occupancy, the Zoning Administrator shall require that an
escrow account, bond or letter of credit be established in accordance with
the policies and procedures established by the City Council for those
incomplete portions of the construction and site improvements that prevented
the certification of the premises by the Zoning Administrator.



165.78   APPEALS OF DECISIONS.



   Any person affected by a decision of the Zoning Administrator in his or
her enforcement of this Code may appeal said decision to the Board of
Adjustment according to the procedures contained in Section 165.81 herein.



165.79   Reserved



165.80   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   1.   Creation, Membership, Appointment, Terms.  There is hereby
created a Board of Adjustment, consisting of five (5) members.  The word
“Board” when used in this Code shall mean the Board of Adjustment. 
Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the
City Council to serve respectively for the following terms:  One for one
year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one for four (4) years,
and one for five (5) years; the successor to each member so appointed to
serve a term of five years.  Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor, subject
to confirmation by City Council, for any unexpired term.  Members may be
removed by the Mayor, with consent of City Council, for cause after written
charges have been filed and after a public hearing has been held.



   2.   Meetings, Rules, Records, Procedures.  Meetings of the Board
shall be held on the second Monday of the month, and at such other times as
the Board may determine.  Meetings shall be held if so requested by three
members of the Board.  All meetings and hearings conducted by the Board
shall be open to the public.  Any person may appear and testify at a hearing
either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney.  The chairperson
or, in their absence, the acting chairperson may administer oaths and compel
attendance of witnesses.  The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing
to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings,
examinations, and other official actions.  Every decision of the Board shall
be by written record which shall include findings that set forth the specific
relief or use granted or relief denied, and shall expressly set forth any
limitations or conditions imposed on any relief granted, or work or use
authorized.  A copy of every rule or regulation order, requirement,
decision, or determination of the Board shall be filed immediately in the
office of the Zoning Administrator and shall be a public record. The Board
shall adopt its own rules and procedures not in conflict with this Code or
with the Code of Iowa.



   3.   Finality of Decision and Necessary Vote.  All decisions and
finds of the Board on any appeal or upon any application for a variance or
conditional use, after a public hearing, shall, in all instances, be the
final administrative decision and shall be subject to judicial review as
provided by law.  The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
Zoning Administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this Code, or to effect any variance
in such ordinance.



   4.   Petition for Certiorari.  Any person or persons, jointly or
severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board under the provisions of
this Code, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department board, or bureau of
the municipality, may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified,
setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying
the grounds of the illegality.  Such petition shall be presented to the
court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office
of the Zoning Administrator.



   5.   Fee.  A nonrefundable fee shall be paid by the applicant to
the Zoning Administrator at the time an application for an appeal, variance,
conditional use, or revised site plan is filed, which the Zoning
Administrator shall forthwith pay over to the City Clerk to the credit of the
general revenue fund of the City.  The fee shall help defray necessary costs
and shall be in an amount established by resolution, from time to time, by
the City Council.



165.81   JURISDICTION.



   1.   Appeals.



      A.   Scope of Appeals and Procedure for Filing.  An appeal
may be taken to the Board by any person, firm or corporation, or by any
office, department, board or bureau affected by any decision of the Zoning
Administrator, and where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement of this Code.  Such an appeal shall be submitted within 30
days of the decision of the Zoning Administrator, by filing a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof.  The appeal shall be in the number of
copies and contain such information as the Board, by rule, may require.  The
Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all of the papers
constituting a record upon which the action appealed from was taken.



      B.   Effect of Appeal.  An appeal shall stay all proceedings
in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Zoning Administrator
certifies to the Board, after the notice of the appeal has been filed with
him or her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would,
in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property, in which
case the proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application, or
on notice of the Zoning Administrator and due cause is shown.



      C.   Hearing, Decision, and Records.  The Board shall select
a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice
thereof to the parties by one publication of a notice in a publication of
general circulation within the City of Hiawatha, said publication to be made
not less than four (4) days nor more than 20 days before the date of
hearing.  The Board shall reach its decision within forty-five (45) days of
the date of the public hearing unless such time is extended by mutual consent
of the petitioner and the Board.  The Board may, in conformity with the
provisions of this Code, affirm or reverse, wholly or in part, or may modify
the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make
such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made and
to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is
taken.  The Zoning Administrator shall maintain records of all actions of
the Board relative to appeals.



165.82   VARIANCES.



   1.   Purpose.  The Board, upon appeal in specific cases and after a
public hearing, may vary the regulations of this Code in harmony with their
general purpose and intent where the Board makes findings of fact in
accordance with the standards hereinafter prescribed, and further, finds that
there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of
carrying out the liberal provisions of this Code.



   2.   Application For Variance and Notice of Hearing.  An
application for a variance shall be filed, in writing, with the Zoning
Administrator.  The application shall be in the number of copies and contain
such information as the Board may, by rule, require.  The Board shall reach
its decision within 45 days from the date of the hearing unless such time is
extended by mutual consent of the petitioner and the Board.



   3.   Public Hearing Notice.  The Board shall set a public hearing
for the application and shall publish notice of time and place of the
hearing, in a publication of general circulation within the City of Hiawatha,
not less than four days nor more than 20 days before the date of such hearing.



   4.   Notification Signs.  The Zoning Administrator shall provide
each applicant for a variance with at least two notification signs which
shall be clearly posted by the applicant on the subject property.  On a
larger property additional such signs may be required.  At least one sign
shall be placed so that it is clearly visible from an abutting street, and if
the subject property has frontage on more than one street, a sign shall be
posted on each such frontage.  When a property has little or no direct
street frontage, additional signs may be required to be posted adjacent to
and facing the surrounding properties.  For each sign provided, the
applicant shall pay a fee in an amount established from time to time by the
City Council by resolution.



      A.   Sign Content.  The notification signs shall indicate the
zoning district classification and the nature of the requested variance, and
the date, time and meeting place of the Board of Adjustment.



      B.   Time of Sign Posting.  The notification signs shall be
posted at least seven days prior to the meeting of the Board of Adjustment
and shall be maintained continuously on the property until after the public
hearing of the Board.



      C.   Failure to Post Sign.  Failure to post and maintain such
notices as prescribed above may be considered by the Board as sufficient
cause to defer the hearing on the application.



      D.   Sign Removal.  Such signs shall be removed by the
applicant within five days after the public hearing.  No person other than
the applicant or his agent shall erect, remove or alter such signs.  No one
shall deface nor in any way affect the visibility or interfere with such
signs.



   5.   Notification Letters.  A list of all owners of property
located within 200 feet of the lot on which a variance is being requested
shall be furnished in writing to the Zoning Administrator at the time of
application for a variance.  The names and addresses of each property owner
shall be as shown by the records of the County Auditor.  However, if the
property is shown to be in the name of more than one owner, a single notice
shall be mailed to all owners at the address of record.  Notice shall be
sent by certified mail by the City Clerk’s office so that the notice will
be received not less than four (4) nor more than 20 days prior to the
scheduled Board of Adjustment hearing on the variance requested. Failure to
receive a mailed notice shall not invalidate the proceedings nor constitute a
defense to a proposed variance.



   6.   Standards for Variances.  The Board shall not grant a variance
unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence submitted in each
specific case that a special condition or conditions exist to the degree that
a literal enforcement of the provisions of the Code will result in an
unnecessary hardship, and that granting such variance will not be contrary to
the public interest nor to the spirit and intent of this Code.  At a
minimum, all the following findings shall be made in order to justify
granting of a variance.



      A.   Unique Circumstances.  The subject property is unique or
exceptional as compared to other properties subject to the same provisions by
reason of irregularity, narrowness, shallowness, or substandard or marginal
size; exceptional topographical features; or other extraordinary conditions
peculiar to and inherent in the property in question and which relate to or
arise out of the property rather than the personal situation of the current
owner of the property; and which amount to more than a mere inconvenience to
the owner.



      B.   Not Exclusively For Financial Gain.  The purpose of the
variance is not based exclusively upon a desire to increase financial gain
from the property.  Proof that the property cannot be used for its highest
or best use under the regulations, shall not in itself justify granting a
variance.



      C.   Hardship Not Self-Created.  The aforesaid unique or
special condition existed at the time of the enactment of the provisions of
this Code which affect it or was the result of government action, other than
adoption of this Code, for which no compensation was paid, and has not been
created by any persons presently having an interest in the property.



      D.   Substantial Rights Denied.  The carrying out of the
strict letter of the provisions would deprive the property owners of
substantial rights commonly enjoyed by other property owners subject to the
same provisions.



      E.   Not Special Privilege.  The hardship is not merely the
inability of the owner or occupant to enjoy some special privilege or
additional right not available to owners or occupants of other property
subject to the same provisions.



      F.   Not Detrimental.  Granting the variance will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or materially injurious to the enjoyment,
use or development of property in the vicinity, and would not materially
impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent properties; would not
substantially increase congestion in the public streets, nor increase the
danger of flood or fire, or endanger the public safety, nor substantially
diminish or impair property values in the vicinity.



      G.   No Other Remedy.  There is no means other than the
requested variance by which the hardship can be avoided or remedied to a
degree sufficient to permit a reasonable use of the property.



   7.   Authorized Variances.  Variances from the regulations of this
Code shall be granted by the Board only in accordance with the standards
established in Section 165.82(5) immediately above, and may be granted only
in the following circumstances:



      A.   To allow any yard setback less than required.



      B.   To allow any yard encroachments greater than permitted.



      C.   To allow the use of a lot for a use otherwise permitted
when such use is prohibited solely because of the lot’s area, width or
depth does not meet minimum requirements.



      D.   To allow building heights greater than the maximum height
allowed with the Board of Adjustment using the knowledge of the surrounding
area, total size of the structure compared to the requested height and
location of the structure on the lot and in consideration of the surrounding
neighborhood.



      E.   To allow the same off-street parking facility to qualify
as required facilities for two or more uses, provided that substantial use of
such facilities by each user does not take place at approximately the same
times.



      F.   To reduce required off-street parking or loading
facilities by not more than one space or by 25 percent of the required
facilities, whichever is greater.



      G.   To increase but not more than 25 percent the maximum
distance that required off-street parking facilities are permitted to be
located from the use served.



      H.   To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming structure
which has been damaged to more than 65 percent of its fair market value, when
the Board finds compelling necessity requiring continuation of such use.



      I.   To waive any transitional yard screening requirements in
a C or I district if the structure, use or building is already effectively
screened by topography or existing screening comparable to the types required.



      J.   To waive the screening and landscaping requirements for
parking areas containing more than four parking spaces and adjoining or
fronting on property situated in a residential district or any institutional
premises if the closest point of such parking area is at least 100 feet from
the nearest residential or institutional property line.



      K.   To grant an extension of time for the termination of any
nonconforming Adult Motion Picture Theaters, Adult Mini Motion Picture
Theaters, Adult Massage Parlors, Adult Theaters, Adult Artist-Body Painting
Studios, Adult Modeling Studios, Adult Sexual Encounter Center, Adult Cabaret
or any other Adult Entertainment Establishment based upon evidence that three
years is not a sufficient amount of time to amortize the owner’s investment
in such establishment.



      L.   To allow lots of record developed with more than one
single family structure to be subdivided into individual lots for each
structure, when one or more of the resulting lots do not meet lot area
requirements or other bulk requirements.  However, such variance shall not
result in the creation of any lot which contains less than 80 percent of the
minimum lot area required by the Unified Development Code regulations for the
district within which the lots are located.  Further, such action does not
relieve the owner of compliance with applicable platting regulations.



      M.   In the event that a residential structure, located on a
lot created under this provision is subsequently removed, demolished, or is
destroyed or damaged to the extent that the cost of restoration exceeds 65
percent of the fair market value prior to the occurrence, said structure
shall not be restored nor shall a building permit be issued for a new
structure unless specifically authorized by the Board as provided for under
Section 165.82(6)(N) below of these regulations.



      N.   To permit the restoration of a structure which has been
damaged to more than 65 percent of its fair market value or construction of a
new residential structure on lots created under Section 165.82(6)(L) above of
these regulations.



      O.   To extend to 24 months the time a legal nonconforming use
may be vacant or discontinued without requiring any subsequent use to conform
to the use regulations of the district where it can be established that a
delay in reoccupying a property has been caused by government and/or court
action which is clearly beyond control of the property owner.



      P.   To allow a variance to the subdivision requirements where
it can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this Code
would result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider, because of unusual
topography or other conditions, the Board may vary, modify or waive the
requirements so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
is secured provided, however, that such variance, modification or waiver will
not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this Code.  In
granting a variance, the Board may impose such additional conditions as are
necessary to secure substantially the objectives of the requirements so
varied, modified or waived.



   8.   Specified Variances Prohibited.  No variance shall be granted
which would:



      A.   Permit a use which is not allowed as a permitted use by
the provisions of this Code in the district in which a property is located,
nor any use expressly or by implication prohibited therefrom.



      B.   Permit the creation of a lot or parcel that cannot be
developed in compliance with the zoning, subdivision, and other regulations
applicable thereto.



      C.   Be greater than the minimum variance necessary to relieve
the practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship demonstrated by the
applicant.



   9.   Relief Less Than Requested.  A variance less or different than
the one requested may be granted when the records support the applicant’s
right to some relief but not the relief requested.



   10.   Conditions on Variances.  The Board may impose such
conditions, including restrictions and safeguards, upon the property
benefited and the variance granted as considered necessary to prevent or
minimize adverse effects upon other property in the vicinity or upon public
facilities and services.  Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in
the grant of variance.  Violation of such conditions shall be a violation of
this Code.



   11.   Permits and Approvals Still Necessary.  A grant of a variance
shall not necessarily authorize immediate action.  As appropriate and as
required by the codes and ordinances of the City, other permits and approvals
shall be obtained.  These may include building permits, certificates of
occupancy, subdivision approval, and the like.  The relief accorded by the
grant of variance and any conditions imposed thereon shall be taken in
appropriate account in issuance of any said subsequent permits and
approval(s).



   12.   Subdivision Related Variances.  Paragraphs 2 through 6 of
this Section 165.82 shall not apply to variances of the requirements of
Sections 165.47 through 165.67 of this Unified Development Code.  An
application for a variance from those requirements shall be filed, in
writing, with the Zoning Administrator.  The application shall be in the
number of copies and contain such information as the City Council may, by
resolution, require.  Where it can be shown by the applicant that the
requirements of Sections 165.47 through 165.67 of this Unified Development
Code will result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider, because of
unusual topography or other conditions, the City Council may vary, modify or
waive the requirements so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest is secured provided, however, that such variance, modification or
waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purposes of this
Code.  By way of example, the City Council has the authority to issue a
variance of the subdivision regulations by permitting a conveyance of real
estate using a plat of survey prior to approval of the final plat.



165.83   CONDITIONAL USES.



   1.   Purpose.  Conditional uses are those uses having some special
impact or unique characteristic which requires a careful review of their
location, design, configuration, and special impact to determine the
desirability of permitting their establishment on any given site.  They are
uses which may or may not be appropriate in a particular location depending
upon consideration in each case of the public need and benefit and the local
impact, and shall be considered within the context of the intent and purpose
of this Code.



   2.   Conditional Uses Permitted; Limitation.  Each schedule of
district regulations, as contained within Sections 165.15 and 165.16 of this
Code, identifies those uses which may be permitted as conditional uses in
each specific district.  No conditional uses except those listed may be
permitted in the district.



   3.   Eligible Applicant.  A property owner may file an application
to use property for one or more of the conditional uses provided in this Code
in the zoning district within which the property is located.



   4.   Application.  An application for a conditional use shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator and be in the number of copies, and shall
contain such information and documentation as the Board may be resolution
adopt, but shall in all instances contain at least the following documents
and information:



      A.   Petition.  A written petition containing the following
information:



         (1)   Applicant’s name and address and his or her
legal interest in the subject property.



         (2)   The title holder’s name and address, if
different than the applicant and evidence of title holder’s consent to the
filing of the application.



         (3)   Street address or common description and the
complete legal description of the property.



         (4)   The zoning district classification and present use
of the property.



         (5)   A general description of the proposed conditional
use.



         (6)   Statements addressing each one of the standards
set forth in Section 165.83(7) below, and stating how the proposed
conditional use relates to and meets each such standard.



      B.   Location Map.  A clear and legible map, drawn to a scale
of one inch equals 300 feet (1" = 300') or larger, containing the following:



         (1)   Existing lot lines and streets within 600 feet of
the subject property.



         (2)   Existing zoning districts within 600 feet of the
subject property.



         (3)   Identification of the subject property and its
dimensions.



         (4)   A north arrow.



         (5)   A legend box which shall include the applicant’s
name and phone number, date prepared, conditional use requested, address, and
legal description of the subject property and map scale.



      C.   Site Development Plan.  The site development plan shall
be prepared by an engineer, architect, landscape architect, or similar
professional, and shall be at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or larger,
and shall contain the following:



         (1)   Existing physical site conditions including
contours at intervals of five feet or less, water courses, flood plains,
unique natural features, and location of all trees five inches or more in
diameter at a height of four feet above the ground line or general wooded
areas; and proposed finished topographic contours.



         (2)   Existing and proposed lot lines and property
dimensions.



         (3)   The location and dimensions of all existing and
proposed principal and accessory buildings and any other significant
structures on the subject property also showing separation between buildings
and location and dimensions of yards.



         (4)   Identify building types by usage of floor area and
number of units, offices, or the like.



         (5)   Location and dimensions of vehicular and
pedestrian circulation elements including streets; driveways and entrances
and exits thereto; off-street parking spaces, loading spaces and access
aisles; and sidewalks, walkways and pathways.



         (6)   Existing and proposed utility systems including
sanitary and storm sewers and water, electric, gas and telephone lines;
surface drainage and any impoundment areas.



         (7)   General location and height of proposed fence and
planting and the type of materials to be used.



         (8)   Elevations and architectural renderings of
structures and improvements sufficient to relay the basic architectural
intent of the proposed improvements.



   5.   Notification Signs.  The Zoning Administrator shall provide
each applicant for a conditional use with at least two notification signs
which shall be clearly posted by the applicant on the subject property.  On
a larger property additional such signs may be required.  At least one sign
shall be placed so that it is clearly visible from an abutting street and if
the subject property has frontage on more than one street a sign shall be
posted on each such frontage.  When a property has little or no direct
street frontage, additional signs may be required to be posted adjacent to
and facing the surrounding properties.  For each sign provided, the
applicant shall pay a fee in an amount established from time to time by the
City Council by resolution.



      A.   Sign Content.  The notification signs shall indicate the
zoning district classification, the proposed conditional use, and the date,
time and place of the following meetings at which the conditional use will be
reviewed.



         (1)   Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (2)   Board of Adjustment Public Hearing.  The sign
shall also contain any additional information as the Board shall, by rule,
require.



      B.   Time of Sign Posting.  The notification signs shall be
posted at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting of the Planning and
Zoning Commission and shall be maintained continuously on the property until
after the public hearings of the Board.



      C.   Failure to Post Signs.  Failure to post signs and
maintain such notices as prescribed above may be considered by the Board as
sufficient cause to defer the hearing on the application.



      D.   Sign Removal.  Such signs shall be removed by the
applicant within five (5) days after the public hearing.  No person other
than the applicant or his agent shall erect, remove or alter such signs.  No
one shall deface nor in any way affect the visibility or interfere with such
signs.



   6.   Conditional Use Application Review Procedure.  The Zoning
Administrator shall forward copies of the conditional use application to the
Board and to the Planning and Zoning Commission in the number of copies they
shall each require.



      A.   Planning and Zoning Commission.  The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall review such application and return a written report of their
findings and recommendations to the Board prior to the Board’s scheduled
public hearing on the application.  In their review said Commission shall
consider each of the standards established in Section 165.83(7) below.  In a
separate paragraph in such report said Commission shall list any recommended
conditions and/or restriction to be attached to an approval of the subject
application.



      B.   Board of Adjustment.



         (1)   Public Hearing Notice.  The Board shall set a
public hearing for the application and shall publish notice of time and place
of the hearing, in a publication of general circulation within the City of
Hiawatha, not less than four (4) days nor more than 20 days before the date
of such hearing.  In setting the public hearing, the Board shall allow time
required by the Planning and Zoning Commission to review the application and
return its report to the Board.



         (2)   Action by the Board.  The Board shall, after
receiving the report from the Planning and Zoning Commission and conducting
the public hearing on the application, reach its decision within forty-five
(45) days of the date of the public hearing, unless such time is extended by
mutual consent of the applicant and the Board.  In their review, the Board
shall consider each of the standards established in Section 165.83(7)
below.  The Board shall either grant the application for conditional use,
grant it subject to conditions, or deny the application.



         (3)   Conditions.  The Board may impose such
conditions, including restrictions and safeguards, upon the property
benefited by the conditional use as considered necessary to prevent or
minimize adverse effects upon other property in the vicinity or upon public
facilities and services.  Such conditions shall include a requirement that
development be in accordance with a site development plan approved by the
Board.  Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the approval of the
conditional use.  Violations of such conditions shall be a violation of this
Code.



   7.   Standards for Conditional Uses.  Approval for any conditional
use shall be granted only if evidence is presented which establishes:



      A.   That the conditional use applied for is permitted in the
district within which the property is located.



      B.   That the proposed use and development will be in
accordance with the intent and purpose of this Code and with the goals and
objectives of the Land Use portion of the Comprehensive Site Plan.



      C.   That the proposed use and development will not have a
substantial adverse effect upon adjacent property, the character of the
neighborhood, traffic conditions, parking, utility and service facilities,
and other factors affecting the public health, safety, and welfare.



      D.   That the proposed development or use will be located,
designed, constructed and operated in such a manner that it will be
compatible with the immediate neighborhood and will not interfere with the
orderly use, development and improvement of surrounding property.



      E.   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to
assure adequate access designed to minimize traffic congestion and to assure
adequate service by essential public services and facilities including
utilities, storm water drainage, and similar facilities.



      F.   That the proposed building, development, or use will
comply with any additional standards imposed on it by provisions of this Code
for the district in which the property is located.



      G.   Whether, and to what extent, all reasonable steps
possible have been, or will be taken, to minimize any potential adverse
effects on the surrounding property through building design, site design,
landscaping, and screening.



   8.   Permits and Approvals Still Necessary.  As appropriate, and as
required by the codes and ordinances of the City, other permits and approvals
shall be obtained.  These may include building permits, certificates of
occupancy, subdivision approval, and any similar permits or approvals.  The
approval of a conditional use and any conditions imposed thereon, including
the approved site development plan, shall be taken into appropriate account
in issuance of any said subsequent permits and approvals.



   9.   Amendments to an Approved Conditional Use.  Following
completion of the development, or establishment of the use authorized by an
approval for a conditional use, such use may be amended, varied, or altered
in the same manner and subject to the same limitations as any other
regulation established by this chapter.



   10.   Revisions to an Approved Site Development Plan for a
Conditional Use.  If, at any time, the owner of land included in an approved
site development plan for a conditional use desires to revise said approved
plan, he or she shall submit a written petition requesting such revision.  A
revised site development plan shall accompany the petition, and said plan
shall show the proposed revisions to the approved site development plan. 
The petition and the revised plan shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator who shall forward a copy thereof to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for review and report.  After review of said report, a
determination shall be made by the Zoning Administrator as to whether the
proposed revisions constitute a major or minor plan revision to the approved
plan.  If an issue arises concerning whether a proposed revision constitutes
a major or minor plan revision, the Board and the Planning Commission shall
be so informed.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend whether
it be considered a minor or major revision to the Board and then the Board
shall make the final determination without the necessity of a public hearing
thereon.



      A.   Minor Revisions.  Minor revisions shall be those that do
not increase the size of any building or structure by more than 10 feet in
any direction.  Revised site development plans containing only minor
revisions may be approved or denied by the Board without the necessity of
holding a public hearing thereon after report by the Zoning Administrator and
the Planning and Zoning Commission.  If approved, the revised site
development plan shall then supersede the previously approved plan and
subsequent development on the property shall be in accord with such approved
revised plan.



         (1)   Changes adjacent to the transitional zone, which
is defined as “that area between a site improvement, such as structures,
parking areas and driveways, and an adjacent property in an A, R-1, R-3 or
R-5 District,” shall be limited to the following:



            a.   Reduction in length of parking areas, drives,
or other similar facilities;



            b.   An increase in setbacks of site improvements
such as structures, parking areas and driveways;



            c.   A decrease in the height, length, or width of
structures;



            d.   An increase in the height, length, or width
of structures, parking areas, or other facilities generally to no more than
twenty percent (20%) of that portion facing the adjacent property;



            e.   A decrease in setbacks of structures,
parking, or other facilities generally to no more than twenty percent (20%)
of the approved setbacks;



            f.   A shift parallel to the transitional zone in
the location of a structure, parking area, or similar facility generally to
no more than twenty percent (20%) of the length or width of the structure,
parking area, or other facility;



            g.   All changes to Site Development Plans that
are determined to meet the twenty percent (20%) standard when referenced to
the last Site Development Plan approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the City Council.



         (2)   Changes which are not adjacent to a transition
zone and/or are located within the interior of Residential, Commercial, or
Industrial Districts that are minor, relative to the total land area and
scale of the development for the subject property that are found to have no
significant negative impacts on adjacent property.



      B.   Major Revisions.  Any proposed revisions not classified
as minor shall be considered major revisions.



         (1)   Procedure.  An applicant requesting approval of
major revisions in a site development plan previously approved for a
conditional use shall submit a written petition, location map, and a site
development plan which contains the requested revisions.  Such material
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator who shall forward copies to
the Board and to the Planning and Zoning Commission.  Notification signs
shall be furnished to the applicant and all requirements of Section 165.83(5)
shall apply, except that the content of the signs shall be modified to
indicate that a revised site development plan is being requested.



         (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review
such application and return a written report of their findings and
recommendations to the Board prior to the Board’s scheduled public hearing
on the application.



         (3)   The Board of Adjustment shall set a public hearing
for the application and shall publish notice of time and place of the
hearing, in a publication of general circulation within the City of Hiawatha,
not less than ten (10) days before the date of such hearing. In setting the
public hearing the Board shall allow the time required by the Planning and
Zoning Commission to review the application and return its report to the
Board.  The Board shall, after receiving such report from the Planning and
Zoning Commission and conducting the public hearing on the application, reach
its decision within forty-five (45) days of the date of the public hearing,
unless such time is extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the
Board. The Board may approve, approve with modifications, or deny such site
development plan.  If approved the revised site development plan shall then
supersede the previously approved plan, and subsequent development on the
property shall be in accord with such approved revised plan.



   11.   Amendment to Conditional Use.  Amendment to conditional use
of animal boarding shall have the additional requirements of:



      A.   Such establishments shall also satisfy all applicable
State and local agency provisions.



      B.   Outdoor exercise area shall be sectioned off to make
different sizes of outdoor play areas with no one area exceeding fifty
percent (50%) of the total exercise area.



      C.   Dogs shall be supervised at all times in outdoor area to
control barking.



      D.   Outdoor exercise or play areas shall be approximately 1/3
of indoor gross building square footage.



      E.   Conditional use shall be inspected yearly to insure
cleanliness and noise compliance.



      F.   Waste disposal shall be scheduled twice per week and more
frequently if odor becomes a problem.



165.84   CONDITIONAL EXPANSIONS.



   1.   Purpose.  Conditional expansion of nonconforming uses may be
granted by the Board of Adjustment for legal nonconforming commercial uses in
Commercial and Industrial Districts, and for legal nonconforming uses in the
Commercial-Warehouse District and Industrial Districts.  Upon review of each
request for a conditional expansion, the nature of the use, the nature of the
surrounding properties, and any other considerations pertinent to an
individual request which may have relevance to whether or not that legal
nonconforming use should be expanded shall be considered.



   2.   Conditional Expansions Permitted.



      A.   Nonconforming Commercial Uses.  Expansion of legal
nonconforming commercial uses may be granted in those Commercial and
Industrial Districts described in Sections 165.15 and 165.16.  All yard
requirements of the district in which the structure is located shall be
adhered to.



      B.   Nonconforming Industrial Uses.  Expansion of legal
nonconforming industrial uses may be granted in the Commercial-Warehouse
District and those Industrial Districts described in Sections 165.15 and
165.16.  All yard requirements of the district in which the structure is
located shall be adhered to.



   3.   Expansion of Uses.  Expansion of commercial or industrial uses
are expressly prohibited in Residential Districts as well as the expansion of
nonconforming industrial uses in all Commercial Districts with the exception
of the C-WH District.



   4.   Application.  An application for a conditional expansion shall
be filed with the Zoning Administrator and be in the number of copies and
shall contain such information and documentation as the Board may, by rule,
require but shall in all instances contain at least the following documents
and information:



      A.   Petition.  A written petition containing the following
information:



         (1)   Applicant’s name and address and his legal
interest in the subject property.



         (2)   The title holder’s name and address, if
different from the applicant, and evidence of title holder’s consent to the
filing of the application.



         (3)   Street address or common description and the
complete legal description of the property.



         (4)   The zoning district classification and present use
of the property.



         (5)   A general description of the proposed conditional
expansion.



         (6)   Statements addressing each of the standards set
forth in Section 165.84(7) below, and stating how the proposed conditional
expansion relates to and meets each such standard.



      B.   Location Map.  A clear and legible map, drawn to a scale
of one inch equals 300 feet (1" = 300') or larger, containing the following:



         (1)   Existing lot lines and streets within 600 feet of
the subject property.



         (2)   Existing zoning districts within 600 feet of the
subject property.



         (3)   Identification of the subject property and its
dimensions.



         (4)   A north arrow.



         (5)   A legend box which includes the applicant’s name
and phone number, date prepared, address, and legal description of the
subject property and map scale.



      C.   Site Development Plan.  The site development plan shall
be prepared by an engineer, architect, landscape architect, or similar
professional, and shall be at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet (1" = 20')
or larger, and shall contain the following:



         (1)   Existing physical site conditions including
contours at intervals of five feet or less, water courses, flood plains,
unique natural features, and location of all trees five inches or more in
diameter at a height of four feet above the ground line or general wooded
areas; and proposed finished topographic contours.



         (2)   Existing and proposed lot lines and property
dimensions.



         (3)   The location and dimensions of all existing and
proposed principal and accessory buildings and any other significant
structures on the subject property also showing separation between buildings
and location and dimensions of yards.



         (4)   Identity of building types by usage, floor area
and dwelling units, offices, or the like.



         (5)   Floor area of the existing buildings and the floor
area and percentage increase of the proposed expansion.



         (6)   Location and dimensions of vehicular and
pedestrian circulation elements including streets; driveways and entrances
and exits thereto; off-street parking spaces, loading spaces and access
aisles; and sidewalks, walkways and pathways.



         (7)   Existing and proposed utility systems including
sanitary and storm sewers and water, electric, gas and telephone lines;
surface drainage and any impoundment areas.



         (8)   General location and height of proposed fences and
plantings and the type of materials to be used.



         (9)   Elevations and architectural renderings of
structures and improvements sufficient to lay the basic architectural intent
of the proposed improvements shall also be submitted.



   5.   Notification Signs.  The Zoning Administrator shall provide
each applicant for a conditional expansion with at least two notification
signs which shall be clearly posted by the applicant on the subject
property.  On a larger property additional signs may be required as
needed.  At least one sign shall be placed so that it is clearly visible
from an abutting street and if the subject property has frontage on more than
one street a sign shall be posted on each such frontage.  When a property
has little or no direct street frontage, additional signs may be required to
be posted adjacent to and facing the surrounding properties.  For each sign
provided, the applicant shall pay a fee of an amount established from time to
time by the City Council by resolution.



      A.   Sign Content.  The notification signs shall indicate the
zoning district classification, the floor area of the existing building, and
the floor area of the proposed expansion; and the date, time and place of the
following meetings at which the special exception will be reviewed:



         (1)   Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (2)   Board of Adjustment Public Hearing.  The sign
shall also contain any additional information as the Board shall, by rule,
require.



      B.   Time of Sign Posting.  The notification signs shall be
posted at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting of the Planning and
Zoning Commission and shall be maintained continuously on the property until
after the public hearing of the Board.



      C.   Failure to Post Signs.  Failure to post and maintain
such notices as prescribed above may be considered by the Board as sufficient
cause to defer the hearing on the applications.



      D.   Sign Removal.  Such signs shall be removed by the
applicant within five (5) days after the public hearing.  No person other
than the applicant or his agent shall erect, remove or alter such signs.  No
one shall deface nor in any way affect the visibility or interfere with such
signs.



   6.   Conditional Expansion Application Review Procedure.  The
Zoning Administrator shall forward copies of the Conditional Expansion
application to the Board and to the Planning and Zoning Commission in the
number of copies they shall each require.



      A.   Planning and Zoning Commission.  The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall review such application and return a written report of their
findings and recommendations to the Board prior to the Board’s scheduled
public hearing on the application. In their review, said Commission shall
consider each of the standards established in Section 165.84(7) below.  In a
separate paragraph in such report, said Commission shall list any recommended
conditions and/or restrictions to be attached to an approval of the subject
application.



      B.   Board of Adjustment Public Hearing Notice.  The Board
shall set a Public Hearing for the application and shall publish notice of
time and place of the hearing, in a publication of general circulation within
the City of Hiawatha, not less than four (4) days nor more than 20 days
before the date of such hearing. In setting the public hearing, the Board
shall allow time required by the Planning and Zoning Commission to review the
application and return its report to the Board.



      C.   Action by the Board.  The Board shall, after receiving
report from the Planning and Zoning Commission and conducting the public
hearing on the application, reach its decision within forty-five (45) days of
the date of the public hearing, unless such time is extended by mutual
consent of the applicant and the Board.  In their review, the Board shall
consider each of the standards established in Section 165.84(7) below.  The
Board shall either grant the application for conditional expansion, grant it
subject to conditions, or deny the application.



      D.   Conditions.  The Board may impose such conditions,
including restrictions and safeguards, upon the property benefited by the
conditional expansion as considered necessary to prevent or minimize adverse
effects upon other property in the vicinity or upon public facilities and
services.  Such conditions shall include a requirement that development be
in accordance with a site development plan approved by the Board.  Such
conditions shall be expressly set forth in the approval of the conditional
expansion.  Violations of such conditions shall be a violation of this Code.



   7.   Standards for Conditional Expansion.  Approval for any
conditional expansion shall be granted only if evidence is presented which
establishes:



      A.   That the proposed expansion or enlargement will not have
a substantial adverse effect upon adjacent property, the character of the
neighborhood, traffic conditions, parking, utility and service facilities,
and other factors affecting the public health, safety and welfare.



      B.   That the proposed expansion or enlargement will be
located, designed, constructed and operated in such a manner that it will be
compatible with the immediate neighborhood and will not interfere with the
orderly use, development and improvement of surrounding property.



      C.   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to
assure adequate access designed to minimize traffic congestion and to assure
adequate service by essential public services and facilities including
utilities, storm water drainage and similar facilities.



      D.   That the proposed building, development, or use will
comply with any additional standards imposed on it by provisions of this Code
for the district in which the property is located.



      E.   Whether, and to what extent, all reasonable steps
possible have been or will be taken to minimize any potential adverse effects
on the surrounding property through building design, site design,
landscaping, and screening.



   8.   Permits and Approvals Still Necessary.  As appropriate, and as
required by the codes and ordinances of the City, other permits and approvals
shall be obtained.  These may include building permits, certificates of
occupancy, subdivision approval, and any similar permits or approvals.  The
approval of a conditional expansion and any conditions imposed thereon,
including the approved site development plan, shall be taken into appropriate
account in issuance of any said subsequent permits and approvals.



   9.   Revisions to an Approved Site Development Plan for a
Conditional Expansion.  If, at any time, the owner of land included in an
approved site development plan for a conditional expansion desires to revise
said approved plan, the applicant shall submit a written petition requesting
such revision.  A revised site development plan shall accompany the
petition, and said plan shall show the proposed revisions to the approved
site development plan.  The petition and revised plan shall be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator who shall forward a copy thereof to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for review and report.  After review of the report, a
determination shall be made by the Zoning Administrator as to whether the
proposed revisions constitute a major or minor revision to the approved
plan.  If an issue arises concerning whether a proposed revision constitutes
a major or minor plan revision, the Board and the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be so informed.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
recommend whether it be considered a minor or major revision to the Board and
then the Board shall make the final determination without the necessity of a
public hearing thereon.



      A.   Minor Revisions.  Minor revisions shall include those
changes as established from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Adjustment. Revised site development plans containing only minor revisions
may be approved, approved with modifications, or denied by the Board without
necessity of holding a public hearing thereon after report by the Zoning
Administrator and the Planning and Zoning Commission.  If approved, the
revised site development plan shall then supersede the previous approved
plan, and subsequent development on the property shall be in accordance with
such approved revised plan.



      B.   Major Revisions.  Any proposed revisions not classified
as minor shall be considered major revisions.



         (1)   Procedure.  An applicant requesting approval of
major revisions in a site development plan previously approved for a
conditional expansion shall submit a written petition, location map, and a
site development plan which contains the requested revisions.  Such material
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator who shall forward copies to
the Board and to the Planning and Zoning Commission.  Notification signs
shall be furnished to the applicant and all requirements of Section 165.84(5)
shall apply, except that the content of the signs shall be modified to
indicate that a revised site development plan is being requested.



            a.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
review such application and return a written report of their findings and
recommendations to the Board prior to the Board’s scheduled public hearing
on the application.



            b.   The Board of Adjustment shall set a public
hearing for the application and shall publish notice of time and place of the
hearing in a publication of general circulation within the City of Hiawatha
not less than ten (10) days before the date of such hearing. In setting the
public hearing the Board shall allow the time required by the Planning and
Zoning Commission to review the application and return its report to the
Board. The Board shall, after receiving a report from the Planning and Zoning
Commission and conducting the public hearing on the application, reach its
decision within forty-five (45) days of the date of the public hearing unless
such time is extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the Board. The
Board may approve, approve with modifications, or deny such revised site
development plan. If approved the revised site development plan shall then
supersede the previously approved plan, and subsequent development on the
property shall be in accordance with such approved revised plan.



165.85   SPECIAL USE PERMIT; GROUP CHILD DAY CARE HOME.



   1.   Purpose.  To allow group child day care homes within all
districts permitting residential use or in any district where a residential
use is legally established, subject to Section 165.25(1), Residential Child
Day Care Facilities, Statement of Intent.



   2.   Eligible Applicant.  A residential property owner, or the
occupant, with permission of the owner (title holder), may file an
application to use their residence as a group child day care home, as
provided for in this Code, in the zoning district within which the
residential property is located.



   3.   Application.  An application shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator which shall be on a form and be in the number of copies, and
shall contain such information and documentation as the Board, by resolution,
may require.



   4.   Notification Signs.  The Zoning Administrator shall provide
such applicant with at least two notification signs which shall be clearly
posted by the applicant on the subject property.  At least one sign shall be
placed so that it is clearly visible from an abutting street and if the
subject property has frontage on more than one street a sign shall be posted
on each such frontage.  When a property has little or no direct street
frontage, additional signs may be required to be posted adjacent to, and
facing the surrounding properties.  For each sign provided, the applicant
shall pay a fee in an amount as established from time to time by resolution
of the City Council.



      A.   Sign Content.  The sign shall indicate that this is a
request for a special use permit for a Group Child Day Care Home and specify
the date, time, and place of the Board of Adjustment Public Hearing.  The
sign shall also contain any additional information as the Board shall, by
rule, require.



      B.   Time of Sign Posting.  The notification signs shall be
posted at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting of the Board of
Adjustment and shall be maintained continuously on the property until after
the public hearing of the Board.



      C.   Failure to Post Signs.  Failure to post and maintain
such notices as prescribed above may be considered by the Board as sufficient
cause to defer the hearing on the application.



      D.   Sign Removal.  Such signs shall be removed by the
applicant within five (5) days after the public hearing. No person other than
the applicant or his agent shall erect, remove or alter such signs. No one
shall deface nor in any way affect the visibility or otherwise interfere with
such signs.



   5.   Special Use Permit Review Procedures.  The Zoning
Administrator shall forward copies of the special use permit application to
the Board of Adjustment, who shall take the following actions:



      A.   Public Hearing Notice.  The Board shall set a public
hearing for the application and shall publish notice of the date, time, and
place of the hearing in a publication of general circulation within the City
of Hiawatha not less than four (4) days nor more than 20 days before the date
of such hearing.



      B.   Action by the Board.  The Board shall, after conducting
the public hearing on the application, reach its decision within forty-five
(45) days of the date of the public hearing, unless such time is extended by
mutual consent of the applicant and the Board.  The Board shall either grant
the application for a special use permit, grant it subject to conditions, or
deny the application.



      C.   Conditions.  The Board may impose such conditions,
including restrictions and safeguards, upon the property benefited by the
special use permit as considered necessary to prevent or minimize adverse
effects upon other property in the vicinity or upon public facilities and
services.  Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the approval of
the special use permit.  Violations of such conditions shall be a violation
of this Code.



   6.   Standards for a Special Use Permit.  Authorization for a
special use permit request shall be based on how the request satisfies the
following standards:



      A.   The site is suitable for the proposed use.



      B.   The use will be generally compatible with the development
on adjacent properties and the character of the general area.



      C.   The petitioner can meet the criteria set forth under
Section 165.25(2).



165.86   LIMITATION ON SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS.



   Whenever any application has been denied by the Board of Adjustment or
has been withdrawn after Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation but
prior to action by the Board, an application requesting the same approval
shall not be accepted during the succeeding twelve (12) months unless the
Board determines that sufficient new information, as specified in paragraph
1, New Information, below, has been provided to justify acceptance of another
such request:



   1.   New Information.  New information sufficient to justify
acceptance of a successive application within the above described twelve (12)
month period shall include one or both of the following:



      A.   A substantial change in the proposed use and/or
development of the subject property.



      B.   A substantial change in any conditions important to the
previous denial.



   2.   Procedure.



      A.   Petition for Successive Application.  The owner shall
submit to the Zoning Administrator a petition addressed to the Board.  Such
petition shall be clearly labeled as a “Petition for a Successive
Application.”  The petition shall identify the subject property, the
substance of the previous denial, and include a listing and description of
the new information relating to Section 165.86(1), New Information, above to
justify submission of another application petition to the Board.  Other
documents, exhibits, material, and information in support of the petition may
be included in the submission.  The applicant shall submit such petition and
supporting material in the number of copies, and pay a fee to the Zoning
Administrator in an amount as established from time to time by the City
Council by resolution.



      B.   Review of Request.  The Zoning Administrator shall
forward such petition for successive application to the Board and to the
Planning and Zoning Commission in the number of copies they shall each
require.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review such petition
within sixty (60) days of receipt of the petition and report its findings and
recommendation to the Board within thirty (30) days from the date of said
Commission’s review meeting.  The Board shall not act on such petition
until it has received a recommendation thereon from said Commission, unless
such recommendation is not received within ninety (90) days of the submission.



      C.   Action by Board.  The Board shall determine whether the
information submitted in the petition for successive application justifies
acceptance of a successive application.  If the Board determines that a
successive application is justified the owner may then submit an application
according to the procedures governing the submittal.



165.87 through 165.89 - Reserved



165.90   INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING DISTRICT MAP.



   1.   Authority.  The City Council may, from time to time, in the
manner hereinafter set forth, amend the Zoning District Map.



   2.   Purpose.  The amendment process herein established is intended
to provide a means for changing the zoning classification of specific parcels
of property.



   3.   Initiation of Amendment.  An amendment to the Zoning District
Map may be initiated by a motion of the City Council or the Planning and
Zoning Commission, or by the filing of an application by the owners of the
property which is the subject of the proposal. Such motion or application
shall be directed to the City Clerk, and contain the materials specified by
Section 165.91.



   4.   Amendment Initiated by the City Council or Planning and Zoning
Commission.  When an amendment to the Zoning District Map is initiated by a
motion of the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission, certain of
the requirements contained in this section and Section 165.91 may be waived,
including but not limited to: written petition, location map, site
development plan, posting of notification signs, and payment of application
fee.  The initiating body shall, however, utilize alternative means which
are determined to provide sufficient information and notice to the public. 
The procedure provided for in Section 165.90(5) shall in all instances be
followed.



   5.   Public Hearing Notice and Adjacent Property Owner Notification.



      A.   Public Hearing Notice.  The Council shall set a public
hearing for the application and shall publish notice of time and place of the
hearing, in a publication of general circulation within the City of Hiawatha,
not less than four days nor more than 20 days before the date of such
hearing.  In setting the public hearing, the Council shall allow time
required by the Planning and Zoning Commission to review the application and
return its report to the Council.



      B.   Not less than four nor more than 20 days before the date
of the public hearing to be held by the City Council to consider the
amendment, notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be sent to the
owners of any real property which is located within the City of Hiawatha and
is either a part of the area which would be directly affected by the proposed
amendment or located with 500 feet of any part of the area which would be
directly affected by the proposed amendment.  Owners of property which is a
part of the area which would be directly affected by the proposed amendment
or located within 200 feet of any part of the area which would be directly
affected by the proposed amendment shall be notified by certified mail, and
owners of other property located within 500 feet of any part of the area
which would be directly affected by the proposed amendment shall be by
regular mail.



      C.   If the amendment is initiated by a property owner, it
shall be the responsibility of the property owner to obtain a listing of the
parties to whom notice must be provided by regular or certified mail from the
Linn County Auditor, and to reimburse the City for the costs of mailing the
required notices.  Such notices shall be mailed to the address shown by the
records of the County Auditor provided, however, that if the property is
shown to be in the name of more than one owner, a single notice shall be
mailed to all owners at the address of record.



      D.   Failure of actual notice to any party, whether sent by
regular or certified mail, shall not invalidate the proceedings or require
the denial of the proposed amendment.



      E.   Notwithstanding the above, if the proposed amendment
would directly affect a more than 10 parcels of property, only published
notice shall be required.



   6.   Notification Signs.  The Zoning Administrator shall provide
each applicant for an amendment to the Zoning District Map with at least two
notification signs which shall be clearly posted by the applicant on the
subject property.  On a larger property additional such signs may be
required.  At least one sign shall be placed so that it is clearly visible
from an abutting street and if the subject property has frontage on more than
one street a sign shall be posted on each such frontage.  When a property
has little or no direct street frontage, additional signs may be required to
be posted adjacent to and facing the surrounding properties.  For each sign
provided, the applicant shall pay a fee in an amount established from time to
time by the City Council by resolution.



      A.   Sign Content.  The notification signs shall indicate the
request to amend the Zoning District Map, the existing and proposed zoning
designation, and the date, time and place of the following meetings at which
the proposed amendment will be reviewed.  The sign shall also contain any
additional information as the Council shall, by rule, require.



         (1)   Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (2)   City Council public hearing. 



      B.   Time of Sign Posting.  The notification signs shall be
posted at least seven days prior to the meeting of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and shall be maintained continuously on the property until after
the public hearings of the City Council.



      C.   Failure to Post Signs.  Failure to post signs and
maintain such notices as prescribed above may be considered by the Council as
sufficient cause to defer the hearing on the application.



      D.   Sign Removal.  Such signs shall be removed by the
applicant within five days after the public hearing.  No person other than
the applicant or his agent shall erect, remove or alter such signs.  No one
shall deface nor in any way affect the visibility or interfere with such
signs.



165.91.      CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT TO THE ZONING
DISTRICT MAP.



   An application for an amendment to the Zoning District Map shall be in
the form of a petition. Except for applications to reclassify property as A,
R-l or R-3, the petition shall contain each of the following items, unless
waived by the City Clerk based on the nature of the request.



   1.   Written Material. 



      A.   Zoning classification requested and existing zoning.



      B.   Complete legal description of property.



      C.   Street address if applicable.



      D.   Statement describing the relationship of the request to
the Land Use Plan and other elements of the Comprehensive Plan.



      E.   Compatibility of the requested district to the adjoining
neighborhood.



      F.   Suitability of the property to uses permitted in the
district requested.



      G.   Adequacy of street facilities, utilities, and other
facilities in the area and the effect proposed development will have on them.



      H.   Property owner’s signature.



      I.   Other information deemed necessary by the City.



   2.   Location Map.  The location map shall be at a scale of one
inch equals three hundred feet (1" = 300') or larger, have a north arrow, and
shall include the following information:



      A.   Existing platted lot lines and streets.



      B.   Existing zoning of all property within 600 feet of the
boundaries of the property submitted for reclassification.



      C.   Identification of the area to be reclassified.



      D.   The names and contact information for the property owner,
petitioner and the petitioner’s agent.



      E.   Reclassification request.



      F.   General geographic location of the request.



      G.   Legal description of the property.



      H.   Other information deemed necessary by the City.



   3.   Site Development Plan.



      A.   Scale of 1 inch equals 20 feet (1" = 20') or larger.



      B.   Prepared by an engineer, landscape architect, urban
planner, architect, or similar professional.



      C.   Existing site contours at maximum five-foot intervals.



      D.   Water courses and flood plains.



      E.   Unique natural features.



      F.   All trees five inches or more in diameter measured four
feet above natural ground line and/or general wooded areas.



      G.   Required minimum linear yard dimensions of the requested
district.



      H.   Provide linear yard dimensions, if different from
required ones.



      I.   Parking spaces, drives, radius or curvature of ingress
and egress drives, circulation patterns of traffic, access to public or
private streets.



      J.   Location of all structures.



      K.   Physical characteristics pertinent to the development.



      L.   Soil erosion control plan.



      M.   Total lot area to be reclassified and exterior lot
dimensions.



      N.   Square footage and percentage of the lot covered by
existing and proposed structure(s) and hard surfacing.



      O.   Area of required yards and open space.



      P.   Number of parking spaces required and number provided.



      Q.   Owner’s name requesting reclassification, location of
the property, petitioner’s name, address and phone number.



      R.   All dimensions necessary to assure that the proposed
development is in accord with the requirements of this Code.



      S.   Other information as deemed necessary by the City.



165.92   POLICIES RELATING TO THE RECLASSIFICATION OF PROPERTY.



   The City of Hiawatha has established policies which apply whenever an
applicant proposes to reclassify property, and the reclassification would
result in a significant change in use or a higher intensity of use from the
current zoning.  Figure III lists the type of rezoning requests to which
these policies apply.† 4 The reclassification policies are intended to
obtain development which, in addition to being in conformance with the
Comprehensive Plan is compatible with existing development in the vicinity
and the natural features of the site.  (Where these policies conflict with
the policies contained in the Comprehensive Plan, the policies contained in
the Comprehensive Plan shall be given precedence.)  These reclassification
policies shall be applied by the City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission
and the City in reviewing and acting upon rezoning applications.



   1.   Zoning Density.  In determining densities for a particular
property, the City Council will take into account both the property’s
physical characteristics and the location of the property relative to
available services and facilities such as roads, water, sewer, utility
services, fire protection, the degree and intensity of development in the
vicinity, the surrounding neighborhood character, and Comprehensive Plan
policies regarding land use applicable to the property.



   2.   Consideration of Development Constraints.  It is the City
Council’s intent to obtain the best possible harmony between the physical
characteristics of a site and the type and intensity of development proposed
for the site.  Land having development constraints shall be avoided or used
for lower intensity development unless constraints are mitigated to the
satisfaction of the City Council.  Suggested and required mitigation
measures are listed in Figure IV.† 5



      A.   Identification of Development Constraints.  An applicant
requesting a rezoning shall provide maps depicting any of the following areas
applicable to the property contained in the rezoning application.  The
applicant shall provide an estimate of acreage contained in each of these
areas, and outside of the areas below listed.  Areas having these
characteristics shall be considered subject to development constraints. 
Figure IV contains explanation of the City's concerns about these areas.



         (1)   Slopes of greater than 25%.



         (2)   Areas subject to geologic hazards including
unstable slopes or soils, and ground subsidence.



         (3)   Any regulatory floodway or flood fringe areas as
depicted on the City’s flood plain overlay district maps.



         (4)   Wetlands as defined in Section 165.96(187) of
these regulations.



         (5)   Adjacent less intense land uses.



      B.   Treatment of Development Constraints.



         (1)   Applicants proposing a rezoning which is subject
to this section shall show the type of terrain and development constraints on
the property have been considered in requesting a particular density.



         (2)   The applicant may propose mitigation measures in
areas subject to development constraints which would reduce hazards or make
development more compatible with physical conditions on the property and
adjacent development.  Figure IV contains a list of suggested mitigation
measures for the different types of development constraints.  This list is
not all-inclusive.  An applicant may propose other methods of mitigation. 
Proposed mitigation measures shall be included in the applicant’s rezoning
submittal.



   3.   Preservation of Natural Features.  To the maximum extent
possible, the arrangement of land uses shall preserve or complement the
natural features of the site.  Whenever feasible, development shall be
arranged to obtain this result.



   4.   Site Considerations.  A rezoning proposal shall allow for the
required parking, landscaping, open space, and other accessory uses necessary
for the proper functioning of the development to be accommodated on the
property for which rezoning is requested.



   5.   Reasonable Restrictions on Rezoning.  Reasonable restrictions
may be placed on the property to be rezoned at the time of rezoning to
protect or relieve adjacent property from any additional requirements that
might apply as a result of the rezoning.  Reasonable restrictions include
requiring the owner of any property that is rezoned to be responsible for the
establishment and installation of transition yards and/or buffer areas that
are required by the zoning regulations as a result of the requested rezoning.



165.93   Reserved



165.94   LIMITATION ON SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS.



   Whenever any application requesting a change in a district
classification has been denied by the City Council, or has been withdrawn
after City Planning Commission recommendation and prior to City Council
action, application seeking essentially the same amendment shall not be
accepted during the succeeding twelve months unless the City Council
determines that sufficient new information as specified in paragraph
165.94(1), New Information, below has been provided to justify acceptance of
another amendment request.



   1.   New Information.  New information sufficient to justify
acceptance of a successive application within the above described twelve
month period shall include one, or both, of the following:



      A.   A substantial change in the proposed use and/or
development of the subject property.



      B.   A substantial change in any conditions important to the
previous denial.



   2.   Procedure.



      A.   Petition for Successive Application.  The owner shall
submit to the City Clerk a petition addressed to the City Council.  Such
petition shall be clearly labeled as a “Petition for a Successive
Application.”  The petition shall identify the subject property, the
substance of the previous denial of such amendment, and include a listing and
description of the new information – relating to paragraph 165.94(1) above
– to justify submission of another amendment request.  Other documents,
exhibits, material, and information in support of the petition may be
included in the submission.  The application shall submit such petition and
supporting material in the number of copies, and pay a fee to the City Clerk
in an amount as established from time to time by the City Council by
resolution.



      B.   Review of Request.  The City Council shall refer such
petition for successive application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
review and recommendation prior to action by the City Council.  Said
Commission shall review such petition within sixty (60) days of receipt of
proper submittal and report its recommendations to the City Council within
thirty (30) days from the date of said Commission’s review meeting.  The
City Council shall not act on such petition until it has received a
recommendation thereon from said Commission, unless such recommendation is
not received within ninety (90) days of the submission.



      C.   Action by City Council.  The City Council shall
determine whether the information required in the petition for successive
application justifies acceptance of a successive application.  If the City
Council determines that a successive application is justified, the owner may
then submit an amendment request according to the procedures set forth in
this section.



165.95   VIOLATION AND PENALTY.



   1.   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than
thirty (30) days, for each offense.  Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



   2.   In case any building, structure, or improvements are erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or
any building, structure or land is used in violation of this Code, the City
Council, in addition to other remedies, may institute any proper action or
proceeding, including an action to adjoin such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or
use, in the name of the City of Hiawatha, to restrain, correct or abate such
violations, to prevent occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about said premises.



165.96   DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall govern the interpretation of the
regulations of the City of Hiawatha Unified Development Code.



   1.   “Accessory building, structure, or use” means a building,
structure or use which:



      A.   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building,
structure, or use.



      B.   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal
building, structure, or use served, except as otherwise expressly authorized
by the provisions of this Code.



      C.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience, necessity, or
benefit of the occupants, employees, customers, or visitors of or to the
principal building, structure, or use served.



      D.   Includes, but is not limited to, satellite antenna
dishes, solar panels, and wind generators.



   2.   “Adult artist-body painting studio” means an establishment
or business which provides the services of applying paint or other substance
whether transparent or nontransparent to or on the human body distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas (as defined herein).



   3.   “Adult book store” means an establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines,
and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined herein) or an
establishment or section devoted to the sales or display of such material.



   4.   “Adult cabaret” means any place holding a liquor license or
beer permit, or combination for consumption of beer or liquor, or both, on
the premises wherein entertainment is characterized by emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas (as defined herein).



   5.   “Adult entertainment establishment” means any other
establishment not otherwise defined herein, but of the same general
classification as the other establishments herein defined, having as a
substantial or significant portion of its business the offering of
entertainment, stocks in trade of materials, scenes or other presentations
characterized by emphasis on depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas (as herein defined).



   6.   “Adult massage parlor” means any place of business wherein
any method of pressure on or friction against, or rubbing, stroking,
kneading, tapping, pounding or vibrating the external parts of the body with
the hand or any body parts, or by a mechanical or electrical instrument,
under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the individual
to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf
will pay money or give other consideration or gratuity therefore, wherein the
massage is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined herein).



   7.   “Adult mini motion picture theater” means an enclosed
building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas (as defined herein), for observation by patrons therein.



   8.   “Adult modeling studio” means an establishment or business
which provides the services of modeling for the purposes of reproducing the
human body by means of photography, painting, sketching, drawing or otherwise
wherein the activity is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined herein).



   9.   “Adult motion picture theater” means an enclosed building
with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as
defined here) for observation by patrons therein.



   10.   “Adult sexual encounter center” means any business,
agency, or persons who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provide a
place where three or more persons, not all members of the same family, may
congregate, assemble, or associate for the purposes of performing activities
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas (as defined herein).



   11.   “Adult theater” means a motion picture theater or stage
show theater or combination thereof used for presenting materials
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas (as defined herein) for observation by patrons therein.



   12.   “Agriculture” means the raising of food and feed crops and
products, and including tree and vine products, animal husbandry including
bee-keeping, dairying, poultry, and pasturage and the like, but excluding
commercial feed lots, fur farms, kennels, and boarding kennels, and boarding
and riding stables. It includes the ordinary accessory uses and structures
for preparing, treating, and storing products, equipment and machinery,
provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be
secondary to that of ordinary agricultural activities.



   13.   “Airport” means an area of land or water which is used or
intended for use for the landing and taking off of aircraft, and any
appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for airport buildings or
other airport facilities or rights-of-way, including all necessary taxiways,
aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangars, and other necessary buildings
and open spaces.



   14.   “Alley” means a public or private right-of-way generally
designed to provide a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting
property and not intended for general traffic circulation.



   15.   “Apartment” means a room or suite of rooms designed and
arranged for use as a residence by a single family.



   16.   “Apartment house” – see definition of “dwelling,
multiple-family.”



   17.   “Appeal” – see Section 165.81 of this Code.



   18.   “Automobile” means a four-wheeled, motor driven vehicle
designed and intended primarily to carry not more than six passengers but not
including a bus, van, or motor home.



   19.   “Automobile service station” means an establishment for
the retail sale of fuel, lubricants, tires, and other similar products and
supplies for vehicles, including minor accessory parts.  It may also include
minor parts installation, towing, servicing, and minor repairs of vehicles;
and vehicle washing facilities and trailer rental when secondary to the above
activities.  Major repairs and sale of vehicles are expressly excluded.



   20.   “Automobile salvage and wrecking” – see definition of
“salvage yard.”



   21.   “Basement” means that portion of a building between floor
and ceiling which is partly below grade but having more than one-half its
height above the average grade of the adjoining ground.  For the purpose of
this Code a basement shall not be considered a story unless designed or used
for habitable space or business purposes.



   22.   “Bed and breakfast home” means a dwelling unit within
which a portion thereof is used to provide short-term lodging and meals for
compensation for a limited number of overnight guests.



   23.   “Beer garden” means any establishment—which includes any
area out-of-doors or not completely contained within a building in which
alcoholic beverages are served and/or consumed—and may include the serving
or consumption of food and is associated with a special event or other
outdoor activities.  The facility shall be duly approved and licensed as
required by applicable State and local regulations.  “Beer garden” does
not include outdoor seating areas of a restaurant or bar regularly open
during their business hours.



   24.   “Billboard” – see definition of “sign, advertising.”



   25.   “Block” means a tract or area of land within a subdivision
that is entirely bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets, public
parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, municipal
boundary lines, township lines, county lines, or the boundary of the
subdivision.



   26.   “Board” means the Board of Adjustment of the City of
Hiawatha, Iowa.



   27.   “Boarding house” – see definition of “lodging house.”



   28.   “Buildable area” means the area of a lot remaining after
the minimum open space and/or yard requirements of this Code have been
complied with.



   29.   “Building” means any structure built, used, designed, or
intended for the support, shelter, protection, or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels, or property of any kind.



   30.   “Building, attached” means a building which is joined to
another building at one or more sides by a common wall, except that an
accessory building, including a garage, shall be considered as attached to
the principal building if connected by a roof.



   31.   “Building, detached” means a building entirely surrounded
by open space.



   32.   “Building height” means the vertical distance from the
sidewalk level, or its equivalent established grade opposite the center of
the front of a building to the highest point of the underside of the ceiling
beams, in the case of a flat roof; to the desk line of a mansard roof; and to
the mean level of the underside of the rafters between the eaves and the
ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel room.  Where no sidewalk level has been
established, the height of a building may be measured from the mean elevation
of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.



   33.   “Bulk” is the term used to indicate the size and setbacks
of buildings or structures and the location of same with respect to one
another and includes:



      A.   Height and area of buildings.



      B.   Location of exterior walls in relation to lot lines,
streets, or other buildings.



      C.   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area.



      D.   All open spaces allocated to buildings.



      E.   Amount of lot area required for each dwelling unit.



   34.   “Car-wash” means a building, or portion thereof,
containing facilities for the primary purpose of washing automobiles, using
production line methods with a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device,
and other mechanical devices; or providing space, water, equipment, or soap
for the complete or partial hand-washing of such automobiles, whether by
operator or by customer.



   35.   “Cellar” means that portion of a building between floor
and ceiling which is partly or entirely underground but having more than
one-half its height below the average grade of the adjoining grade.  For the
purpose of this Code it shall not be considered a story.



   36.   “Church” means a building, structure or group of buildings
or structures which by design and construction are primarily intended for the
conducting of organized religious services and accessory uses associated
therewith and having been granted an exemption from federal tax as a
nonprofit religious organization.



   37.   “City” means:



      A.   The City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



      B.   Persons authorized to perform specified functions on
behalf of the City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



   38.   “City Engineer” means the professional engineer registered
in the State of Iowa designated as City Engineer by the Council or other
hiring authority.



   39.   "City Standards" means the design of improvements shall be in
accordance with the Engineering Standards as adopted by Resolution of the
Hiawatha City Council in accordance with Hiawatha Code Section 165.58.



(Ord. 923 - Feb. 19 Supp.)



   40.   “Club” means building and facilities owned or operated by
a corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational, or
recreational purpose but not primarily for profit nor to render a service
which is customarily carried on as a business.



   41.   “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of
the City.



   42.   “Communication tower” means a structure in a fixed
location used as an antenna or to support antennas for the primary purpose of
transmitting and/or receiving electronic signals.



   43.   “Community center” means a building used for recreational,
social, educational, and cultural activities, open to the public or a
designated part of the public, usually owned and operated by a public or
non-profit group or agency.



   44.   “Comprehensive Plan” means the general plan for the
development of the community, which may be titled master plan, comprehensive
plan or some other title, which plan has been adopted by the Council.  Such
Comprehensive Plan shall include any part of such plan separately adopted and
any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.



   45.   “Convalescent home” – see definition of “health care
facility.”



   46.   “Convenience store” means an establishment for retail sale
of petroleum products and other supplies for motor vehicles, as well as for
the retail sale of a variety of other items typically sold in grocery stores.



   47.   “Court” means an unoccupied open space, other than a yard,
on the same lot with a building which is bordered on two or more sides by the
building.



   48.   “Coverage” means that part of a lot or tract covered by a
building or buildings.



   49.   “Crisis counseling center” means a primarily
non-residential facility which provides counseling, referral, emergency
mediation, and other similar human service functions, and may include
temporary emergency lodging for families and individuals in immediate need.



   50.   “Cul-de-sac” means a street having one end connecting to
another street, and the other end terminated by a vehicular turn around.



   51.   “Day care center” means:



      A.   A facility in which are received more than 11 children
for part or all of a day for care and/or instruction.  The facility shall be
approved and licensed by the State.  The term day care center includes but
is not limited to the following:  nursery schools, child care centers, day
nurseries, kindergartens, preschools and play groups, but does not include
bona fide kindergartens or nursery schools operated by public or private
elementary or secondary school systems.  Day care center does not include a
group day care home or a family day care home.



      B.   A facility which provides supervised activities as a
principal use, on a daily basis, for adults who do not require specialized
care and do not remain on the premises overnight.



      C.   A “group child day care home” is a facility providing
nonresident child day care for less than 12 children.  No more than six
children, at one time, shall be less than six years of age, and there shall
never be more than four children under two years of age, present at any one
time.  All children including the provider’s not regularly in school full
days, shall be included in the total.



      D.   A “family day care home” is a facility operated by a
resident occupant which provides nonresident child care to less than seven
children.



   52.   “Degree of nonconformity” means the degree of deviation of
a particular nonconformity from uses or structures permitted within a
district.  The same uses classifications shall be interpreted to have the
same degree of non-conformity for purposes of this Code.  A determination of
whether a decrease or an increase in the degree of non-conformity has
occurred shall be based on the following listing of districts.  Districts
listed adjacent to each other on the list have the least degree of
nonconformity.  A, R-1, R-3, R-5, R-7, R-MH, C-ORS, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-R,
C-WH, I-1, I-2.



   CPR Zoning District Nonconformity: To be less nonconforming for CPR
districts, the use must be permitted to the CPR use matrix.



   53.   “Density” means a ratio of dwelling units or persons to
land area.



   54.   “Disabled” means, in reference to an individual, a
physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the
major life activities – caring for one’s self, performing manual tasks,
walking, seeing, hearing, breathing, learning and working – and has
continued over time and can be expected to continue indefinitely.



   55.   “District” means any section or area of the City for which
the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, building bulk,
and related matters are uniform.



   56.   “Drive-in establishment” means an establishment which, by
design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures,
encourages or permits customers to receive a service or obtain a product
which may be used or consumed in an automobile on the premises or to be
entertained while remaining in an automobile.  This term does not include
sidewalk or patio cafes where service is provided to tables only.



   57.   “Dwelling” means a building, or portion thereof, not a
mobile home, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiple family
dwellings, but not including hotels or motels, or other transient
accommodations, nor institutional care facilities such as hospitals, nursing
homes or orphanages.



   58.   “Dwelling, attached” means a dwelling which is joined to
another dwelling at one or more sides by a common wall or walls, and where
dwellings do not share entry or any interior common space, including
duplexes, townhomes, row houses, and zero lot line dwellings.



   EXCEPTION:  Dwellings in a duplex may share an entrance and entry
space.



   59.   “Dwelling, detached” means a dwelling containing a single
dwelling unit which is entirely surrounded by open spaces on the same lot.



   60.   “Dwelling, multiple-family” means a building, or portion
thereof, containing three or more dwelling units.



   61.   “Dwelling, mixed use” means a building or development or
portion thereof containing one or more dwelling units and additional
occupancies or uses.  Nonresidential uses must be allowable or conditional
uses within the zoning district.  All dwelling units must be located above
the first floor unless approved as part of a Planned Unit Development or
designated watchman’s quarters.



   62.   “Dwelling, single-family” means a building containing one
dwelling unit only.



   63.   “Dwelling, two-family” means a building containing two
dwelling units – also a duplex.



   64.   “Dwelling unit” means a room or group of rooms located
within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that
are used, or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and
sanitation.



   65.   “Easement” means authorization by a property owner, for
the specified use by another, of any designated part of his or her property.



   66.   “Efficiency unit” means a dwelling unit consisting of one
principal room exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining
alcove; directly off the principal room.



   67.   “Emergency residential shelter” means a residential
facility providing temporary lodging for families or individuals in immediate
need.  The facility may also provide limited temporary counseling, referral,
mediation, and similar human service functions.



   68.   “Emergency service and repairs” means those actions
necessary for starting and/or moving a disabled vehicle; includes only repair
or replacement of fuses, battery, tires, belts, hoses, headlights, lock and
key service, glass replacement, jump starts, towing, and adding fuel.



   69.   “Establishment, business” means a place of business
carrying on operations, the ownership or management of which are separate and
distinct from those of any other place of business located on the same zoning
lot.



   70.   “Extended care facilities” – see definition of “health
care facility.”



   71.   “Factory-built housing” means a factory-built structure
designed for long-term residential use.  For the purposes of these
regulations, factory-built housing consists of three types:  modular homes,
mobile homes, and manufactured homes.



   72.   “Factory-built structure” means any structure which is
wholly, or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a
building site.



   73.   “Family” means one or more persons each related to the
other by blood, marriage, adoption, legal guardianship or as foster
parent-children who live together in a single dwelling and maintaining a
common household.  No more than five persons not so related and living
together on the premises as a common household may constitute a family. 
Domestic servants residing with said family are considered unrelated persons.



   74.   “Family home” means a residential home which is licensed
as a residential care facility under Chapter 135C of the Code of Iowa, or as
a child foster care facility under Chapter 237 of the Code of Iowa, to
provide room and board, personal care, rehabilitation services and
supervision in a family environment exclusively for not more than eight
developmentally disabled persons, and any necessary support personnel. 
However, family home does not mean an individual foster care family home
licensed under Chapter 237 of the Code of Iowa.



   75.   “Flood hazard area” means any area subject to flooding by
a one percent probability flood, otherwise referred to as a 100-year flood,
as designated by the Department of Natural Resources or the Federal Insurance
Administration.



   76.   “Flood plain” means that area of land adjoining a
watercourse or other body of water which has been determined to be subject to
periodic coverage by flood water.



   77.   “Floodway” means:



      A.   The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent lands that must be reserved in order to discharge the waters of a
one hundred (100) year flood without cumulatively raising the waterways
surface elevation more than one foot.



      B.   It is the channel of a watercourse or body of water and
those portions of the adjoining flood plains designating as necessary to
carry and discharge the floodwater flow of such watercourse or body of water.



   78.   “Floor area” means the sum of the gross horizontal areas
of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls or from the center line of common walls separating two
attached buildings.  For determining off street parking and loading
requirements for any specific use the floor area shall be the total amount of
floor area, as described above, which is devoted to such specific use,
including accessory storage areas such as counters, racks, or closets when
located within selling or working areas; and any floor area devoted to
selling activities, to the production, processing, or servicing of goods, or
to offices.  However, for such purpose floor area shall not include area
devoted primarily to off-street parking or loading facilities.



   79.   “Floor area ratio” means the quotient obtained by dividing
the floor area of a building or buildings on a lot by the area of the lot.



   80.   “Frontage” means the length of all the property fronting
on one side of a street between the two nearest intersecting streets,
measured along the line of the street, or if dead ended then all of the
property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end
of the street.



   81.   “Frontage, zoning lot” means the length of all the
property of such zoning lot fronting on a street measured between side lot
lines.



   82.   “Garage, private” means an accessory building or portion
of a building designed or used for the storage of vehicles owned and used by
the occupants of the building to which it is accessory or attached.



   83.   “Garage, public” means a building or portion thereof
designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, renting, selling or
storing motor vehicles.



   84.   “Grade” means the average elevation of the surface of the
ground.



   85.   “Group home” means a facility for the residence of six (6)
or more individuals including resident persons providing care and supervision
in a family setting.  A group home shall be duly approved and licensed as
required by applicable State and local regulations.  A group home does not
include facilities such as a family home, rehabilitation house, lodging
house, fraternities, sororities, health care facility or similar institutions.



   86.   “Halfway house” – see definition of “rehabilitation
house.”



   87.   “Health care facility” means an establishment for
provision of care to persons who by reason of illness, disease, or physical
or mental infirmity are unable to sufficiently or properly care for
themselves and may or may not require continuous nursing care services and
related medical service, but do not require hospital care.  The facility
shall be approved and licensed by the State.



   88.   “Health club” means a nonmedical service establishment
intended to maintain or improve the physical condition of persons.  Contains
exercise and game equipment and facilities, steam baths, and saunas, or
similar equipment and facilities.



   89.   “Height” – see definition of “building height.”



   90.   “Home occupation” means an activity conducted for gain
entirely within a residential building, or an accessory building thereto,
which is incidental and secondary to the use of such building for dwelling
purposes and which does not change the essential residential character of
such building.



   91.   “Hospital” means an establishment providing health
services and medical or surgical care, primarily for temporary inpatients, to
persons suffering from mental or physical illness, disease, injury, or
disability, and including any related facilities such as laboratories,
outpatient care, obstetrical, central service, staff offices, or training
facilities.  “Hospital” does not include establishments which are
intended primarily for permanent or long-term care or custodial care.



   92.   “Hotel/motel” means an establishment in which lodging is
provided to the public for compensation and which is open to transient
guests, in contradistinction to a boarding room or lodging house.  A hotel,
includes a motor hotel, tourist court, executive inn, or similar use, but
does not include mobile home parks or similar use.  Services such as maid
service, linen laundering and front desk service are customarily provided.



   93.   “Improvement” means changes to land necessary to prepare
it for building sites, including but not limited to grading, filling, street
paving, curb paving, sidewalks, walk ways, water mains, sewers, drainageways,
and other public works and apparatus.



   94.   “Inoperable vehicles” means any motor vehicle,
recreational vehicle, boat, trailer or semi-trailer which lacks a current
registration, valid for that vehicle, and/or a component part which renders
the vehicle unfit for legal use.



   95.   “Institution” means an establishment occupied or operated
by a private or public nonprofit corporation, association, organization, or
group for use or benefit of the general public.



   96.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any
other nonferrous metal, old rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste, used lumber or salvaged wood, dismantled or inoperable
vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery or
appliances, iron, steel, or other old scrap ferrous material, old discarded
glass, tinware, plastic, or old discarded household goods or hardware, or
similar items or material.



   97.   “Junkyard” – see definition of “salvage yard.”



   98.   “Kennel” means a building, structure, or use for the
keeping, sheltering, breeding, training, or selling of dogs or domesticated
animals.



   99.   “Loading space, off-street” means an unobstructed area no
part of which is located in any public right-of-way and the principal use of
which is for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks and trailers.



   100.   “Lodge” – see definition of “club.”



   101.   “Lodging house” means a residential building, or portion
thereof, containing rooms for accommodating, for compensation, three or more
persons who are not transients.  Lodging may or may not include the serving
of meals to the lodgers.  Facilities for lodgers may include sleeping or
living quarters or rooms with or without individual bathrooms, but shall not
include individual cooking facilities.  Includes rooming houses, boarding
houses, and building of dormitory use as defined in the International
Building Code.



   102.   “Lot” means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land
established by plan, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be
separately owned, used, developed or built upon.



   103.   “Lot area” means the total horizontal area included
within the lot lines.



   104.   “Lot area per dwelling unit” means the amount of lot area
required, by the applicable provisions of this Code, for each dwelling unit
located on a lot.



   105.   “Lot, corner” means a lot abutting upon two or more
streets at their intersection or junction or a lot bounded on two sides by a
curving street where the angle of intersection of such street right-of-way
lines, or in the case of curved right-of-way lines, the extension of tangents
drawn from each of the points of intersection of the side lot lines and the
street right-of-way line, intersect with each other to form an interior angle
of less than 135 degrees.



   106.   “Lot coverage” – see definition of “coverage.”



   107.   “Lot depth” means the mean horizontal distance between
the front lot line and rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot
boundaries.



   108.   “Lot, double frontage” means any lot which is not a
corner lot which abuts two streets.



   109.   “Lot, interior” means a lot other than a corner or
reversed corner lot.



   110.   “Lot line” means a boundary of a lot.



   111.   “Lot line, front” means the boundary between the lot and
street on which it fronts.



   112.   “Lot line, rear” means the lot boundary opposite and most
distant from the front lot line.



   113.   “Lot line, side” means any lot line other than a front or
rear lot line.



   114.   “Lot of record” means a lot which is part of a
subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Linn County; or a parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded
in the office of said Recorder prior to the adoption of this Code.



   115.   “Lot, reversed corner” means a corner lot the street side
lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of
the first lot to its rear.



   116.   “Lot, through” means a lot having a pair of opposite lot
lines along two more or less parallel public streets, and which is not a
corner lot.  On a “through lot” both street lines shall be deemed front
lot lines.



   117.   “Lot width” means the distance between side lot lines
measured at the rear of the required front yard on a line parallel to the
front lot line.



   118.   “Lot, zoning” means a single tract of contiguous land
which, at the time of filing for a building permit or a certificate of
occupancy, is designated by the owner or developer as a tract to be used,
developed, or built upon as a unit under single or unified ownership or
control and assigned to the particular use, building or structure for which
the building permit or certificate of occupancy is issued and having frontage
upon an approved street or place, and including such areas of land as may be
required by the provisions of this Code for the building structure or use.



   119.   “Machines and equipment, heavy and commercial” shall
include trucks, vehicles, machines and equipment not classified as Passenger
vehicles, recreational vehicles or light duty machines and equipment or
similar machines and equipment.



   120.   “Machines and equipment, light duty” shall include
snowmobiles, boats, trailers with maximum carrying capacity of 5 tons, and
trucks, tractors, machinery and equipment not over 2,000 lb GVW and similar
machines and equipment.



   121.   “Manufactured home” means a factory-built, single-family
structure which is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 43
U.S.C. Section 5403, the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act, is transportable in one or more sections, is built on a
permanent chassis, and is to be used as a place for human habitation; but
which is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing
transport of the unit other than for the purpose of delivery to a permanent
site, and which does not have wheels or axles permanently attached to its
body or frame.  For the purposes of this Code, a manufactured home shall be
considered as a single-family detached dwelling.  A manufactured home is the
same as a mobile home except a manufactured home must meet the above cited
U.S. Code requirements.  It also must meet the State of Iowa requirements
including the nonpermanent hitch, wheels and axle as stated herein, and is
also subject to additional local requirements which are also generally more
stringent than requirements for mobile homes.



   122.   “Mini-warehouse facilities” means a building or group of
buildings which are rented and designed, through individual compartments or
controlled stalls for self-service storage purposes.



   123.   “Mobile home” means a factory-built structure which is
transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis, and
is so designed and constructed to permit lawful occupancy as a dwelling
whether attached or unattached to a permanent foundation.  A mobile home may
have wheels, axles, hitch and other appurtenances of mobility removed, but
shall remain a mobile home; provided, however, that a mobile home may be
classified as a “manufactured home” and be so regulated if it meets all
the standards and qualifications contained within this Code’s definition of
“manufactured home.”



   124.   “Mobile home park” means a parcel or tract of land with
facilities designed for occupancy by mobile homes.  Mobile home parks shall
be designed in accordance with all applicable State regulations and Chapter
146 of the Hiawatha Code of Ordinances.  It shall not include any area in
which any vehicles or unoccupied mobile homes are parked or stored for the
purpose of inspection or sale.



   125.   “Modular home” means factory-built housing certified as
meeting the State Building Code as applicable to modular housing.  Once
certified by the State, modular homes shall be subject to the same standards
as site-built homes.



   126.   “Motel” – see definition of “hotel/motel.”



   127.   “Motor vehicle” means any vehicle designed and intended
to be either propelled by a motor contained by the vehicle or drawn by
another motor vehicle.



   128.   “Motor vehicle, passenger” includes autos, motorcycles,
vans, pickup trucks, trucks not exceeding 1.5 ton capacity, passenger
vehicles not exceeding 15 passenger capacity and similar vehicles.



   129.   “Motor vehicles, recreational” includes bus campers,
camper trailers, pickup campers, travel trailers, motor homes, and similar
vehicles.



   130.   “Multiple-family dwelling” – see definition of
“dwelling, multiple-family.”



   131.   “Nonconforming, legal” (lawful) means a building,
structure, or use lawfully erected and/or used prior to the adoption of this
Code, or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the provisions of
this Code, or amendment thereto, or the district within which such building,
structure or use is located.



   132.   “Nonconformity, degree of” – see definition of
“degree of nonconformity.”



   133.   “Nursery” means an establishment for the planting,
raising, care, and/or sale of plants.



   134.   “Nursing home” – see definition of “health care
facility.”



   135.   “Opaque” is defined as a structure which blocks or
otherwise prevents the passage of light through 50 percent or more of its
surface area.



   136.   “Outdoor eating establishment” means picnic tables,
benches, counters and any similar facilities, or area, provided in
conjunction with a restaurant for the serving and/or consumption of food
out-of-doors, not serving alcoholic beverages and not contained within a
building.



   137.   “Owner/Property” means the legal entity holding all
titles to a property or such representative or agent empowered to act on the
owner’s behalf.  Includes the holder of legal title, any person having a
freehold interest, or one having a possessory interest entitled to exclusive
possession, or a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest.



   138.   “Parking space” means a surfaced area enclosed in the
main building or in an accessory building, or unenclosed exclusive of
driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile
and connected with a street or alley by a surfaced driveway which affords
satisfactory ingress and egress for automobiles.



   139.   “Planned Unit Development” – see Section 165.66 of this
Code.



   140.   “Plat” means a map, drawing or chart on which a
subdivider’s plan for the subdivision of land is presented, which the
subdivider submits for approval and intends, in the final form, to record.



   141.   “Plat survey” means the graphical representation of a
survey of one or more parcels of land, including a complete and accurate
description of each parcel within the plat, prepared by a registered land
surveyor.  The plat of survey is limited under these regulations to use for
conveyance of single parcels of land, unless the requirements to file a
subdivision plat are waived by the Council.



   142.   “Plats Officer” means the individual assigned the duty to
administer this chapter by the Council or other appointing authority.



   143.   “Private,” in reference to a building, structure,
utility, facility, or use, means owned and/or operated by someone other than
a unit of government, or an agency of a government, unless the context
clearly indicates that “private” is being used in the broader sense of
something not open or available to the general populace.



   144.   “Property owner” – see definition of
“owner/property.”



   145.   “Public,” in reference to a building, structure, utility,
facility, or use, means owned and/or operated by a unit of government or an
agency thereof, unless the context clearly indicates that “public” is
being used in the broader sense of something available to the general
populace.



   146.   “Public way” means any sidewalk, street, alley, highway,
or other thoroughfare established for travel by vehicles or persons and open
or available for use by the general public; and may be in either public or
private ownership.



   147.   “Rehabilitation (halfway) house” means a facility that
provides shelter, supervision and short-term rehabilitative services for six
(6) or more persons who have had physical or social disabilities which make
operation in society difficult and require the protection of a group setting
to facilitate the transition to a functional member of society.  Facilities
participating in a work release, or similar programs from a State
institution, and under the supervision of a Court, State or local agency
shall be included within this definition.



   148.   “Refuse hauling facilities” means to include office
buildings, employee parking and structures for the storage of garbage/hauling
equipment (only when enclosed), which are utilized for collection and
disposal of garbage, trash, junk, waste and rubbish materials, and providing
that no open storage or disposal shall be allowed on-site.



   149.   “Religious facility” means a church, synagogue, temple,
chapel, or similar place of religious worship or instruction.



   150.   “Residential zoning district” means any district
identified as a residential district in Section 165.14.



   151.   “Resubdivision” means any subdivision of land which has
previously been included in a recorded plat.  In appropriate context, it may
be a verb referring to the act of preparing a plat of previously subdivided
land.



   152.   “Roadside stand” means a temporary structure and/or use,
unenclosed and so designed and constructed that it can be easily moved.



   153.   “Rooming house” – see definition of “lodging house.”



   154.   “Salvage yard” means a lot or portion thereof where
waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled,
stored, packed, disassembled, or handled, including auto wrecking activities,
building wrecking activities, used lumber places and places for storage of
salvaged building materials and equipment; but not including places where
such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building.



   155.   “Satellite antenna dish, commercial” – primarily under
all public uses.



   156.   “Satellite antenna dish, residential” – primarily R
District – under accessory building.



   157.   “School” means any building or part thereof which is
designed, constructed or used for presenting formalized courses or curriculum
for educational purposes.



   158.   “Setback” means the minimum horizontal distance between a
lot line and a building or structure located upon such lot required by the
provisions of this Code.



   159.   “Shopping center” means a group of commercial
establishments generally planned, constructed and managed as a unit on a
single site with common parking facilities.



   160.   “Sign” means any medium, including its component parts,
which is used or intended to be used to direct attention to a business,
product, service, subject, idea, premises, person, or thing.



   161.   “Sign, accessory” means a sign which directs attention to
an establishment, business, profession, commodity, service, premises, person
or thing which is located, produced, conducted, sold, or offered on the same
lot upon which the sign is located.



   162.   “Sign, advertising” means a sign which directs attention
to an establishment, business, profession, commodity, service, premises,
person or thing which may be located, produced, conducted, sold, or offered
elsewhere than on the lot upon which the sign is located.



   163.   “Sign, identification” means any sign designed to
identify a specific person, firm, corporation, or primary trade name of
permanent character identifiable with said person, firm, corporation, or
primary trade name, and located on the building or immediate premises of said
person, firm or corporation.



   164.   “Sign, information” means a sign displayed strictly for
the direction, safety, or convenience of the public and which sets forth no
advertisement.  Information signs would include signs which identify parking
areas and drives, restrooms, addresses, telephones, exits and entrances, no
trespassing area, danger areas, and similar information.



   165.   “Sign, pole” means a sign with an elevated surface
supported by one or more vertical poles or columns placed in the ground.



   166.   “Sign, roof” means a sign situated upon the roof of any
building.



   167.   “Solar access” means a property owner’s right to have
the sunlight shine on the owner’s land, enforced through the zoning height
and setback requirements.



   168.   “Special use permit” - see Sections 165.25 and 165.85.



   169.   “Specified anatomical areas” shall include the following:



      A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered:



         (1)   Human genitals, pubic region;



         (2)   Buttock; and



         (3)   Female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the aureole; and



      B.   Human male genitals, in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   170.   “Specified sexual activities” shall include the following:



      A.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal.



      B.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.



      C.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttock or female breast.



   171.   “Storage” (self-service facility) means real property
designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage
space to occupants who are to have access to the space for the purpose of
storing personal property.



   172.   Storage container means a commercial storage container is a
modular metal box constructed to carry freight by being loaded and stacked
for transport.



   173.   “Story” means that portion of a building, excluding a
cellar, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
floor next above, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between
the floor and the ceiling next above it.  If the basement area is used for
housekeeping, business, or manufacturing use – as opposed to being used for
utilities, recreation, or similar accessory uses – such basement shall be
considered a story.  Any portion of a story exceeding 12 feet in height
shall be considered as an additional story for each additional 12 feet or
fraction thereof.



   174.   “Story, half” means a partial story, under a gable, hip
or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior
walls are not more than four feet above the floor of such story, except that
any partial story used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or
caretaker or his or her family or by a family occupying the floor immediately
below it, shall be deemed a full story, as shall any partial story being used
for general business or manufacturing purposes.



   175.   “Street, arterial” means a street primarily intended to
carry traffic from one part of the City to another, and not intended to
provide access to abutting property.



   176.   “Street line” means a dividing line between a lot,
parcel, or tract of land and an abutting street.



   177.   “Street, major” means an arterial street or other street
which has or is planned to have continuity to carry traffic from one section
of the City to another.



   178.   “Street, private” means an approved public or private
thoroughfare which provides a principal means of vehicular access to abutting
property and/or for vehicular passage.



   179.   “Street, public” means public property, not an alley,
intended for vehicular circulation. In appropriate context, the term
“street” may refer to the right-of-way bounded by the property lines of
such public property, or may refer to the paving installed within such
right-of-way.



   180.   “Street, right-of-way” means the land, property, or
interest therein, formally established and intended for a street.



   181.   “Structure” means anything constructed, erected, or
placed with a more or less fixed location on the ground or attached or
resting on something having a fixed location on the ground.



   182.   “Subdivider” means the owner of the property being
subdivided or such other person or entity empowered to act on the owner’s
behalf.



   183.   “Subdivision” means the division of land into two or more
parts for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership
and building development.  The term, when appropriate to the context, may
refer to the process of subdividing or to land subdivided.  However, the
sale or exchange of small parcels of land to or between the owners of
adjacent platted lots where such sale or exchange does not create any
additional lots and where the land sold or exchanged constitutes less than
fifty percent (50%) of the area of the enlarged lot after such transfer, is
not considered a subdivision.



   184.   “Taxicab” and/or “limousine business” means a firm
which provides taxicab and/or limousine services within the corporate limits
of the City of Hiawatha.  The business shall not be established in a
residential district, but must be operated from a property zoned to conduct
such a business, as set forth in the zoning ordinance.  Activities to be
conducted include, but are not limited to: receiving calls and dispatching
taxicabs, transferring driver’s and/or vehicles, parking and storage of
vehicles, storage of lost or misplaced baggage, maintenance and storage of
business records, conducting employee meetings and related personnel matters.



   185.   “Use” means the purpose or purposes for which land or a
structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or to which purpose land or a
structure is occupied, maintained, leased, or operated.



   186.   “Use, accessory” – see definition of “accessory
use.”



   187.   “Use Classification” means the classification of a use is
the sum total of the permitted, conditional use and nonpermitted zoning
districts for that use.



   188.   “Use classification, same” means uses that are allowed in
the exact same zoning districts in accordance with the Land Use Matrix Figure
I and the CPR Matrix.



   189.    “Use, principal” means the main or primary purpose for
which land or a structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or to which
purpose land or a structure is occupied, maintained, leased, or operated.



   190.   “Utilities” means systems for the distribution or
collection of water, gas, electricity, wastewater, storm water,
communications systems, etc.



   191.   “Variance” – see Section 165.82 of this Code.



   192.   “Wetlands” means areas that are inundated or saturated on
the surface by ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.



   193.   “Yard” means a required open space on a lot between a lot
line and a building or structure located on the lot, unoccupied and
unobstructed from ground to sky, except as otherwise provided herein.  In
measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the
depth of a front yard or the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal
distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.



   194.   “Yard, front” means a yard extending across the full
width of the lot, between the front lot line and the main building structure.



   195.   “Yard, rear” means a yard extending across the full width
of the lot between the rear lot line and the main building or structure.



   196.   “Yard, required” means a yard defined by a required
setback and extending the full length of the lot along the designated line.



   197.   “Yard, side” means a yard between the side lot line and a
principal building on a lot and extending from the front most line of a
principal building to the rear most line of the building.



   198.   “Yard, transitional” means a yard which is required for a
non-R District lot when said lot is adjacent to an R District lot.



   199.   “Zone” – see definition of “district.”



APPENDIX A
PLANTING GUIDELINES AND SUGGESTED TREE PLANTING LIST



I.   Planting Guidelines.



   1.   Large trees shall be placed no closer than 30 feet apart or
located closer than 14 feet to a building.  Small trees shall be located no
closer than 16 feet apart but may be located to within eight (8) feet of a
building.



   2.   Trees shall be placed to avoid interference with the
construction, maintenance and operation of public and private utilities and
services above or below ground as determined by the utility companies and the
City.



   3.   Any tree planted within the street right-of-way shall have a
single trunk, with a minimum of four (4) feet from grade to the first branch
at the time of planting.



   4.   Trees shall not be located within four (4) feet of a public
sidewalk or the anticipated location of a future public sidewalk where one
does not exist.  Trees shall not be located within five (5) feet of the
curb.  No trees shall be planted in the area between a curb and a sidewalk
where the width of the area is less than nine (9) feet.



      II.   Protection of Existing Trees 18 inches in Diameter or
Greater.



   1.   No excavation or other subsurface disturbance may be undertaken
within the drip line of any tree 18 inches in diameter or more, and no
impervious surface (including, but not limited to, paving or buildings) may
be located within 14 feet of any tree 18 inches in diameter or more unless
compliance with this subsection would unreasonably burden the development. 
For purposes of this subsection, a drip line is defined as a perimeter formed
by the points farthest away from the trunk of a tree where precipitation
falling from the branches of that tree lands on the ground.



      III.   Suggested Tree Planting List.



 

DECIDUOUS VARIETIES (large)
 
Street
 
Parking Areas
 
Other Uses
 
Withstands City Conditions
 
Approximate Height
 
REMARKS




BEECH

   American

   Blue
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
90 feet
 
Some problems with City conditions


BIRCHES

   European and varieties
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
60 feet
 
Pest problems – not recommended for streets


ELM

   American (D.E.D. resistant) varieties
 

 

 
X
 
X
 
120 feet
 



GINGKO and varieties
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
100 feet
 
Slow growing, few pest problems, fruit can be a problem


HACKBERRY
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
75 feet
 
Susceptible to Witches Broom, pest problems


HICKORY
 



   Shagbark
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
120 feet
 
Nuts can be a problem,
picturesque bark


   Pignut
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
120 feet
 
Nuts


   Mockernut
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
90 feet
 
Nuts


HOP HORNBEAM
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 
60 feet
 
Fairly free of disease and insect pests


HORNBEAM

   European and varieties
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
60 feet
 
Hardiness may be a factor


HYBRID LOCUST
and varieties

   Shademaster

   Sunburst

   Skyline
 

 
X
 
X
 
X
 
70 feet
 
Pest problems, requires extra maintenance


KATSURA
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
80 feet
 
Generally pest free, has clumping tendency


KENTUCKY COFFEE TREE
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
90 feet
 
Pods


LINDEN
 



   American Linden
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 
80 feet
 
Large leaves


   Redmond
 

 

 

 

 
70 feet
 



   Little leaf and varieties
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 
50 feet
 
Slower growing


   Greenspire
 

 

 

 

 
60 feet
 



   Big leaf and varieties
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
90 feet
 
Not a good street tree


LONDON PLANE
 

 
X
 
X
 
X
 
90 feet
 
Requires extra maintenance


MAPLE
 



   Norway and varieties
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
90 feet
 
Dense shade, generally good for most uses


   Red
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
90 feet
 
Adapts to wet soils


   Sugar and varieties
 

 
X
 
X
 

 

 
Girdling roots, have problems with City conditions


OAK
 



   White
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 
100 feet
 
Slow growing, very large at maturity


   Swamp White
 

 

 
X
 

 
60 feet
 
Adapts to wet soils


   Shingle
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 
75 feet
 
Ornamental bark


   Pin Oak
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
75 feet
 
Requires extra maintenance


   English and varieties
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 
80 feet
 
Little fall color, hardiness may be a factor


   Red
 
X
 

 
X
 
X
 
80 feet
 
Bright red fall color


   Shumard
 

 

 
X
 
X
 
80 feet
 
Good substitute for Scarlet Oak


OHIO BUCKEYE
 

 
X
 
X
 
X
 
70 feet
 
Good fall color


PEAR
   Bradford Callery Pear
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
45 feet
 
Rarely bears fruit, somewhat resistant to Fire Blight


POPLARS

   Quaking Aspen
 

 

 
X
 

 
90 feet
 
Ornamental, short lived


PRUNUS
 



   Black Cherry and varieties
 

 

 
X
 

 
75 feet
 
Ornamental, drooping branches


   Shubert Choke Cherry
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 
40 feet
 
Attractive, hardy cultivar


SWEET GUM
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 
90 feet
 
Hardiness may be a factor


SYCAMORE
 

 
X
 
X
 
X
 
80 feet
 
Requires extra maintenance


TULIP TREE (Liriodendron)
 

 

 
X
 

 
90 feet
 
Reasonably free of disease and insect pests


WALNUT
 



   Butternut
 

 

 
X
 

 
80 feet
 
Nuts can be a problem


   Eastern Black
 

 

 
X
 

 
90 feet
 
Nuts can be a problem




 



 



 

UPRIGHT EVERGREEN VARIETIES
(large and medium)
 
Street
 
Parking Areas
 
Other Uses
 
Withstands City Conditions
 
Approximate Height
 
REMARKS




AMERICAN ARBOR VITAE
 

 
X
 

 

 
60 feet
 
Adapts to wet soil, bronze winter color


   Pyramidal Arbor Vitae
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
30 feet
 
Makes excellent screening


FIRS

   White (concolor)
 

 
X
 
X
 
X
 
100 feet
 
Bluish-green color


HEMLOCK
 



   Canada and varieties
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
85 feet
 
Excellent specimen tree


   Carolina
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
75 feet
 
Excellent specimen tree


JUNIPERS – upright

   Eastern Red Cedar and varieties
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
75 feet
 
Hardy, prefer alkaline soil, makes excellent screening


PINE
 



   Austrian and varieties
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
90 feet
 
Rapid growth rate, pyramidal


   Red
 

 

 
X
 

 
75 feet
 
Pests controlled by spraying, reddish bark


   Eastern White and varieties
 

 

 
X
 

 
95 feet
 
Good ornamental, transplants easily


   Scotts and varieties
 

 

 
X
 

 
75 feet
 
Unique form, not a good shade tree


SPRUCE
 



   Norway and varieties
 

 

 
X
 

 
100 feet
 
Mature trees thin out at top, dark green


   White and varieties
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
90 feet
 
Hardy, endures heat and drought


   Colorado and varieties
 

 
X
 
X
 
X
 
100 feet
 
Insect pest, does not grow old gracefully


DECIDUOUS VARIETIES
(medium and small)

 



DOGWOOD
 



   Flowering and varieties
 

 
X
 
X
 

 
35 feet
 
Does not always bloom in this tree zone


HORNBEAM

   American and varieties
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 
36 feet
 
Slow growing


MALUS (Crabapple)
 

 
Adapts well to City conditions, resistance to disease and insect pests,
varies from area to area


   Adams
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 
24 feet
 
Red buds open to pink, annual bearing


   Arnolds Crab
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
20 feet
 
Red buds open to pink-white, pest problems


   Centurion
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
20 feet
 
Red buds open into rose-red blossoms


   Radiant
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 
25 feet
 
Hardy, red buds to pink flowers


   Red Splendor
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 
20 feet
 
Red buds open to showy deep pink flowers


   Sargent
 

 
X
 
X
 
X
 
10 feet
 
White flowers, shrub form, some pest problems


   Snowdrift
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
20 feet
 
Fast growing with upright branching habit


   Van Eseltine
 

 

 
X
 

 
20 feet
 
Buds flower peek, pest problems


   Zumi
 

 

 
X
 

 
20 feet
 
Deep red buds opening into white flowers


MAPLE
 



   Amur and varieties
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 
20 feet
 
Good specimen, fragrant flowers


   Norway varieties (small)


   Columnar
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
X
 
25 feet
 
Pyramidal


   Crimson King
 

 

 
X
 
X
 
40 feet
 
Hardiness sometimes a problem, good color


RED BUD

   Eastern and varieties
 
X
 
X
 
X
 

 
35 feet
 
New rosy reds are interesting, susceptible to weed spray




 



APPENDIX B
BUILDING LAYOUT IN DISTRICT CPR-1



 







FIGURE I
LAND USE MATRIX



 


USE DEFINITIONS

 

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

CPR




ANIMALS AND AGRICULTURAL USES

 

A

 

R-1

 

R-3

 

R-5

 

R-7

 

R-MH

 

C-ORS

 

C-2

 

C-3

 

C-4

 

C-R

 

C-WH

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

1

 

2

 
3




Agricultural: uses as defined in Section 165.96
 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



Agricultural Limited: limited to production of crops and pasturing/shelter of
grazing livestock on lots of three acres and larger
 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



Vegetation Production Limited: includes nurseries, green houses, truck
gardens and similar uses. Product sales shall be limited to produce grown on
site.
 

P

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



Game and Forest reserves
 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



Animal Services Limited: Uses limited to animal clinics/hospitals and pet
grooming all contained within structures and limiting animal noise to less
than 50 db at the property line. Incidental accessory boarding is allowed.
 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



Animal Indoor Boarding: Uses include indoor boarding kennels and the
allowance for outdoor animal exercise areas.
 

³C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

³C

 

³C

 

³C

 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



Riding/boarding stables.
 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



Kennels as defined in Section 165.96
 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 





 



 


USE DEFINITIONS

 

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

CPR




RESIDENTIAL DWELLING USES

 

A

 

R-1

 

R-3

 

R-5

 

R-7

 

R-MH

 

C-ORS

 

C-2

 

C-3

 

C-4

 

C-R

 

C-WH

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

1

 

2

 

3





Detached single family dwellings
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Mobile Home as defined in 165.96
 

P

 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Two-family dwellings as defined in 165.96
 

C

 



 



 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Two-family zero lot line dwellings attached
 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Attached dwelling units as defined in 165.96
 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

4C

 

4C



Multi-family dwellings as defined in 165.96
 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Lodging houses as defined in 165.96
 



 



 



 

5C

 

P

 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





6Family homes, group homes and emergency shelters as defined in Section
165.96 and which resemble the structures of the zone in which located
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Health Care Facilities as defined in 165.96
 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

C



Mixed Use Dwelling Structure or Development as defined in 165.96; A building
containing residential in addition to non-residential uses permitted in the
respective zone.  A development with two or more different uses such as but
not limited to, residential, retail, professional offices or entertainment,
in a compact urban form.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 

7P

 

8P

 

7P



Watchman’s quarters
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 





Cemeteries
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 







 



 


USE DEFINITIONS

 

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

CPR




RESIDENTIAL TRANSIENT USES

 

A

 

R-1

 

R-3

 

R-5

 

R-7

 

R-MH

 

C-ORS

 

C-2

 

C-3

 

C-4

 

C-R

 

C-WH

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

1

 

2

 

3





Hospitals
 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 






Hotels and motels as defined in Section 165.96

 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P



6Rehabilitation houses and crisis counseling centers as defined in 165.96
 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Bed and Breakfast (see also 165.26 #4)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 






Residential Child Day Care Facilities

 

See sections 165.25, 165.26, 165.85 and 165.96 for limits and registrations



Home Occupations
 

See Section 165.26





 



 


USE DEFINITIONS

 

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

CPR




EDUCATION AND RELIGIOUS OCCUPANCIES

 

A

 

R-1

 

R-3

 

R-5

 

R-7

 

R-MH

 

C-ORS

 

C-2

 

C-3

 

C-4

 

C-R

 

C-WH

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

1

 

2

 

3





Religious Facilities as defined in 165.96
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Schools up to and through grade 12 without boarding
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Schools up to and through grade 12 with boarding
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Schools up to and through grade 12 for specialized training: dance schools,
music schools
 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Colleges with boarding
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Colleges, vocational and trade schools without boarding
 

9C

 



 



 

9C

 

9C

 

9P

 

9P

 



 

10P

 

10P

 



 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 



 







 



 


USE DEFINITIONS

 

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

CPR




MOTOR VEHICLE RELATED USES [see also 165.21(17)]

 

A

 

R-1

 

R-3

 

R-5

 

R-7

 

R-MH

 

C-ORS

 

C-2

 

C-3

 

C-4

 

C-R

 

C-WH

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

1

 

2

 

3



Motor Vehicle Services Limited: uses limited to car washes, interior
detailing and convenience store/fuel stations
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 

P



Motor Vehicle Services General: uses include all services related to the
repair and maintenance of motor vehicles including but not limited to
mechanic shops, repair shops and body shops.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 

¹¹P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 





Truck Stop
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 






 



 


USE DEFINITIONS

 

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

CPR




¹² ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATION

 

A

 

R-1

 

R-3

 

R-5

 

R-7

 

R-MH

 

C-ORS

 

C-2

 

C-3

 

C-4

 

C-R

 

C-WH

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

1

 

2

 

3





Clubs and Lodges as defined in 165.96
 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Restaurants and Bars: includes outdoor seating
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

13P

 

14P

 

14P

 

P

 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P



Entertainment and Sports Indoor: Characterized by artistic productions in
theater settings and uses involving physical participation indoors with
limited spectators. Including but not limited to indoor theaters with and
without stages, dance halls, bowling alleys, indoor archery and shooting
ranges, indoor tennis courts, handball, indoor swimming pools, arcades and
casinos.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P



Outdoor Recreational Non-spectator Limited: Characterized by non-spectator
activities including but not limited to mini-golf, driving ranges, paintball,
tennis courts and swimming pools. EXCLUDE open space parks, golf courses and
firing ranges.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 





Outdoor Recreational Spectator: Characterized by large groups of spectators
or participants in diverse outdoor activities including but not limited to
arenas, stadiums and amusement parks.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 





Golf Courses
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 





Firing Ranges Outdoor; Includes gun and archery ranges
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 





Race tracks
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 





Campground and RV Park
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 





Parks: open space
 

15P

 

15P

 

15P

 

15P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 







 



 


USE DEFINITIONS

 

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

CPR




BUSINESS SERVICES

 

A

 

R-1

 

R-3

 

R-5

 

R-7

 

R-MH

 

C-ORS

 

C-2

 

C-3

 

C-4

 

C-R

 

C-WH

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

1

 

2

 

3





Personal Professional Services: uses characterized by frequent on-site client
services including but not limited to medical clinics, financial
institutions, salons, automatic laundromats, photo and art studios, massage
and tattoo parlors (Excluding adult massage parlors as defined in 165.96)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P



Day Care Centers: Items A and B as defined in 165.96
 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 





Personal Service and Repair: Limited to personal services including but not
limited to dressmaking, tailoring, laundries, interior decorating, domestic
appliance and furniture repair. Incidental sales shall be related to the
service and shall be contained in less than 20% of the floor area. 
 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 





Business Professional Uses: characterized by offices and laboratories with
limited on site client services including but not limited to business and
professional offices, attorney offices, realtors, job services, radio/TV
stations, medical offices, research and testing laboratories, and software
developers and support.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P



Business Professional Services with Public Gathering: uses characterized with
a mix of on-site client services with public gathering occupancy and
increased traffic including but not limited to conference centers without
hotel accommodations, art galleries, health clubs, gymnasiums, funeral homes,
libraries and museums
 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 

P

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P




16Business Services Contractor Limited: Uses include services usually
delivered off site and includes incidental uses contained within buildings
such as showrooms, storage of materials, storage of vehicle and equipment.
These uses have limited customer traffic on site. Including but not limited
to telecommunications companies, building contractors, engineering firms,
mechanical / electrical/plumbing contractors, caterers, lawn care and
landscapers.

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 





Business Services Contractor Industrial: Uses include services usually
delivered off site and includes incidental uses not contained within
buildings such as showrooms, materials storage, vehicle and equipment
storage. These uses have limited customer traffic on site. Including but not
limited to industrial contractors, equipment rentals and contractors using
vehicles and equipment larger than three tons.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 





Adult Entertainment Establishments
 

See Section 165.24



Pawn Brokers and Delayed Deposit Services
 

See Section 165.24A





 



 


USE DEFINITIONS

 

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

CPR




RETAIL AND REPAIR

 

A

 

R-1

 

R-3

 

R-5

 

R-7

 

R-MH

 

C-ORS

 

C-2

 

C-3

 

C-4

 

C-R

 

C-WH

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

1

 

2

 

3



Retail Convenience Limited: Retail related to neighborhood convenience
limited to pharmacies and food stores for pre-packaged foods such as grocery
stores and prepared on-site foods including but not limited to meat markets,
delis, bakeries, and ice cream parlors.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P



Retail General: retail uses characterized by shops and stores where all
commodities and transactions are inside buildings. Includes rentals but no
additional services such as repairs or installations. Including but not
limited to department stores, clothing stores, malls and specialty stores.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P



Retail and Repair: uses include medium to small commodity sales with
associated repair and rental services including but not limited to computer
sales, appliance sales and residential outdoor equipment.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 

P



Retail Large Commodity: Includes retail and rental uses which may rely on
outside storage and display such as cars, boats, trailers, building
materials, mobile home sales, grave monuments and nurseries.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 





Retail Industrial Commodity: Characterized by sales and repair of industrial
equipment and products. Including but not limited to industrial equipment,
construction machines, farm implement, seed and feed stores.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

C

 

P

 



 



 






 



 


USE DEFINITIONS

 

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

CPR




STORAGE AND WAREHOUSE & DISTRIBUTION

 

A

 

R-1

 

R-3

 

R-5

 

R-7

 

R-MH

 

C-ORS

 

C-2

 

C-3

 

C-4

 

C-R

 

C-WH

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

1

 

2

 

3



Storage Limited: uses include only mini storage and self-storage facilities.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

17C

 

17C

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 





Warehouse and Distribution Limited: Characterized by significant truck
traffic and inside storage and distribution activity. Including but not
limited to general warehousing, wholesale and distribution, refuse and
recycling in accordance with state laws.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 





Warehouse and Distribution General: Characterized by significant truck
traffic and outside storage and distribution activity. Including but not
limited to general warehousing, wholesale and distribution and recycling in
accordance with state laws.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

P

 



 



 





Refuse Hauling
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 






 



 


USE DEFINITIONS

 

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

CPR




PRODUCTION AND MANUFACTURING

 

A

 

R-1

 

R-3

 

R-5

 

R-7

 

R-MH

 

C-ORS

 

C-2

 

C-3

 

C-4

 

C-R

 

C-WH

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

1

 

2

 

3





Production and Processing Limited: uses include assemblies and production
contained completely inside buildings with limited combustibles which do not
include noise, odor, hazardous chemicals or large commodities. Includes
incidental truck traffic, associated assembly, distribution and storage.
Including but not limited to garment printing and embroidery, laundries and
dry cleaning, sporting goods assembly, printing, audio and visual production,
photo processing, picture framing and taxidermy. 
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 

P



Production and Processing General: uses include assemblies and production
contained completely inside buildings with limited combustibles which may
include noise, odor, hazardous chemicals or large commodities. Includes
incidental truck traffic, associated assembly, wholesale, distribution and
storage. Including but not limited to bakeries, tooling and light metal
fabrication, dairy product processing, food packaging, concrete fabrication,
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 





Manufacturing Limited: uses include assemblies and production contained
completely inside buildings which may include combustible products, noise,
odor, hazardous chemicals or large commodities. Includes incidental truck
traffic, associated assembly, wholesale, distribution and storage. Including
but not limited to clothing manufacturing, carpet manufacturing, and finished
wood products.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 





Manufacturing Industrial: Characterized by the use of heavy equipment and
some exterior processes. Including but not limited to asphalt product
manufacturing, stone and masonry manufacturing, concrete mixing plant
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 

P

 



 



 





Heavy Industrial Activities: Characterized by the use of heavy equipment in
production and processes necessarily outside. Including but not limited to
salvage yards.
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 





Quarries and other extraction uses
 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

18C

 



 



 





Sanitary Land Fills
 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 





Wind Generators, Commercial
 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 







 



 


USE DEFINITIONS

 

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

CPR



TRANSPORTATION AND UTILITIES
 

A

 

R-1

 

R-3

 

R-5

 

R-7

 

R-MH

 

C-ORS

 

C-2

 

C-3

 

C-4

 

C-R

 

C-WH

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

1

 

2

 

3





Bus Terminals
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 





Airports
 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 





Heliports
 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 





Railroad Facilities
 



 



 



 



 



 

 

C

 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 





Essential Services
 

165.21 (1)



Communication Towers
 

165.27 (Conditional use required unless accessory to Residential Occupancy)





 



1.  Legal nonconforming uses are exempt from this table.  See Section
165.70.



3.  Exercise areas are to be screened by fences and year round vegetative
barrier.  See Section 165.83 for additional conditions.



4.  Requires 4 or more units with a homeowners association with individual
unit ownership.  Minimum square footage of primary floor dwelling unit –
800 square feet.



5.  No more than four guest rooms allowed.



6.  There shall be a minimum separation of one-quarter mile between any
family home, group home, emergency residential shelter or rehabilitation
house. The distance separation shall be measured from lot line to lot line.



7.  These uses also require a Planned Unit Overlay as specified by Section
165.66. PUD Overlay District Requirements of Section 165.47(6)(A)(2), the 15%
green space requirement may not apply. No more than 4 units for rental
allowed in any building. Dwelling units are not permitted below the second
floor in CPR-1.



8.  No more than 4 units for rental allowed in any building.



9.  Excluded are trade and vocational schools having a customer trade or
utilizing, servicing or repairing vehicular or heavy equipment and machinery
as a principal activity. When not involved with any danger of fire or
explosion nor offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, glare, heat or
other objectionable influences.



10.  When not involved with any danger of fire or explosion nor offensive
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, glare, heat or other objectionable
influences.



11.  Garages for storage, repair and servicing of motor vehicles with any
motor vehicle sales being secondary to the principal use and outdoor storage
and display of motor vehicles limited to an area no greater than the gross
square footage of the principal structure.



12.  Excludes Adult Entertainment. See Section 165.24.



13.  No beer gardens as defined in Section 165.96 permitted.



14.  Beer gardens as defined in Section 165.96, and not associated with a
special event permit, require a conditional use.



15.  Operated by a public agency.  See essential services 165.21(1).



16.  Service vehicles less than three ton may be stored outside if screened
as for outside storage in Section 165.23.



17.  Mini storage buildings shall be located behind a principal permitted
use building for the specified zone.



18.  Limited to rock, sand, gravel production and preparation.



FIGURE II
SERVICES MATRIX



 


FIGURE II – SERVICES MATRIX




SERVICE

 

ZONING

 

SUBDIVISION

 

SITE PLAN





ACCESS
 
Preliminary Zoning:  Identify how access is to be provided; if problems are
anticipated with acquiring access, applicant shall submit evidence that
necessary easements or rights-of-way have been acquired or options executed.


Final Zoning:  Provide evidence access has been acquired to existing City
street system.

 
Preliminary Plat:  Provide preliminary road layout and identify approximate
grades.  Acquire means of access to existing City street system; extent of
easements or rights-of-way sufficient to build access road meeting the
standards of the City.


Final Plat:  Same as preliminary plat; must obtain approval for street
improvement plans from City Engineer.

 
Site Plan:  Evidence access has been acquired to existing City street system.


FIRE/

EMERGENCY

MEDICAL
 
Final Zoning:  Sign-off from Fire Department.
 

 
Site Plan:  Sign-off from Fire Department.


PUBLIC USE

AREAS
 
Preliminary Plat:  Go to Park Board.
 
Final Plat:  Subdivider to pay public use fees or dedicate land prior to
recordation as required by Section 165.59(7).
$4,000/acre or 5% total acreage.
 
Site Plan:  Not applicable.


SEWAGE

DISPOSAL
 

 
Preliminary Plat:  Evidence of adequate method of sewage disposal for each
lot to be developed.


Final Plat:  Connection to City sewer system or signed Waiver of Assessment
provided to City.

 



UTILITIES
 

 
Preliminary Plat:  Identify source of utilities; location of nearest lines.


Final Plat:  Sign-off from utilities.

 



WATER
 

 
Preliminary Plat:  Evidence of adequate supply of water in terms of quantity
and quality. Sign-off from purveyor of system.


Final Plat:  Sign-off from City that hook-up to system is approved.

 
Site Plan:  Sign-off from purveyor of central system.



Figure II provides a summary of requirements for the availability of access
and services at each stage in the development process.  Section 165.51
provides further explanation of these requirements. It is important to note
the information in this figure is not all-inclusive, and must be used in
conjunction with the text of the regulations to identify the requirements
applicable to a development.




More specific information on requirements for subdivision is provided in
Sections 165.52-165.59.





 



FIGURE III
APPLICATION OF REZONING POLICIES



 


FIGURE III – APPLICATION OF REZONING POLICIES



Y = Policies Apply

N = Policies Not Applicable



 

TO: THIS ZONING DESIGNATION




FROM: THIS ZONING DESIGNATION

 

A

 

R-1

 

R-3

 

R-5

 

R-7

 

R-MH

 

C-ORS

 

C-2

 

C-3

 

C-4

 

C-R

 

C-WH

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

CPR-1

 

CPR-2

 

CPR-3

 

FP

 

PUD




PUD TO ALLOW HIGHER INTENSITY†

 

PUD TO ADD PRIMARY USES





A
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



R-1
 

N

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



R-3
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



R-5
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



R-7
 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



R-MH
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



C-ORS
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



C-2
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



C-3
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



C-4
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



C-R
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



C-WH
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



I-1
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



I-2
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



CPR-1
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



CPR-2
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



CPR-3
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y



FP
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

N

 

Y

 

Y



PUD
 

N

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y

 

Y




Section 165.91(3) of this Code establishes rezoning policies.  This Figure
III identifies the types of zone changes to which these policies apply.
†For purposes of Figure III, a change in intensity is defined as a 10% or
more increase in the number of units or square footage allowed.





 



 



FIGURE IV
DEVELOPMENT CONSTRAINTS



 


FIGURE IV – DEVELOPMENT CONSTRAINTS
CITY CONCERNS AND SUGGESTED/REQUIRED MITIGATION MEASURES




TYPE OF CONSTRAINT

 

CITY CONCERNS

 

SUGGESTED/REQUIRED
MITIGATION MEASURES†





FLOODFRINGE
 
Flood hazards to structures

Public health, safety, welfare
 

a.   Compliance with City flood plain regulations (See Chapter 161)



FLOODWAY
 
Flood hazards to structures

Public health, safety, welfare
 

a.   Compliance with City flood plain regulations (See Chapter 161)



GEOLOGIC HAZARD AREAS
 
Unstable slopes or soils
 

a.   Avoiding placing any structures on areas subject to geologic hazards



b.   Submitting geotechnical report identifying hazards and recommending
methods of construction to alleviate hazards; designing structures in
accordance with recommendations contained in geotechnical report [see
165.57(1)]



c.   Providing grading and foundation plans prepared by registered
professional engineer [see 165.67(6)(H)]



d.   Modifying land uses so structures are minimized or eliminated



e.   Clustering development to avoid hazard areas



SLOPES EXCEEDING 25%
 
Amount of site disturbance

Visual scarring

Slope stability

Soil erosion
 

a.   Avoiding placement of such items as parking lots which require large,
flat-surfaced areas on steep slopes



b.   Modifying land uses so site disturbance is minimized



c.   Proposing smaller scale rather than larger scale development in order
to minimize the amount of site disturbance



d.   Designing structures so they are stepped or otherwise fit with the
terrain



e.   Minimizing the extent of roads



f.   Clustering development to avoid steep slopes



g.   Providing grading and foundation plans prepared by registered
professional engineer [see 165.67(6)(H)]



h.   Providing erosion control, re-vegetation, and urban runoff control
plans (see Cedar Rapids Metropolitan Area Engineering Design Standards
adopted by Resolution by the Hiawatha City Council)



WETLANDS
 
Degradation of natural environment

Loss of wildlife habitat

Loss of cleansing action of wetlands

Disruption of natural corridors

Loss of amenity in projects
 

a.   Complying with 404 permit procedures where required



b.   Replacing wetlands on an acre-for-acre basis within same ecosystem



c.   Replacing wetlands on a 2 for 1 basis



d.   Proposing land uses which are not disruptive to wetlands



e.   Clustering development to avoid wetland areas



ADJACENT LAND USES
 
Assured compatibility of adjacent, existing

Less intense land uses
 

a.   Site rear and front yards to buffer less intense land uses



b.   Berms to buffer less intense land use



c.   Landscaping to buffer less intense land uses



d.   Fencing to protect less intense land uses




Section 165.91 of this Code specifies policies which apply to certain
rezoning proposals.  These policies specify that land having development
constraints shall be avoided or used for lower intensity development unless
constraints are mitigated to the satisfaction of the City.  This figure
contains suggested and required mitigation measures.  (Mitigation measures
required by this Code need not be listed in Figure IV.)  Mitigation measures
suggested are not all-inclusive.  An applicant may propose other methods of
mitigation.



†For purposes of this Code, mitigation is defined in the Cedar Rapids
Metropolitan Area Engineering Standards adopted by Resolution by the Hiawatha
City Council.





 



 



 

EDITOR’S NOTE


The Unified Development Code, adopted December 17, 1997, by Ordinance No.
439, and amendments thereto, contained in a separate volume, are a part of
this Code of Ordinances and are in full force and effect.  The following
ordinances have been adopted amending the Unified Development Code of the
City.


ORDINANCE
 
ADOPTED
 
SUBJECT




442
 
3-4-98
 
Zoning Map


443
 
3-4-98
 
Zoning Map


444
 
3-4-98
 
Zoning Map


445
 
3-4-98
 
Zoning Map


448
 
7-1-98
 
Zoning Map


449
 
6-3-98
 
Board of Adjustment


452
 
7-15-98
 
Zoning Map


453
 
8-5-98
 
Zoning Map


454
 
8-5-98
 
Zoning Map


465
 
11-18-98
 
Landscape & Shading Regulations


468
 
1-6-99
 
Zoning Map


469
 
2-3-99
 
Zoning Map


472
 
4-7-99
 
Zoning Map


473
 
4-7-99
 
Zoning Map


476
 
5-5-99
 
Zoning Map


477
 
5-5-99
 
Zoning Map


479
 
7-7-99
 
Zoning Map


480
 
7-7-99
 
Zoning Map


481
 
9-1-99
 
Zoning Map


485
 
2-2-00
 
Zoning Map


487
 
3-15-00
 
Zoning Map


489
 
4-5-00
 
Land Use in C-4 and I-1 Districts


491
 
8-2-00
 
Zoning Map


492
 
8-2-00
 
Zoning Map


496
 
1-3-01
 
Zoning Map


497
 
1-3-01
 
Maintenance Bond


500
 
4-4-01
 
Land Use in I-2 District


506
 
9-5-01
 
Zoning Map


507
 
9-5-01
 
Zoning Map




 



 

ORDINANCE
 
ADOPTED
 
SUBJECT




508
 
10-17-01
 
Off-street Parking Table


510
 
11-21-01
 
Zoning Map


514
 
5-15-02
 
Zoning Map


519
 
5-15-02
 
Site Plan Requirements


520
 
6-5-02
 
Zoning Map


530
 
3-5-03
 
Zoning Map


531
 
3-5-03
 
Meetings and Hearings


534
 
5-7-03
 
Zoning Map


537
 
10-15-03
 
Zoning Map


538
 
10-15-03
 
Zoning Map


539
 
10-15-03
 
Zoning Map


540
 
11-5-03
 
Zoning Map


541
 
11-5-03
 
Zoning Map


547
 
12-30-03
 
Zoning Map


548
 
1-7-04
 
Amendments to Zoning Map


551
 
4-7-04
 
Zoning Map


552
 
5-5-04
 
Zoning Map


555
 
9-1-04
 
Zoning Map


563
 
10-6-04
 
Zoning Map


570
 
5-4-05
 
Zoning Map


574
 
8-3-05
 
Land Use Regulations


581
 
9-7-05
 
Off-Street Parking Spaces


583
 
11-2-05
 
Zoning Map


586
 
3-15-06
 
Zoning Map


589
 
8-2-06
 
Zoning Map


590
 
8-2-06
 
Zoning Map


597
 
2-7-07
 
Zoning Map


598
 
2-21-07
 
Condition Use of Animal Boarding


610
 
12-5-07
 
Zoning Map


611
 
12-5-07
 
Zoning Map


612
 
2-20-08
 
Zoning Map


616
 
4-2-08
 
Zoning Map


617
 
6-4-08
 
Authorized Variances


624
 
9-3-08
 
Land Use Regulations


625
 
11-5-08
 
Zoning Map


630
 
3-18-09
 
Land Use Regulations


631
 
3-18-09
 
Zoning Map


638
 
5-18-09
 
Tree Planting List


645
 
8-5-09
 
Land Use Regulations


646
 
8-19-09
 
Supplemental Regulations


650
 
10-7-09
 
Zoning Map


656
 
2-3-10
 
Zoning Map


663
 
4-21-10
 
Land Use Regulations


664
 
6-2-10
 
Zoning Map


666
 
6-2-10
 
Nonconforming Structures and Buildings




 



 

ORDINANCE
 
ADOPTED
 
SUBJECT




670
 
7-7-10
 
Zoning Map


672
 
8-4-10
 
Zoning Map


673
 
8-4-10
 
Zoning Map


674
 
8-4-10
 
Zoning Map


676
 
10-20-10
 
Land Use Regulations


677
 
10-20-10
 
Land Use Regulations


678
 
10-20-10
 
Land Use Regulations


679
 
10-20-10
 
Zoning Map


680
 
10-20-10
 
Zoning Map


681
 
10-20-10
 
Zoning Map


682
 
10-20-10
 
Zoning Map


689
 
12-1-10
 
Zoning Map


690
 
12-1-10
 
Zoning Map


691
 
12-1-10
 
Zoning Map


699
 
4-6-11
 
Land Use Regulations


700
 
4-6-11
 
Off-Street Parking


702
 
4-20-11
 
Zoning Map


706
 
6-14-11
 
PUD Overlay District


711
 
8-3-11
 
Zoning Map


712
 
8-17-11
 
Adult Entertainment Establishments


731
 
7-18-12
 
Subdivision Requirements


732
 
7-18-12
 
Off-street Parking Spaces


734
 
11-7-12
 
Zoning Map


744
 
5-15-13
 
Zoning Map


749
 
8-7-13
 
Center Point Road Zoning District


750
 
8-21-13
 
Zoning Map


752
 
8-21-13
 
Variances and Amendments


753
 
8-21-13
 
Pawnbrokers and Delayed Deposit Services


756
 
9-4-13
 
Zoning Map


757
 
9-4-13
 
Land Use Matrix


758
 
9-4-13
 
Land Use Matrix


761
 
10-16-13
 
Publication Requirements


777
 
1-22-14
 
Subdivision Regulations


779
 
2-19-14
 
Public Service Areas, Parks and Open Spaces


780
 
3-19-14
 
Applicability; Interpretation of Regulations; Supplemental Yard Regulations;
PUD Overlay District


789
 
6-4-14
 
Zoning Map


792
 
7-2-14
 
Zoning Map


793
 
8-6-14
 
Zoning Map


796
 
8-20-14
 
Land Use Matrix


797
 
9-3-14
 
Zoning Map


807
 
10-15-14
 
Zoning Map


817
 
12-17-14
 
Land Use Matrix


818
 
12-17-14
 
Land Use Matrix


819
 
12-17-14
 
Jurisdiction


820
 
12-17-14
 
Supplemental Yard Regulations




 



 

ORDINANCE
 
ADOPTED
 
SUBJECT




821
 
1-7-15
 
Nonconforming Uses


823
 
2-4-15
 
Zoning Map


833
 
5-6-15
 
Land Uses and Regulations by District, Supplemental Regulations, Supplemental
Yard Regulations, Definitions


841
 
7-1-15
 
Zoning Map


845
 
11-4-15
 
Zoning Map


847
 
12-2-15
 
Zoning Map


872
 
3-15-17
 
Zoning Map


873
 
3-15-17
 
Zoning Map


874
 
3-15-17
 
Zoning Map


876
 
8-2-17
 
Zoning Map


880
 
6-7-17
 
Zoning Map


887
 
12-22-17
 
Amending Chapter 165 in Its Entirety


901
 
7-18-18
 
Zoning Map


905
 
8-1-18
 
Zoning Map


913
 
9-5-18
 
Maintenance Bond


915
 
10-10-18
 
Rezone Property



 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 




 

 





 



 



 


Notes

1 
†Editor’s Note.  Figure I – Land Use Matrix is found at the end of
this chapter.

2 
† CPR-1 Zoning District:  Spaces as required by the City Council after
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and not to exceed four
per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.

3 
†Editor’s Note.  Figure II – Services Matrix is found at the end of
this chapter.

4 
†Editor’s Note.  Figure III – Application of Rezoning Policies – is
found at the end of this chapter.

5 
†Editor’s Note.  Figure IV – Development Constraints – is found at
the end of this chapter.


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 166
SIGN CODE



 



166.01  Title and Authority
 
166.28  Reserved


166.02  Adoption and Repeals
 
166.29  Unsafe, Unlawful and Abandoned Signs


166.03  Purposes and Effect
 
166.30 – 166.33  Reserved


166.04  Applicability
 
166.34  Nonconforming Signs


166.05  Relationship to Other Requirements
 
166.35  Appeals and Variances


166.06  Severability
 
166.36 – 166.39  Reserved


166.07  Effective Date
 
166.40  Amendments to the Sign Code Regulations


166.08  Location of Certified Copy (and Zoning District Map)
 
166.41  Application for Amendment


166.09  Construction and Interpretation
 
166.42 – 166.44  Reserved


166.10  Regulations for All Signs
 
166.45  Limitation on Successive Applications


166.11  Supplemental Regulations
 
166.46 – 166.49  Reserved


166.12  Sign Permits
 
166.50  Violation and Penalty


166.13  Inspections
 
166.51 – 166.53  Reserved


166.14  Computation of Surface Area and Height
 
166.54  Definitions


166.15  Permitted Signs by Zoning District
 
Figures Referred to in Section 166.54


166.16 – 166.26  Reserved
 
Table 1 – Permitted Signs by Zoning District


166.27  Zoning District Sign Regulations
 




 



166.01   TITLE AND AUTHORITY.



   This chapter shall be known as the “City of Hiawatha Sign Code,”
and has been referred to as the “Sign Code” or “Ordinance” when a
shortened title is necessary.  This chapter is adopted by authority of and
for the purposes set forth in the Code of Iowa and shall be codified as
Chapter 166 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



166.02   ADOPTION AND REPEALS.



   1.   Establishment of this Sign Code.  This chapter amends the
Hiawatha Sign Code, which became effective in 1997, and was subsequently
codified as Chapter 166 of the Code of Ordinances of Hiawatha, Iowa, by
repealing said ordinance and all subsequent amendments thereto, except as
hereinafter provided in this Sign Code, and establishing this City of
Hiawatha Sign Code and providing for the administration, enforcement and
amendment thereof; and repealing all ordinances or resolutions in conflict
therewith.



   2.   Preservation of Ordinances Related to Specific Properties. 
All sign-related ordinances previously adopted by the City Council for
specific parcels of property, whereby conditions or other requirements were
made of property owners in connection with the approval of signs, are
herewith, specifically preserved and exempted from all repealed provisions of
this chapter.  All such conditions and/or other requirements are continued
in full force and effect as set forth in such ordinances, and are herewith
ratified, confirmed, and reenacted the same as set forth in such ordinances.



166.03   PURPOSES AND EFFECT.



   1.   The purposes of these sign regulations are:



      A.   To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of
communication in the City;



      B.   To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the
City’s ability to attract sources of economic development and growth;



      C.   To improve pedestrian and traffic safety;



      D.   To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on
nearby public and private property; and



      E.   To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these
sign regulations.



   This sign ordinance is adopted under the zoning authority of the City
in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in the Unified
Development Code, Chapter 165.



166.04   APPLICABILITY.



   1.   Territorial Application.  This Sign Code shall apply to all
structures, land, and uses within the corporate limits of Hiawatha, Iowa.



   2.   General Prohibition.  No sign or sign structure, now or
hereafter existing, shall be established, altered, moved, divided, or
maintained in any manner except in accord with the provisions of this Sign
Code.



   3.   Existing Nonconforming Signs.  Existing sign structures in
place on the date of the passage of this Sign Code which do not comply with
the regulations of this Sign Code shall be allowed to continue subject to the
provisions of Section 166.34 of this chapter relating to nonconforming uses.



   4.   Covenants.  Certain property in the City of Hiawatha may have
a covenant recorded against the property which affects signage and sign
structures located thereon.  It is hereby noted such covenants constitute a
private party agreement.  The City does not have the power or obligation to
enforce such covenants.  If the City is a party to a recorded covenant, then
the City has the authority to enforce the provisions of that covenant.



   5.   Sign Permits Issued Prior to Effective Date of Sign Code
Ordinance.  Where a sign permit for building, structure, or property was
issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this Sign Code,
and provided that construction of the sign or sign structure is begun within
six months of issuance of the sign permit and diligently prosecuted to
completion, said sign or sign structure may be completed, subject to the
provisions of Section 166.34 of this chapter relating to nonconforming uses
in accordance with the approved plans of the sign permit issued, even if said
sign or sign structure is nonconforming under the terms of this chapter.



   6.   Private Agreements.  This Sign Code is not intended to
abrogate, annul, or otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant, or other
private agreement or legal relationship.  However, where the regulations of
this Sign Code are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements or
legal relationships, the regulations of this Sign Code shall govern.



166.05   RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   1.   Relationship to Other Laws.  Nothing in this Sign Code shall
be construed as exempting any person from other requirements of the City of
Hiawatha or State and Federal laws and regulations.  To the extent the
requirements of this chapter differ from other applicable City, State, or
Federal requirements, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.



   2.   Minimum Requirements.  In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this Sign Code shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience, prosperity, and general welfare.



   3.   Higher Standards Govern.  Where the conditions imposed by any
provision of this Sign Code upon the use of land or buildings or upon the
bulk of signs, are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this chapter or any
other law, code, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations
which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements
shall govern.



166.06   SEVERABILITY.



   It is the intention of the City Council that each section, paragraph,
sentence, clause, and provision of this chapter is separable, and if any
provision is held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision
shall not affect the remainder of this chapter, nor any part thereof other
than that affected by such decision.



166.07   EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This Sign Code shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval, and publication as provided by law.



166.08   LOCATION OF CERTIFIED COPY (AND ZONING DISTRICT MAP). 



   Upon approval of the Sign Code ordinance, a certified copy, including
all official maps referred to in such ordinance, shall be recorded and kept
on file in the office of the City Clerk.



166.09   CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION.



   1.   General.  Nothing herein shall be construed as creating any
rights or protection for any third party.  The requirements of this chapter
are intended to protect and benefit the City of Hiawatha only, and not any
third party beneficiary.



   2.   Interpretation.  In the interpretation of this Sign Code the
rules and definitions of this subsection shall be observed and applied,
except when the context clearly indicates otherwise.



      A.   Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include
other tenses and derivative forms.



      B.   Words in the singular number shall include the plural
number, and words in the plural number shall include the singular number.



      C.   The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the
feminine gender shall include the masculine.



      D.   The word “shall” is mandatory.



      E.   The word “may” is permissive.



      F.   The word “lot” refers to a “zoning lot” unless
the context shall clearly indicate that it refers instead to a “lot of
record.”



      G.   The words “Code of Ordinances” or “Code” means
the Code of Ordinances of the City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



      H.   The word “person” includes individuals, firms,
corporations, associates, and any other entity.



      I.   The word “County” means the County of Linn, Iowa.



      J.   The word “City” means the City of Hiawatha, Iowa
and/or persons authorized to perform specified functions on behalf of the
City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



      K.   The words “City Council” means the City Council of
the City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



      L.   The words “Planning and Zoning Commission” means the
Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



      M.   The word “State” means the State of Iowa.



   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.



166.10   REGULATIONS FOR ALL SIGNS.



   1.   Scope of Regulations.  The regulations contained in this
section shall apply to and regulate signs in all zoning districts.  No sign
shall be located, erected, or maintained except in compliance with the
regulations contained herein.  Any sign already established on the effective
date of this Sign Code which is rendered nonconforming by these regulations,
and any sign which, as a result of subsequent amendments to this Sign Code,
is rendered nonconforming, shall be subject to the applicable provisions of
this section and Section 166.34 (Nonconforming Signs).



   2.   Exemptions.  The following signs are exempted from the permit
regulations of this chapter:



      A.   Miscellaneous Signs.  Miscellaneous traffic or other
signs of a public agency, such as railroad crossing signs and signs that warn
of danger, hazards, or unsafe conditions.



      B.   Official Flags and Emblems.  Display of any official
flag or emblem of a nation, state or city.



      C.   City Entrance.  City identification and entrance signs
installed by the City.



      D.   Memorials.  Grave markers, statues, or remembrances of
persons or events which are noncommercial in nature.



      E.   Works of Fine Art.  Works of fine art which are not
displayed in conjunction with a commercial enterprise for the principal
purpose of commercial advertisement.



      F.   Temporary.  Temporary decorations or displays for less
than 90 days which celebrate the occasion of traditionally accepted patriotic
or religious holidays.



      G.   Vehicle Signs.  Signs applied directly or attached
directly to the body of a car, bus, trailer, or other vehicle if such vehicle
has a valid registration, is utilized in the normal course of a business or
in the operator’s usual routine activities, and such vehicle is not used
primarily for the display of such sign or signs. 



      H.   Legally Required Signs.  Signs and notices required to
be displayed, maintained, or posted by law or by any court or governmental
order, rule, or regulation.



      I.   Drive Thru Menu Boards.  Drive through menu boards which
comply with the following:



         (1)   Shall be readable from the drive through lane only.



         (2)   Shall be set back from property lines as required
for signs.



      J.   Temporary Signs.  Temporary signs that are subject to
the following conditions:



         (1)   No such signs shall be placed on public property,
including any street right-of-way.  Such signs may be located in a required
yard in any such district, except none shall be within 30 feet of a corner
street lot line intersection. 



         (2)   No such signs shall exceed 16 square feet for lots
of one and two family dwellings and 32 square feet for all other uses.  The
total allowable surface area or the maximum amount of aggregate square feet
of all signs in one lot shall not exceed 32 square feet per street frontage.



   EXCEPTION: Temporary signs exceeding this size shall require a permit
as attention drawing devices as allowed by Section 166.10(3)E.



         (3)   Such signs shall not exceed four (4) feet in
height for lots of one and two family dwellings and 10 feet in height for all
other uses.



         (4)   Such signs shall not be illuminated.



         (5)   Such signs shall not be displayed for more than 75
days in any one calendar year.  Such signs shall be removed or caused to be
removed by the person or organization responsible for the erection or
distribution of such signs, or by the owner of the property upon which they
are located, or by such owner’s agent after 75 days, and no later than 5
days after the event for which such signs pertain, if applicable.



      K.   Information Signs.  Information, directional and
premises identification signs not exceeding four square feet in surface area,
displayed strictly for the direction, safety, or convenience of the public,
including signs which identify restrooms, telephones, danger areas, parking
area entrances or exits, freight entrances, nameplates, address signs, or the
like.



   3.   Signs Prohibited.



      A.   Public Rights-of-Way.  No sign or sign structure other
than an official traffic, street, or related sign approved for placement by
the controlling public agency shall be placed on any street or highway
right-of-way.



      B.   Interference with Utilities.  Signs and their supporting
structures shall not interfere with any equipment or lines for utilities,
including water, sewage, gas, electricity, or communications.  No permanent
sign of any size shall be located in or overhang a utility easement.



      C.   Consent of Owner Required.  No sign or sign structure
shall be placed on private or public property without the consent of the
owner or authorized agent thereof.



      D.   Imitation or Resemblance to Traffic Control and Safety
Signs.  No sign or sign structure shall be erected at any location where it
may, by reason of its size, shape, design, location, content, coloring, or
manner of illumination, constitute a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic
safety by obstructing the vision of drivers, by obscuring or otherwise
physically interfering with any official traffic control device, or which may
be confused with an official traffic control device. No rotating beacon,
beam, or flashing illumination resembling an emergency light shall be used in
connection with any sign display or be visible from an adjacent street. No
lights resembling an emergency light and no such words as “Stop,”
“Look,” “Danger,” or any other lights, word s, phrases, symbols, or
characters which in any manner may interfere with, mislead, or confuse
vehicle operators shall be used in a location which is visible to vehicular
traffic. No sign shall be located in such a manner as to impede the comer
visual clearance.



      E.   Attention Drawing Devices and Portable signs. No
festoons, spot lights, suspended balloons, other attention drawing devices or
portable signs shall be allowed.



   EXCEPTION: Attention-Drawing Devices. Temporary attention-drawing
devices shall be submitted to the City for approval. A permit is required
pursuant to the provisions of Section 166.12. The maximum time period for any
such sign or attention-drawing device shall be two (2) weeks.



      F.   Roof Signs. No roof signs shall be allowed



      G.   Fence and Free-Standing Wall Signs. Painting or affixing
a sign to a fence or free-standing wall is prohibited.



   EXCEPTION:  Signs may be attached to a freestanding wall with setbacks
as allowed for ground signs.  Sign shall be considered as a ground sign.



      H.   Flashing Lights.  Flashing, chasing and/or moving light
is not allowed on any sign.  See electronic message center signs in this
Section 166.11 §10.



      I.   Vehicle Signs.  Vehicle signs greater than one square
foot which are applied directly or attached directly to the body of a car,
bus, trailer, or other vehicle when such vehicle does not have a valid
registration and is not utilized in the normal course of a business or in the
operator’s usual routine activities.



      J.   Advertising signs as defined in Section 166.54.



   EXCEPTION: Business logos of businesses participating in the 1-380
advertising program may be placed on 1-380 Trailblazer signs located as
approved by City Council as Right-Of-Way directional signs.



      K.   All signs not expressly permitted by this chapter.



166.11   SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.



   1.   Compliance with Building and Sign Codes.  The construction,
installation, erection, anchorage, and maintenance of all signs shall be
subject to the applicable provisions of this Sign Code, the Building Code,
the Lighting Code, and other Codes of the City of Hiawatha.



   2.   Safety and Maintenance Required.  All signs and sign
structures shall be erected and maintained in a safe condition.  It shall be
the responsibility of the sign owner, property owner, or proprietor of the
premises to keep all signs thereon properly maintained.



   3.   Setback from Property Lines.  All signs shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from front and rear property lot lines, and 15 feet from
side property lot lines, except when adjacent to residentially zoned
property, the sign setback shall be a minimum of 40 feet from the nearest
residential lot line in a residential zone district unless a greater setback
is required elsewhere in this Sign Code.  The setback shall be measured from
the closest part of the sign structure to the nearest point on the lot line
being measured.



   4.   Corner Visual Clearance.  Signs located within 30 feet of a
corner street lot line intersection shall be so erected and maintained that
an un-obscured, visual sign area is provided for vehicle operators.  Such
un-obscured area, as a minimum, shall extend from a distance of two (2) feet
above finished street grade to 10 feet above said grade.  No more than two
(2) pole or post supports, of no more than 10 inches in diameter, shall be
permitted within such un-obscured area.  Additional limitations upon
location, size, and height of any such signs shall be required if the
City’s Traffic Engineer demonstrates conclusively that such additional
specific limitations are necessary to meet requirements of standard traffic
engineering practices.



   5.   Minimum Clearance over Public or Other Access Ways.  Unless a
greater or lesser minimum height is specifically listed for a particular
sign, any part of a sign which projects into or over any public way shall
provide a minimum clearance of not less than the following:



      A.   Vehicular way   14 feet.



      B.   Pedestrian way   8 feet.



   6.   Building Signs.  Building signs shall consist of the following
signs and shall comply with these limits.  The following signs shall be
included in the total allowable sign area for building signs unless exempt by
Section 166.10:



      A.   Wall Signs.  Wall signs shall project no more than 12
inches from the wall to which it is attached and further shall be restricted
to remain within the outline of the wall to which it is attached.



      B.   Canopy and Marquee Signs.  Where limitations are imposed
by this Sign Code regarding the projection of a sign from the face of the
wall of any building or structure, such limitations shall not apply to an
approved canopy or marquee, all marquee and canopies shall maintain the
following clearances:



         (1)   Height.  All canopies and marquee shall maintain
vertical clearance of not less than 10 feet above ground surface grade, or
the clearance established for the marquee by the provisions of the Hiawatha
Building Code, whichever requires the lesser height.



         (2)   Projection.  No such canopy or marquee shall
project closer to a curb line than two (2) feet.



      C.   Awning Signs.  Where limitations are imposed by this
Sign Code regarding the projection of a sign from the face of the wall of any
building or structure, such limitations shall not apply to an approved awning
provided that all such awnings shall maintain the following clearances:



         (1)   Height.  All awning signs shall maintain a
vertical clearance of not less than eight (8) feet above grade.



         (2)   Projection.  No awning sign shall project closer
to a curb line than five (5) feet.



      D.   Projecting Signs.  Projecting signs shall comply with
the following.



         (1)   Project no more than 12 feet from the building to
which it is attached. 



         (2)   Project no more than 8 feet into the space above a
public way.



         (3)   Have a minimum clearance as noted in 166.11(5).



      E.   Window Signs.  Window signs shall cover no more than 30%
of the window on which they are located.  Shall not be considered building
signs when:



         (1)   The signage is exempt according to 166.10 or



         (2)   The sign is a mural and regulated by Section
166.11(8)



   7.   Electronic Message Center Signs.  Electronic message center
signs shall be considered illuminated signs and shall meet the requirements
of A through C.



      A.   Display Attribute.  Electronic message center signs
shall not be operated in a way that flashes, blinks, flutters, mimics traffic
control devices or emergency vehicles, or distracts the public without
providing content to the message.



      B.   Sign Luminosity.  Electronic message center signs must
be equipped with automatic dimming technology that automatically adjusts the
display’s brightness to the ambient light conditions.



      C.   Public Safety.  Notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code, if the Hiawatha Police Chief or the Iowa DOT determines that the
operation of an electronic message center sign constitutes a public safety or
traffic threat the sign owner may be ordered to either modify the operation
of or remove an electronic message center sign to eliminate such threat.



   8.   Murals.  Murals may be permitted in all districts which comply
with the definition of a mural and are not larger than 10 feet by 10 feet. 
All murals shall require a sign permit.



   9.   Minimum Distance between Signs.  All freestanding signs on the
same lot in the districts in which they are allowed shall have a minimum
distance of 150 feet between them.



   10.   Sign Mounting.  No sign back shall be visible from the public
right-of-way unless it is painted and maintained a neutral color that blends
with the surrounding environment.



   11.   Externally Illuminated Signs.  Only downward directed lights
shall be permitted on signs, reflectors shall be provided with proper glass
or plastic lenses concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign so
as to prevent any glare upon the street or adjacent property.



166.12   SIGN PERMITS.



   1.   Permits Required.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
erect, alter, or relocate within the City any sign not exempted herein
without first obtaining a permit from the City and making payment of the fee
required.  All illuminated signs shall, in addition, be subject to the
provisions of the Electrical Code of the City and the permit fees required
thereunder.  EXCEPTIONS TO PERMITTING:



      A.   Signs exempt in Section 166.10.



      B.   Sign face replacements which do not change the sign size,
height, location or illumination.



      C.   Maintenance to existing sign structures which do not
change the sign size, height, location, illumination or structural components.



   2.   Application for Permit.  An application for a permit shall be
made upon forms provided by the City and shall at a minimum contain or have
attached thereto the following information:



      A.   Applicant Information.  Name, address and telephone
number of the applicant.



      B.   Plans and Specifications.  One blueprint or ink drawing
of the plans and specifications and method of construction and attachment to
the building or in the ground.  Such blueprint or ink drawing shall show
location of sign or signs and shall certify the distance from each other,
from signs on adjacent property, from points of ingress and egress, and from
adjacent property lot lines.



      C.   A complete listing of all non-exempt signs on the
property including their size, height and setbacks by sign type.



      D.   Erector.  Name of the person or association erecting
structure.



      E.   Valuation.  Valuation of sign.



      F.   Other.  Such other information as the City shall
require, showing full compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances
of the City.



   3.   Permit Issued.  It shall be the duty of the City, upon the
filing of an application for a permit, to examine such plans and
specifications and other data and the premises upon which the sign is
proposed to be erected.  If it shall appear that the proposed structure is
in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter, approved sign plans
and site plans, and all other requirements and laws of the City, the City
shall then issue a permit.  If the work authorized under a sign permit has
not been commenced within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the said
permit shall be come null and void and refund of the fee shall not be allowed.



   4.   Permit Fees.  Every applicant, before being granted a permit
hereunder, shall pay the permit fee, as determined by resolution of the City
Council, for each such sign.



   5.   Duration of Permit.  A sign permit is valid for one year, and
work on the permit must be commenced within six (6) months of the date of
issuance.  A sign permit may be renewed one time for a period not to exceed
one year upon payment of the required fee to the City.



   6.   Revocation of Permits.  The City is hereby authorized and
empowered to revoke any sign permits issued by the City upon failure of the
holder thereof to comply with any provisions of this chapter.



166.13   INSPECTIONS.



   1.   Inspections Required.  All construction or work for which a
permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the City.



   2.   City Codes and Ordinances Supersede Inspections.  Approval as
a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a
violation of the provisions of this chapter or of other City ordinances. 
Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions
of this Sign Code or other City ordinances shall not be valid.



   3.   Work to Remain Accessible.  It shall be the duty of the permit
applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for the
inspection purposes and to schedule, and be present for, the required
inspections.  All such construction or work, including footings and
foundations (structural and location), electrical connections, etc., shall
remain accessible and exposed for inspection until approved.  Neither the
Building Official nor the City shall be liable for any expense entailed in
the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.



   4.   Maintenance and Safety Inspections.  The Building Official may
cause to be inspected from time to time as he or she deems necessary, any
sign regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the
same is secure, and whether it is in need of removal or repair and complies
with this chapter.



166.14   COMPUTATION OF SURFACE AREA AND HEIGHT.



   Allowable Surface Area is the maximum amount of square feet permitted
for an individual sign.  Total Allowable Surface Area is the maximum amount
of aggregate square feet of signs allowed for each lot.  Sign Height is the
maximum height of a sign from the ground.  The following principles shall
control the computation of Allowable Surface Area, Total Allowable Surface
Area and Sign Height.



   1.   Computation of Surface Area of Individual Signs.  The surface
area of a sign face (which is also the surface area of a wall sign or other
sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square,
circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the
extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display,
together with any material or color forming an integral part of the
background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop
or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting
framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall
otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the
display itself.



   2.   Computation of Surface Area of Multi-Faced Signs.  The surface
area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together
the area of all sign faces visible from any one point.  When two identical
sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from
any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same
sign structure and are not more than 24 inches apart, the surface area shall
be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.  Double-faced signs are
permitted the maximum square footage on each side.  Multi-faced signs shall
not exceed two (2) times the area of single-faced signs.



   3.   Computation of Height.  The height of a sign shall be computed
as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the
highest attached component of the sign.  Normal grade shall be construed to
be the lower of:  (i) existing grade prior to construction; or (ii) the
newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling,
berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the
sign.  In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined,
sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the
normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest
point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the
principal entrance to the principal structure on the lot, whichever is lower.



   4.   Computation of Maximum Total Allowable Surface Area for a
Lot.  The Total Allowable Surface Area for signs on a lot shall be the
Maximum Total Allowable Surface Area for the zoning district in which the lot
is located, or the total of all non-exempt sign surfaces based on sign
setbacks, street frontage, and building front, whichever is less.  Lots
fronting on two or more streets are allowed the permitted surface area for
each street frontage.  Total allowable area based on sign type or frontage
cannot be transferred to other sign types or other frontages.



   5.   Computation of Ground Sign Surface Area, Setback and Height. 
When computing the surface area and height in relation to the required
setback distance from a property line, it is permissible to prorate the
allowed sign square footage and height in relation to the additional setback
distance.



166.15   PERMITTED SIGNS BY ZONING DISTRICT.



   Table 1 (Permitted Signs by Zoning District) identifies, by type of
sign, the zoning district in which a type of sign is allowed, and allowable
total areas and Table 1 is located at the end of this chapter.  If there is
conflict between Table 1 and the Code text, the Code text shall take
precedence.



166.16 – 166.26   Reserved



166.27   ZONING DISTRICT SIGN REGULATIONS.



   1.   Only signs as listed hereafter shall be permitted and are
subject to the regulations set forth in the specific Zoning District as
established and set forth in Chapter 165 of this Code of Ordinances.



   2.   District Regulations for A, R-1, R-3, R-5, and R-MH zoning
districts. 



      A.   General Regulations.



         (1)   A sign shall not be illuminated unless
specifically exempted from this requirement.



         (2)   A sign may not be located in a required yard
unless specifically exempted from this requirement.



      B.   Single Family Dwelling Uses.  No permanent building
signs or free standing signs are permitted except exempt signs allowed in
Section 166.10.



      C.   Home Occupation Signs.  No sign other than one unlighted
sign not over two square feet in area shall be allowed.  See Section 165.26
of the Hiawatha Unified Development Code.



      D.   Signs Permitted for Other than Single-Family Residential
Use.  Permitted and conditional uses and legal nonconforming uses shall be
permitted.



         (1)   Building Signs.  One wall sign per establishment
not to exceed 12 square feet.



         (2)   Freestanding Signs.  One ground sign per street
front.



            a.   Not to exceed 16 square feet.



            b.   Not to exceed eight feet in height.



            c.   May be illuminated.



   3.   District Regulations for the R-7 District.  Only signs as
listed hereinafter shall be permitted and subject to the regulations set
forth in the R-7 Multi-Family Residence zoning district as established and
set forth in Chapter 165 of this Code of Ordinances.



      A.   General Regulations.  Signs are permitted and regulated
in the district as specified in Section 166.27(2) above, subject to the
following modifications.



      B.   Multiple-Family Dwelling Signs.  One building sign or
one freestanding sign but not both, is permitted per street front as
regulated herein.  Signs may be illuminated.



         (1)   Building Signs.  Shall be a wall sign not to
exceed 32 square feet.



         (2)   Freestanding sign.  Shall be a ground sign.



            a.   Not to exceed 32 square feet.



            b.   Not to exceed eight feet in height.



   4.   District Regulations for C-ORS District.  Only signs as listed
hereinafter shall be permitted and are subject to the regulations set forth
in the C-ORS zoning district as established and set forth in Chapter 165 of
this Code of Ordinances.



      A.   General Regulations for the C-ORS District.  Signs for
residential and other uses are allowed as permitted and regulated in Section
166.27(3) above, subject to the modifications stated herein.



      B.   For Nonresidential Uses.  The allowable total surface
area of all permitted signs for each lot shall be calculated according to the
criteria in this Section 166.27(4)(B).  Signs may be illuminated.



         (1)   Total Allowable Surface Area.  The total
allowable surface area permitted on each lot frontage shall be equal to the
surface area for building and freestanding signs as specified herein.



         (2)   Building Signs.  Total building sign area for any
wall shall not exceed 15% of the wall area on which the signage is located. 
No projecting signs permitted.



         (3)   Freestanding Signs.  One ground sign is permitted.



            a.   Not to exceed 32 square feet.



            b.   Not to exceed ten feet in height.



   5.   District Regulations for C-2 Districts.  Only signs as listed
hereinafter shall be permitted and subject to the regulations set forth in
the C-2 Neighborhood Convenience Commercial Zoning Districts as established
and set forth in Chapter 165 of this Code of Ordinances.



      A.   General Regulations for the C-2 Districts.  Signs for
residential and other uses are allowed as permitted and regulated in Section
166.27(4) above, subject to the modifications stated herein.



      B.   For Nonresidential Uses.  The allowable surface area of
all permitted signs for each lot shall be calculated according to the
criteria in this Section 166.27(5)(B).  Signs may be illuminated.



         (1)   Total Allowable Surface Area.  The total
allowable surface area permitted on each lot frontage shall be equal to the
surface area for building and freestanding signs as specified herein.



         (2)   Building Signs.  Total building sign area for any
wall shall for each street frontage shall not exceed 15% of the wall area on
which the signage is located.  No projecting signs permitted.



         (3)   Freestanding Signs.  One ground sign shall be
permitted for each lot street frontage.  The maximum total surface area,
setback, and height for all such signs shall not exceed the dimensions given
below for each lot for each street frontage:



            a.   40 square feet if set back 10 feet with a
height not to exceed eight feet;



            b.   50 square feet if set back 20 feet with a
height not to exceed 10 feet; or



            c.   80 square feet if set back 30 feet with a
height not to exceed 12 feet.



   6.   District Regulations for the C-R, C-3, C-4, and CPR
Districts.  Only signs as listed hereafter shall be permitted and subject to
the regulations set forth in the C-R Commercial Recreational, C-3 Highway
Commercial, C-4 Central Service and CPR Center Point Road Corridor Zoning
Districts as established and set forth in Chapter 165 of this Code of
Ordinances.



      A.   General Regulations for the C-R, C-3, C-4, and CPR
Districts.  Signs for residential and other uses are allowed as permitted
and regulated in Section 166.27(5) above, subject to the modifications stated
herein.



      B.   For Nonresidential Uses.  The allowable surface area of
all permitted signs for each lot shall be calculated according to the
criteria in this Section 166.27(6)(B).  Signs may be illuminated.



         (1)   Total Allowable Surface Area.  The total
allowable surface area permitted on each lot frontage shall be equal to the
surface area for building and freestanding signs as specified herein.



         (2)   Building Signs.  Total building sign area shall
not exceed 15% of the wall area on which the signage is located.  One
projecting sign for each establishment’s street frontage shall be
permitted. Projecting signs shall comply with Section 166.11(6)(D).



         (3)   Freestanding Sign Surface Area, Setback and
Height.  One freestanding sign shall be permitted for each lot street
frontage unless the conditions set forth in Section 166.27(6)(C) are
present.  The maximum total surface area, setback, and height for all such
signs shall not exceed the dimensions given below for each lot for each
street frontage.



            a.   Ground Signs.  For ground signs, the maximum
total surface area, setback and height for each ground sign shall not exceed
the below stated criteria:



               i.   60 square feet if set back 10 feet with
a height not to exceed 10 feet;



               ii.   80 square feet if set back 20 feet
with a height not to exceed 12 feet; or



               iii.   100 square feet if set back 30 feet
with a height not to exceed 15 feet.



            b.   Pole Signs in C-R, C-3, C-4 and CPR-3
Zones.  For each pole sign, the maximum total surface area permitted shall
be 100 square feet and the maximum height shall be 28 feet. 



            c.   Pole Signs along I-380.  For each pole sign
located on property zones as C-R, C-3, C-4, and CPR with frontage directly
along the I-380 right-of-way, the maximum total surface area permitted shall
not exceed 400 square feet and the maximum height shall not exceed 50 feet. 
These permitted pole signs must be located within 50 feet of the I-380
right-of-way.



      C.   Lots with Frontage Exceeding 300 Feet. 



         (1)   Freestanding Signs.  One freestanding sign shall
be permitted for each 150 feet of frontage for lot frontages which exceed 300
feet.  The additional freestanding signs allowed by this section shall be
ground signs.  Total allowable sign areas for the applicable zone and sign
type shall not be exceeded.  Sign separation distances shall comply with
Section 166.11(9).  This exception does not apply to I-380 frontage.



   7.   District Regulations for C-WH, I-1 and I-2 Districts.  Only
signs listed hereinafter shall be permitted and subject to the regulations
set forth in the C-WH Commercial Warehouse, I-1 Restricted Industrial and I-2
General Industrial Zoning Districts as established and set forth in Chapter
165 of this Code of Ordinances.



      A.   General Regulations for the C-WH, I-1 and I-2
Districts.  Signs for residential and other uses are allowed as permitted
and regulated in Section 166.27(6) above, subject to the modifications stated
herein.



      B.   For Nonresidential Uses.  The allowable surface area of
all permitted signs for each lot shall be calculated according to the
criteria in this Section 166.27(7)(B).  Signs may be illuminated.



         (1)   Total Allowable Surface Area.  The total
allowable surface area permitted on each lot frontage shall be equal to the
surface area for building and freestanding signs as specified herein.



         (2)   Building Signs.  Total building sign area shall
not exceed 15% of the wall area on which the signage is located.  One
projecting sign for each establishment’s street frontage shall be
permitted.  Projecting signs shall comply with Section 166.11(6)(D).



         (3)   Freestanding Signs.  No more than one ground sign
shall be permitted for each lot street frontage.  The maximum total surface
area, setback, and height for all such signs shall not exceed the dimensions
given below for each lot for each street frontage:



            a.   60 square feet if set back 10 feet with a
height not to exceed 10 feet;



            b.   80 square feet if set back 20 feet with a
height not to exceed 12 feet; or



            c.   100 square feet if set back 30 feet with a
height not to exceed 15 feet.



      C.   Lots with Frontage Exceeding 300 Feet.



         (1)   Freestanding Signs.  One freestanding sign shall
be permitted for each 150 feet of frontage for lot frontages which exceed 300
feet.  The additional freestanding signs allowed by this section shall be
ground signs.  Total allowable sign areas for the applicable zone and sign
type shall not be exceeded.  Sign separation distances shall comply with
Section 166.11(9). This exception does not apply to I-380 frontage.



166.28   Reserved



166.29   UNSAFE, UNLAWFUL AND ABANDONED SIGNS.



   1.   Unsafe, Unlawful or Abandoned Signs; Correction of
Deficiency.  If the City finds that any sign regulated herein is unsafe or
unsecured, a hazard to the public, unlawfully placed or is an abandoned sign
structure the City shall consider the structure a nuisance and it shall be
abated in accordance with Hiawatha Code Chapter 50.



166.30 – 166.33   Reserved



166.34   NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   Prior to the sign regulations established by the Sign Code, or by
subsequent amendments thereto, there exist signs which were lawful before the
Sign Code ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited or
restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments thereto.



   1.   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to provide for the
regulation of nonconforming signs and to specify those circumstances and
conditions under which such nonconformities shall be permitted to continue.



   2.   Authority for Continuance of Nonconformities and Regulation
Thereof.  Any nonconforming sign which existed lawfully at the time of
adoption of the Sign Code ordinance and which remains nonconforming by the
terms thereof, and any such lawful sign which shall become nonconforming upon
the adoption of the Sign Code ordinance, or any subsequent amendment thereto,
may be continued subject to the regulations following in this section.



   3.   Nonconforming Signs.  Where at the time of adoption of the
Sign Code ordinance, or subsequent amendments thereto, lawful use of a sign
exists or may exist which could not be erected under the regulations imposed
by this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, height, yards, location on
the lot, or other requirements concerning the sign, such sign structure may
be continued, provided no such nonconforming sign shall be altered in any way
which would increase its degree of nonconformity but may be altered if such
alteration does not increase its degree of nonconformity.



   4.   Repairs and Maintenance.  Ordinary repairs and maintenance may
be carried out on signs nonconforming as to use or bulk, provided that no
alterations shall be made which would add to the size, area, or degree of
nonconformity.



   5.   Restoration of a Nonconforming Sign.



      A.   Sign Damaged or Destroyed.  A nonconforming sign which
is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God to the extent
that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before the
occurrence shall exceed 65 percent of the fair market value of the sign
before damage, based upon insurance value, shall not be restored except in
conformity with all of the regulations of the district in which it is
located.  If a nonconforming sign is damaged less than 65 percent, it may be
repaired, restored, or reconstructed and used as before the time of damage,
provided that such repair, restoration, or reconstruction is started within
12 months of such damage and diligently prosecuted to completion.



      B.   Correcting an Unsafe Condition.  Nothing in this chapter
shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition
any sign or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with
protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.



   6.   Nonconforming Uses with Nonconforming Accessory Signs.  A
nonconforming sign which is accessory to a principal nonconforming use shall
be discontinued if such principal use or structure is discontinued.



   7.   Discontinuance of a Nonconforming Use.  If the nonconforming
sign structure is not used for a continuous period of 12 months, it shall not
be renewed, and any subsequent use of the sign shall conform to the use
regulations of the district in which such sign is located.  However, where
it can be established that a delay has been caused by governmental and/or
court action, which is clearly beyond control of the property owner, the time
period to retain nonconforming status may, if approved by the Board of
Adjustment, be extended to 24 months.



166.35   APPEALS AND VARIANCES.



   1.   Procedure for Sign Code Appeals and Variances.  The procedures
set forth under Section 165.78 (Appeals of Decision) and Section 165.82
(Variances) shall apply to all applications and requests for Sign Code
appeals and variances.



166.36 – 166.39   Reserved



166.40   AMENDMENTS TO THE SIGN CODE REGULATIONS.



   1.   Authority.  The City Council may, from time to time, in the
manner hereinafter set forth, amend, supplement, or change the regulations or
classification of signs, now or hereafter established by this chapter or by
amendments thereto.



   2.   Purpose.  The amendment process herein established is intended
to provide a means for making changes in the text of this chapter.



   3.   Initiation of Amendment.  An amendment may be initiated by a
motion of the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission or by the
filing of an application for such action by a property owner.



   4.   Legal Notice.  At least fifteen (15) days’ notice of the
time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper printed and
published in Linn County, Iowa, having general circulation in the City of
Hiawatha, Iowa.



166.41   APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT.



   An application for an amendment to the Sign Code shall be filed with
the City Clerk and, at the time of filing, contain or be accompanied by all
the information required hereunder, except for items waived by the City Clerk
based on the nature of the request.



   1.   Amendment to Sign Code Regulations.  Each application
requesting a change in the text of these regulations shall be a petition
which includes:



      A.   Written material:



   Text revisions or additions, if any.



   Statement justifying the proposals.



   Statement describing the consistency of the proposal with the intent of
the Sign Code.



   Statement describing consistency of the proposal with any applicable
goals and policies in the City of Hiawatha Comprehensive Plan.



      B.   Graphic material, if appropriate.



      C.   Information required for public hearing.



      D.   Fee as required by resolution of City Council.



      E.   Other information deemed necessary by the City.



166.42 – 166.44   Reserved



166.45   LIMITATION ON SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS.



   Applications which have been denied by the Board of Adjustment or the
City Council or have been withdrawn after Planning and Zoning Commission
recommendation but prior to action by the Board, shall comply with the
limitations and procedures for successive applications in City Code Section
165.86.



166.46 – 166.49   Reserved



166.50   VIOLATION AND PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any provision
of this Code shall be subject to a municipal infraction punishable by civil
penalty not to exceed $750.00 for the first offense and not to exceed
$1,000.00 for each repeat offense as provided in Chapter 4 of the Hiawatha
Code of Ordinances. 



166.51 – 166.53   Reserved



166.54   DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall govern the interpretation of the
regulations of the City of Hiawatha Sign Code.  If a term is not found in
this section, refer to Section 165.96 of the Unified Development Code for
Hiawatha.  Words used in this chapter have the same definition as provided
in Section 165.96, except that if the definition given in Chapter 166
differs, it supersedes the definition in Section 165.96.



   1.   “Access way” means a way or means of approach to provide
vehicular or pedestrian physical entrance to a property.



   2.   “Awning” means any structure, unaccompanied by advertising
copy, made of cloth or similar non-rigid materials with a structural support
frame attached to a building and projecting away from the building.



   3.   “Billboard” – see definition of “sign, advertising.”



   4.   “Canopy” means a rigid, multi-faced structure covered with
fabric, wood, metal, or other similar material and supported by a building at
one or more points or extremities and by columns or posts embedded in the
ground at other points or extremities.



   5.   “City” means the City of Hiawatha, Iowa, and persons
authorized to perform specified functions on behalf of the City of Hiawatha,
Iowa.



   6.   “Corner visual clearance” means that area bounded by the
street right-of-way lines of a  corner lot and a straight line joining
points on said right-of-way lines thirty (30) feet from the point of
intersection of said right-of-way lines.  (See Figure 1 at end of chapter.)



   7.   “District” means any section or area of the City for which
the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, building bulk,
signs and related matters are uniform.



   8.   “Lot” means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land
established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be
separately owned, used, developed or built upon, and at least sufficient size
to meet minimum zoning requirements.



   9.   “Lot line” means a boundary of a lot.



   10.   “Lot line, front” means the boundary between the lot and
the street on which it fronts.



   11.   “Lot line, rear” means the lot boundary opposite and most
distant from the front lot line.



   12.   “Lot line, side” means any lot line other than a front or
rear lot line.



   13.   “Lot, reversed corner” means a corner lot the street side
lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of
the first lot to its rear.  (See Figure 2 at end of chapter.)



   14.   “Lot, through” means a lot having a pair of opposite lot
lines along two more or less parallel public streets, and which is not a
corner lot.  On a “through lot” both street lines shall be deemed front
lot lines.  (See Figure 3 at end of chapter.)



   15.   “Lot, zoning” means a single tract of contiguous land
which, at the time of filing for a building permit or a certificate of
occupancy, is designated by the owner or developer as a tract to be used,
developed, or built upon as a unit under single or unified ownership or
control and assigned to the particular use, building, or structure for which
the building permit or certificate of occupancy is issued and having frontage
upon an approved street or place, and including such areas of land as may be
required by the provisions of this chapter for the building structure or use.



   16.   “Marquee” means any permanent roof like structure or
awning of rigid material supported by and extending from the façade of a
building.



   17.   “Mural” means any picture, scene or diagram painted or
fixed on an exterior wall of a building shall be considered advertising or
have a business purpose unless exempt under this chapter.



   18.   “Public way” means a public or private tract of land
specified for public use along or across a property for pedestrians, bicycles
and/or vehicles that may not be paved or otherwise improved.



   19.   “Sign” means any medium, including its component parts,
which is a communication device, structure, or fixture, and which
incorporates graphics, symbols, or writings intended to promote the sale of
product, commodity, or service or to provide direction or identification for
a premises or facility, unless exempt under this chapter.



   20.   “Sign, abandoned” means any sign remaining in place for a
period of ninety (90) days or more which no longer advertises or identifies
an activity, business, product, or service available on the premises on which
the sign is located.



   21.   “Sign, advertising” means a sign which directs attention
to an establishment, business profession, commodity, service, premises,
person or thing which may be located, produced, conducted, sold, or offered
elsewhere than on the lot upon which the sign is located.



   22.   “Sign, awning” means any sign attached to an awning or the
sign surface designed as an integral part of the awning.



   23.   “Sign, building” means any sign attached to a building
including awning, canopy, marquee, roof, window, projecting and wall signs.



   24.   “Sign, canopy” means a sign other than a projecting sign
attached to a canopy or the sign surface designed as an integral part of the
canopy.



   25.   “Sign, festoon” means any sign in which lights, ribbons,
tinsel, small flags, pinwheels, pennants or other similar small, attention
drawing devices are attached to a rope, string, wire, pole, or similar
support.



   26.   “Sign, freestanding” means a sign that is an independent
structure, self supporting and not attached to a building or other accessory
structure.  Ground signs and pole signs are freestanding signs.



   27.   “Sign, ground” means any freestanding sign in which the
entire bottom is in contact with or is close to the ground and is independent
of any other structure.  The width of the bottom of the structure in contact
with the ground shall not be less than 40% of the sign width.



   28.   “Sign, identification” means any sign designed to identify
a specific person, firm, corporation, or primary trade name of permanent
character identifiable with said person, firm, corporation, or primary trade
name, and located on the building or immediate premises of said person, firm
or corporation.



   29.   “Sign, information” means a sign displayed strictly for
the direction, safety, or convenience of the public and which sets forth no
advertisement.  Information signs would include signs which identify parking
areas and drives, restrooms, addresses, telephones, exits and entrances, no
trespassing area, danger areas, and similar information.



   30.   “Sign, illuminated” means a sign designed to give forth
any artificial light or reflect such light from an artificial source.



   31.   “Sign, marquee” means a sign other than a projecting sign
attached to a marquee or the sign surface designed as an integral part of the
marquee.



   32.   “Sign, nonconforming” means any sign which does not
conform to the requirements of this chapter.



   33.   “Sign, pole” means a freestanding sign with an elevated
surface supported by one or more vertical poles or columns placed in the
ground.



   34.   “Sign, portable” means a sign designed to be transported,
including but not limited to signs:



      A.   With wheels, or with wheels removed.



      B.   With chassis or support constructed without wheels.



      C.   Designed to be transported by trailer or wheels.



   35.   “Sign, projecting” means a sign which projects from and is
supported by a wall of a building and extends out from the wall more than 12
inches.



   36.   “Sign, roof” means a sign situated upon the roof of any
building.



   37.   “Sign, wall” means a sign which is attached directly to a
building wall and which does not extend out more than 12 inches therefrom,
with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the building wall.



   38.   “Sign, window” means a sign installed inside or painted
upon an individual glazed surface panel for purposes of viewing.



   39.   “Sign plan” means a plan prepared to scale showing
location and size of all signs, including incidental signs proposed for the
lot.  The sign plan shall show the maximum surface area and height permitted
for each sign.  For lots with more than one business, the sign plan shall
allocate, through formula or square footage, the sign location and allowable
surface area for each portion of the building and building site.



   40.   “Site plan” means a plan prepared to scale, showing
accurately and with complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the
location of all buildings, structures, uses, and principal site development
features proposed for a specific parcel of land.



   41.   “Street frontage” means that boundary of a lot abutting a
public thoroughfare right-of-way which is under the jurisdiction and
maintenance of the agencies of the Federal, State, County and Municipal
government, which may be used by the public in general.  Each side of a lot
so abutting a street shall be considered as a separate frontage; however,
this shall not include alleys. Interstates shall not be construed as street
frontage in this chapter.



   42.   “Structure” means that which is built or constructed, an
edifice or a building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up
or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.



   43.   “Temporary use” means a use established for a specified
period of time, with the intent to discontinue the use at the end of a
designated time period.



   44.   “Use” means the purpose (type and extent) for which land
or a building is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which either land or
a structure is occupied or maintained.



   45.   “Variance” means a discretionary entitlement which permits
the departure from the strict application of the standards contained in this
Code of Ordinances.



   46.   “Yard, required” means the minimum yard specified in each
zone district as set forth in Chapter 165 of this Code of Ordinances.



 



FIGURES REFERRED TO IN SECTION 166.54:



 


Figure 1 – Corner Visual Clearance
 


Figure 2 – Lot, Reversed Corner
 



Figure 3 – Through Lot



 



 



TABLE 1 - PERMITTED SIGNS BY ZONING DISTRICT1 3


(Does not include temporary signs or signs exempt from permits by §166.10.)


Zoning District
 
FREESTANDING SIGNS; one per street frontage
 
4BUILDING SIGNS


Pole Sign
 
Ground Sign
 
Projecting Signs
 
Allowable Area


Setback
 
Height
 
Area


1-2 Family Dwelling Use
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA: Except Home Occupation wall signs – 2 ft2 with no illumination


A, R-1, R-3, R-5 Nonresidential
 
NA
 
15 ft
 
8 ft
 
16 ft2
 
NA
 
12 ft2: Wall signs shall have no illumination


R-MH
 
NA
 
10 ft
 
8 ft
 
16 ft2
 
NA
 
NA


R-7
 
NA
 
15 ft
 
6 ft
 
32 ft2
 
NA
 
32 ft2 Wall sign


C-ORS
 
NA
 
10 ft
 
10 ft
 
32 ft2
 
NA
 
Total building sign area shall not exceed 15% of the wall area on which the
signage is located


C-2
 
NA
 
10 ft
 
8 ft
 
40 ft2
 
NA


20 ft
 
10 ft
 
50 ft2


30 ft
 
12 ft
 
80 ft2


6C-3, C-4, C-R, CPR-3
 
528' tall & 100 ft2
 
Setback
 
Height
 
Area
 
One allowed


10 ft
 
10 ft
 
60 ft2


6CPR-1, 2
 
5NA
 
20 ft
 
12 ft
 
80 ft2


6I-1, I-2, C-WH
 
NA
 
30 ft
 
15 ft
 
100 ft2




 



NA – Not Allowed.



1 Required setbacks unless noted otherwise; 10 ft front, corner and rear lot
lines; 15 ft interior side lot lines; 40 ft from residential lots.



3Illumination permitted unless noted.



4 Building sign definition includes all awning, canopy, marquee, projecting,
wall and window signs.  Window signs are limited to 30% of the window area
on which they are located. 



5I-380 signs allowed only within 50' of interstate ROW: Maximum 50 feet tall
and 400 ft2.



6Additional ground signs are allowed on frontages exceeding 300 ft in C-3,
C-4, I-1, I-2, C-WH, and CPR zones; signs must be 150 feet apart.



 

EDITOR’S NOTE


The Sign Code, adopted October 16, 2002, by Ordinance No. 529, and amendments
thereto, contained in a separate volume, are a part of this Code of
Ordinances and are in full force and effect.  The following ordinances have
been adopted amending the Sign Code of the City.


ORDINANCE
 
ADOPTED
 
SUBJECT




536
 
8-6-03
 
Compliance


575
 
8-3-05
 
Ground Sign Surface Area


615
 
2-20-08
 
Temporary Signs


722
 
3-7-12
 
Sign Types


760
 
10-16-13
 
CPR District Signs


832
 
3-4-15
 
Electronic Message Center Signs


844
 
8-19-15
 
Entire Sign Code Amended


864
 
5-18-16
 
Regulations for All Signs


907
 
8-1-18
 
Regulations for All Signs; Zoning District Sign Regulations


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 




 



 



CHAPTER 167
FILLING, GRADING, AND EROSION CONTROL CODE



 



167.01  Title and Authority
 
167.11  Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Required


167.02  Adoption and Repeals
 
167.12  SWPPP Requirements


167.03  Purpose and Intent
 
167.13  SWPPP Review and Approval Procedure


167.04  Applicability
 
167.14  Requirements for Sites Covered by Iowa DNR General Permit No. 2


167.05  Relationship to Other Requirements
 
167.15  Inspection, Notice to Comply and Notice of Violation


167.06  Severability
 
167.16  Powers of Authority for Inspection


167.07  Effective Date
 
167.17  Repair and Cleanup of Damage


167.08  Construction, Interpretation and Definitions
 
167.18  Enforcement


167.09  Fill Permit Required
 
167.19  Appeals


167.10  Filling Requirements
 
167.20  Fees Established




 



167.01   TITLE AND AUTHORITY.



   This chapter shall be known as “City of Hiawatha Filling, Grading,
and Erosion Control Code,” and has been referred to as the “Grading
Code” when a shortened title is necessary.  This chapter is adopted by
authority of and for the purposes set forth in the Code of Iowa and shall be
codified as Chapter 167 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



167.02   ADOPTION AND REPEALS.



   This chapter establishes and provides for the administration,
enforcement, and amendment of filling, grading, and erosion control
requirements; and repeals all ordinances or resolutions in conflict therewith.



167.03   PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   Soil erosion contributes to:  the impairment of drainage ways; an
increase in road and storm sewer maintenance costs; the destruction and
obstruction to traveled roadways, creating a potential hazard for vehicular
traffic; the contamination and degradation of land surfaces and streams,
flooding, and dusty conditions.  Requirements are established by this
chapter in an effort to control erosion and sediment transport.  Unless
exempted in this chapter, a Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Plan will
be required prior to any proposed land-disturbing activity.  This chapter
also establishes requirements for grading, filling, fill material, and
obtaining fill permits.  These requirements include use of suitable fill
material, stable slope construction, proper site drainage, and usability of
public and private easements.



167.04   APPLICABILITY.



   A filling, grading and erosion control permit must be in conformance
with the standards, procedures, exemptions and other requirements of this
chapter.



167.05   RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   1.   Relationship to Other Laws.  Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as exempting any person from other requirements of the City of
Hiawatha or State and Federal laws and regulations.  To the extent the
requirements of this chapter differ from other applicable City, State, or
Federal requirements, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.



   2.   Minimum Requirements.  The provisions of this chapter shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, morals, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare.



167.06   SEVERABILITY.



   It is the intention of the City Council that each section, paragraph,
sentence, clause, and provision of this chapter is separable and if any
provision is held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision
shall not affect the remainder of this chapter, or any part thereof, other
than that affected by such decision.



167.07   EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This Grading Code shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval, and publication, as provided by law.



167.08   CONSTRUCTION, INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS.



   Wherever used in this chapter the terms listed below will have the
meanings indicated.  Words using the present tense shall include the future;
the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the singular;
the masculine gender shall include the feminine; the term “shall” is
always mandatory, and the term “may” is permissive.



   1.   “Applicant” means any individual, firm, corporation,
association, or partnership, or proprietor of land to undergo land-disturbing
activities.



   2.   “Certified professional erosion and sediment control
specialist” means a specialist in the area of soil erosion and sediment
control, as certified by the Soil and Water Conservation Society and the
International Erosion Control Association.



   3.   “City” means the City of Hiawatha, Iowa.



   4.   “City Council” means the City Council of the City of
Hiawatha, Iowa.



   5.   “City Engineer” means the city engineer for the City of
Hiawatha, Iowa.



   6.   “Civil Engineer” means a professional engineer licensed in
the State of Iowa to practice civil engineering.



   7.   “Clearing and grubbing” means removal of unwanted growth,
in the form of trees, wood, shrubs, brush, or stumps on a site.



   8.   “Design professional” means a licensed civil engineer,
registered landscape architect, or certified professional erosion and
sediment control specialist.



   9.   "Design Standards Manual" means the Engineering Standards
adopted by Resolution of the Hiawatha City Council in accordance with
Hiawatha Code Section 165.58.



(Ord. 924 - Feb. 19 Supp.)



   10.   “Development” means the alteration of land from its
existing state.



   11.   “Disturbed area” means the part of a site on which
land-disturbing activities take place.  All land area that is to be
disturbed at any time during the project is to be counted in determining the
disturbed area, even if part of the land will be stabilized before another
part is disturbed.



   12.   “Erosion” means the wearing away of the land surface by
running water, wind, ice, gravity, or other geological, natural, or manmade
agents.



   13.   “Erosion Control Officer” means the City Engineer,
Community Development Director, or designee.



   14.   “Erosion control permit” means a major erosion control
permit or a minor erosion control permit.



   15.   “Filling” means placing materials to effectively change
the site contours.  This includes placing materials from the site itself, or
from off site.



   16.   “Fill material” means soil, stone, rock, brick, Portland
cement, or asphaltic concrete, or sand.



   17.   “Fill permit” means a permit issued by the City of
Hiawatha to engage in filling on a site.



   18.   “Fill site” means land upon which fill materials are
placed and which placement does not require a sanitary disposal permit issued
by the State of Iowa.



   19.   “Final stabilization” means all land-disturbing activities
at the site have been completed and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover
with a density of 70 percent for the area has been established or equivalent
stabilization measures have been employed.



   20.   “Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Plan” means a plan
for property upon which land disturbing activities are proposed.  The Plan
will indicate materials, construction phasing, grading and drainage, and
erosion and sediment control best management practices according to the
Design Standards Manual.



   21.   “General Permit No. 2” means a General Permit No. 2, Storm
Water Discharge Associated with Industrial Activity for Construction
Activities, as authored and administered by the Iowa DNR.



   22.   “Iowa DNR” means the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.



   23.   “Land-disturbing activity” means clearing, grading,
excavating, filling, or other construction activities on a site.



   24.   “Landscape architect” means a professional landscape
architect, registered in the State of Iowa to practice landscape architecture.



   25.   “Major erosion control permit” means a permit issued by
the City of Hiawatha to engage in land-disturbing activities on a site with
one acre or greater disturbed area.



   26.   “Minor erosion control permit” means a permit issued by
the City of Hiawatha to engage in land-disturbing activities on a site of
greater than 6,000 square feet and less than one acre disturbed area.



   27.   “Responsible party” means one or more persons who have
applied for or hold a city erosion control permit or who own, control, or
perform work on a site.



   28.   “Sediment” means solid material, both natural and manmade,
that is in suspension, has been transported, or has been moved from its
origin by air, water, gravity, or ice and has been deposited by the action of
water or wind.



   29.   “Site” means property where land-disturbing activities
take place.



   30.   "Standard Specifications" means the Engineering Standards
adopted by Resolution of the Hiawatha City Council in accordance with
Hiawatha Code Section 165.58.



(Ord. 924 - Feb. 19 Supp.)



   31.   “Stabilization” or “stabilized” means vegetative cover
with a density of 70 percent has been established or equivalent stabilization
measures have been employed.



   32.   “Storm water drainage system” means all manmade facilities
and structures and all natural watercourses that are owned by the City or
that are within a drainage easement owned by the City and that are used for
collection, storage, treatment, and conveyance of storm water from any area
through any area.  This includes, without limitation, all storm water
facilities, canals, creeks, curb and gutter, dams, ditches, floodwalls,
flumes, gulches, gullies, levees, ravines, siphons, streams, streets, and
swales.



   33.   “Storm water facilities” means anything built or used for
the control of storm water, including (without limitation) catch basins,
channels, culverts, detention basins, energy dissipation structures, inlets,
manholes, outlets, pipes and other conduits, retention basins, and roadways
and gutters.



   34.   “Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan” means a document
conforming to the requirements therefore contained in General Permit No. 2
and this chapter, prepared and certified by a design professional, as defined
herein.



   35.   “SWPPP” means the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.



167.09   FILL PERMIT REQUIRED.



   1.   Except as provided in subsection 6 of this section, no person
shall fill upon any site without obtaining a valid fill permit.



   2.   All fill permits shall be issued by the City of Hiawatha
Building Official upon approval of a completed application for a fill permit
on a form provided by the City.  The application shall be signed by the
title holders of all sites to be filled, together with the applicant, if
different from the title holders.  The application fee for fill permits and
renewals shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



   3.   A fill permit application shall include the following:



      A.   A completed application for fill permit on a form
provided by the City Building Department.



      B.   A dimensioned drawing including the following:



         (1)   Property address or legal description.



         (2)   Property lines and any existing easements of
record.



         (3)   Limits of fill area.



         (4)   Existing and proposed ground elevations.



         (5)   Other information as required by the City Building
Official or City Engineer.



      C.   The application shall include a Grading, Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan as set forth in Section 167.11 of this chapter.



   4.   Fill permits shall be valid for a period of one year from the
date of issuance and may be renewed as provided for herein.  A renewal
application must include those items required in subsection 3 of this
section, and the following:



      A.   Payment of the Renewal Fee.



      B.   Current dimensioned drawing of the original plan as
modified.



   5.   The Building Department may revoke a fill permit or decline
renewal if unacceptable materials are being deposited at the site, or if the
permittee has failed to comply with any of the regulations set forth in this
chapter, or any requirement of law, statute or regulation.



   6.   The following activities are exempt from the requirements of
this chapter:



      A.   Corp production activities.



      B.   Cemetery graves.



      C.   Emergencies posing an immediate danger to life or
property, or substantial flood or fire hazards.



      D.   Total fill quantity of less than 25 cubic yards in a
12-month time period.



      E.   Disturbed area of less than ¼ acre.



      F.   Public improvements work within public right-of-way and
easements.



167.10   FILLING REQUIREMENTS.



   1.   Clearing and grubbing shall be performed according to Part 3 of
Section 01400 of the Standard Specifications, except as provided in this
chapter.



   2.   Fill material shall be placed according to the Grading, Erosion
and Sediment Control Plan as accepted by the City.



   3.   Interim filling during construction shall be placed in a safe
manner.  Soil stabilization, inspection and maintenance of erosion control,
and soil stabilization where work has been suspended shall be according to
the Design Standards Manual.



   4.   Finish grading shall be according to Part 2 and Part 3 of
Section 02900 of the Standard Specifications.



   5.   Finish slopes shall not exceed a 3:1 ratio on any slope facing
and terminating within 15 feet of a property line.



   6.   Unacceptable Fill Materials.



      A.   Fill materials shall not include hazardous waste,
synthetic material, metal, and organic material other than natural topsoil
incidental to excavation except as noted below.  Concrete, brick, tile, and
other manufactured inert material shall not be greater than 18 inches in its
greatest dimension.  Asphalt paving material shall not be used for bank
stabilization or where the final location will be below the known water table.



      B.   Trees may be buried within the site they originate from,
provided they are not buried within structural footprints or in earthwork
providing structural support, such as for building foundations and
roadways.  Trees shall not be placed in the trench backfill for sewers,
culverts, and other underground utilities.  Trees shall not be imported
onsite from offsite for use as fill.



167.11   GRADING, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN REQUIRED.



   1.   No person shall engage in land-disturbing activities within the
City unless a Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Plan has been approved by
the Erosion Control Officer and permit issued.



   2.   All erosion control measures must be in place before any
additional work is started.



   3.   Sites with land disturbance shall fall into one of two
categories as listed below:



      A.   Major Erosion Control Permit Is Required.



         (1)   Sites or common plans of development or sale that
will result in a total disturbed area of one or more acres shall obtain a
major erosion control permit prior to any land-disturbing activities.



         (2)   All major erosion control permits shall be issued
by the City upon approval of a completed application for erosion control
permit on a form provided by the City.  The application shall be signed by
the title holder of the site, together with the applicant, if different from
the title holder.



         (3)   Sites required to obtain an erosion control permit
shall comply with Section 167.14 (Requirements for Sites Covered by the Iowa
DNR General Permit No. 2) herein.



         (4)   A major erosion control permit application shall
include the following:



            a.   A completed application for erosion control
permit on a form provided by the City.



            b.   A SWPPP conforming to the requirements of
this chapter and the requirements of General Permit No. 2.  If a SWPPP for
the site has previously been submitted to the City and has not been modified,
the applicant shall submit a signed and dated statement that the SWPPP has
not been modified, in which case the SWPPP need not be resubmitted.



            c.   Payment of the permit fee.



         (5)   The permittee shall provide the erosion control
officer with all materials submitted as part of a notice of discontinuation
when such a notice is filed with the Iowa DNR.



      B.   Minor Erosion Control Permit Is Required.  Sites or
common plans of development or sale that will result in a disturbed area of
greater than 6,000 square feet but less than one acre shall obtain a minor
erosion control permit prior to any land-disturbing activity, except:



         (1)   Filling or construction within floodplain limits,
as established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and in the Hiawatha
Unified Development Code (Chapter 165 of this Code of Ordinances), will
require a separate additional permit under that chapter, in addition to the
permits required by this chapter.



         (2)   For work that is specifically covered by a City
demolition permit, building permit, NPDES permit or approved plan of
improvements containing a SWPPP, a minor erosion control permit is not
required.  However, site filling and grading done pursuant to these approved
permits and plans shall meet the requirements of this chapter.



   4.   All Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Plans must be
reviewed and approved by the Erosion Control Officer prior to the issuing of
permit and commencement of land-disturbing activities.



   5.   All Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control Plans shall include a
drainage plan prepared according to the Design Standards Manual.  The
drainage plan shall be accompanied by a drainage report prepared according to
the City Engineering Department Drainage Report Process Handbook.  This
Handbook is available in the City Engineering Department.  The drainage
report shall, at a minimum, demonstrate the design of proposed grading,
erosion, and sediment control, if constructed per plan, is not expected to
adversely impact adjacent properties.



167.12   SWPPP REQUIREMENTS.



   Every SWPPP submitted to the City in support of an application for a
major or minor erosion control permit:



   1.   Shall contain complete 24-hour contact information for the site
owner and the person in responsible charge of providing and maintaining
sedimentation and erosion control for the site.  The permittee shall inform
the Erosion Control Officer within 7 calendar days of any change in this
contact information.



   2.   Shall comply with all current minimum mandatory requirements
for SWPPPs promulgated by the Iowa DNR in connection with General Permit No.
2, including those published as Summary Guidance for General Permit No. 2 by
the Iowa DNR.



   The Erosion Control Officer may develop policies modifying these
requirements for sites with a disturbed area less than one acre.



   3.   Shall comply with all other applicable State or Federal permit
requirements in existence at the time of application.



   4.   Shall include a drainage plan prepared according to the Design
Standards Manual.  The drainage plan shall be accompanied by a drainage
report.  The drainage report shall, at a minimum, demonstrate the design of
proposed grading, erosion, and sediment control, if constructed per plan, is
not expected to adversely impact adjacent properties.



   5.   Shall be prepared by a design professional, as defined herein;
and



   6.   Shall include within the SWPPP a signed and dated certification
by the person preparing the SWPPP that the SWPPP complies with all
requirements of this section.



   The SWPPP shall be modified by a design professional (as defined
herein) as required in General Permit No. 2.  Any modification of a SWPPP
shall meet the requirements above.



167.13   SWPPP REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE.



   The applicant shall submit a SWPPP for the site, meeting the
requirements established in the Design Standards Manual, to the Erosion
Control Officer for review and approval, as follows:



   1.   The City Engineer shall review the submittal for compliance
with the requirements of a SWPPP as set forth in the Design Standards
Manual.  Following the review, the Erosion Control Officer may return
comments to the design professional.



   2.   Following receipt of comments from the Erosion Control Officer,
the applicant shall provide a revised submittal in accordance with any
requested revisions.



   3.   The City Engineer or Building Official may require supporting
documentation as needed to demonstrate conformance with these requirements. 
Issuance of an erosion control permit may be delayed pending receipt of the
documentation.



   4.   If the submittal is complete, and meets the requirements as set
forth herein, the Erosion Control Officer will issue required permits.



167.14   REQUIREMENTS FOR SITES COVERED BY IOWA DNR GENERAL PERMIT NO. 2.



   1.   The City shall not allow any land-disturbing activity on a site
for which coverage under General Permit No. 2 is required, nor shall the City
issue any permit, authorization, or license allowing such activity, until the
site owner has obtained coverage for the site under General Permit No. 2 from
the Iowa DNR.



   2.   Any responsible party who is required to obtain – or has
obtained – coverage under General Permit No. 2 shall comply with all the
requirements of General Permit No. 2.  Failure to do so is a violation of
this section.



   3.   For sites covered under General Permit No. 2 where the
ownership changes, the Enforcement Officer must be notified of the title
transfer within 30 days, except in the case of single-lot sales, which shall
be recorded on the SWPPP.



   The new owner shall be subject to all terms and conditions of the
erosion control permit.  A copy of the notice of transfer that was sent to
the Enforcement Officer shall be included in the SWPPP.



   For sites that are part of a larger common plan of development, such as
a housing or commercial development project, if a permittee transfers
ownership of all or any part of property subject to an erosion control
permit, both the permittee and transferee shall be responsible for compliance
with the provisions of General Permit No. 2 and the erosion control permit
for that portion of the project which has been transferred, including when
the transferred property is less than one acre in area.  If the new owner
agrees in writing to be solely responsible for compliance with the provisions
of General Permit No. 2 and the erosion control permit for the property which
has been transferred, then the existing permittee shall be relieved of
responsibility for compliance with General Permit No. 2 and the erosion
control permit for the transferred property, from and after the date the
transfer of responsibility is attached to the SWPPP.



167.15   INSPECTION, NOTICE TO COMPLY AND NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   1.   The Erosion Control Officer may inspect the site in response to
reports from third parties or at other times, at the Erosion Control
Officer’s discretion.



   2.   The Erosion Control Officer may issue a notice to comply to the
responsible party or parties, describing any problems and specifying a date
and time by which compliance must be achieved.



      A.   The Erosion Control Officer may modify a notice to comply
and may authorize, in writing, an extension to the specified date and time by
which compliance must be achieved.



      B.   Failure to achieve compliance by the specified date and
time is a violation of this section.



   3.   The Erosion Control Officer shall, upon determination of any
violation of this section, issue a notice of violation in writing to the
responsible party or parties, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it.



      A.   The notice of violation may:



         (1)   Order the discontinuance of any illegal work,
specifying a date and time for such discontinuance;



         (2)   Require the repair and cleanup of any damage done
due to failure to comply with General Permit No. 2, specifying a date and
time for completion of repair and cleanup;



         (3)   Order the withholding of any building or occupancy
permits for the site; and



         (4)   Order the discontinuance of any or all work at the
site, including at the Erosion Control Officer’s discretion work not
directly related to the cause and prevention of erosion and sedimentation,
except work necessary to achieve compliance and to repair and clean up
damage, specifying a date and time for such discontinuance to commence and
conditions for such discontinuance to cease.



      B.   Failure to comply with any order in a notice of violation
is an additional violation.  Each day of such failure constitutes a separate
violation.



      C.   The Erosion Control Officer may modify a notice of
violation and may authorize, in writing, an extension to the specified dates
and times therein.



      D.   The notice of violation shall, where necessary or
appropriate, recommend to the City Attorney the institution of legal or
equitable actions that may be required for the enforcement of this section.



   4.   Communication to a responsible party’s employee, partner,
attorney, agent, contractor, or subcontractor shall be regarded as
communication to the responsible party for the purpose of this section.



   5.   Communication to one responsible party shall be regarded as
communication to each responsible party for the purpose of this section.



167.16   POWERS OF AUTHORITY FOR INSPECTION.



   1.   Right of Entry.  The City Engineer or Building Official and
authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.  The applicant, owner, or titleholder
shall be deemed to have consented to such entry by submission of an
application for any permit or plan contemplated in this chapter.  Barring or
delaying such inspection is a violation of this section.



   2.   Access to Records.  The Erosion Control Officer shall have
access to and be able to copy any records that must be kept under the
conditions of General Permit No. 2 within 3 business hours, where a business
hour is any hour between 8:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on a non-holiday weekday.



167.17   REPAIR AND CLEANUP OF DAMAGE.



   1.   For any site, whether or not covered by an erosion control
permit or other storm water discharge permit, the City may clean up eroded
sediment or tracked soil deposited on public property if:



      A.   Corrective action has not been completed within 24 hours
or within an extended deadline granted in writing by the City; or



      B.   In the judgment of the City Engineer, damage to the
environment is ongoing and prompt corrective action would be intended to
reduce such damage.



   2.   If the City cleans up such material deposited off-site, the
City will invoice the responsible party or parties for the City’s actual
costs, including overhead, which may be recorded as an assessment against the
property and constitute a lien thereon.



   3.   Failure to pay an invoice under this chapter within 30 days
shall constitute a violation of this section.



167.18   ENFORCEMENT.



   1.   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by
civil action including an action for injunctive relief.



   2.   In any civil enforcement action, administrative or judicial,
the City shall be entitled to recover its attorneys’ fees and costs from a
person who is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to have
violated this chapter.



   3.   Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced
as a municipal infraction within the meaning of Section 364.22 of the Code of
Iowa, and pursuant to Chapter 4 of the Hiawatha Code of Ordinances.



167.19   APPEALS.



   Anyone claiming to be aggrieved by any determination made by the
Erosion Control Officer may, within 5 days of the date of such determination,
appeal to the City Administrator or designee and, in writing, state his or
her reasons for requesting such order to be rescinded or modified.  The City
Administrator or designee shall review the determination of the Erosion
Control Officer, and if reasonable grounds exist, shall modify, withdraw or
order compliance with said determination.  Anyone claiming to be aggrieved
by the determination made by the City Administrator or designee shall have
such rights of appeal as provided by the law.



167.20   FEES ESTABLISHED.



   The City Council may establish fees by resolution for permit
applications, permit renewal applications, inspections, and for the review
and processing of documents necessitated by this chapter.  When such fees
are established, a submittal shall not be considered unless the appropriate
fee has been submitted to the City.



 

EDITOR’S NOTE


The Filling, Grading and Erosion Control Code, adopted August 21, 2002, by
Ordinance No. 522, and amendments thereto, contained in a separate volume,
are a part of this Code of Ordinances and are in full force and effect.  The
following ordinances have been adopted amending the Filling, Grading and
Erosion Control Code of the City.


ORDINANCE
 
ADOPTED
 
SUBJECT




647
 
8-19-09
 
Filling, Grading and Erosion Control


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 




 



 



CHAPTER 168
OUTDOOR LIGHTING CODE



 



168.01  Title
 
168.09  Recreational Facilities


168.02  Purpose and Intent
 
168.10  Special Light Sources


168.03  Definitions
 
168.11  Exemptions


168.04  General Regulations
 
168.12  Grandfathering of Nonconforming Luminaires


168.05  Light Trespass
 
168.13  Development Permits


168.06  Control of Glare – Luminaire Design
 
168.14  Variance


168.07  Buildings and Vertical Structures
 
168.15  Field Verification


168.08  Street Lighting
 
168.16  Penalties




 



168.01   TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “City of Hiawatha Outdoor Lighting
Code,” and is referred to herein as the “Lighting Code” when a
shortened title is necessary.



168.02   PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   To protect and preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the
City’s residents, and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health,
welfare, comfort, and convenience of its residents, this chapter is intended
to minimize glare, minimize light trespass, and establish regulations for
outdoor lighting.  All outdoor lighting shall be installed with the idea of
being a “good neighbor,” to keep unnecessary direct light from shining
onto abutting properties or streets.  This chapter encourages lighting
practices that will reduce light pollution by reducing up-light, glare, and
over lighting, and sets standards for outdoor lighting so that its use does
not interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of property within the
City.  It is recognized that this chapter might need to be revised to
accommodate lighting designs and fixtures that are newly developed after the
adoption of this chapter.



168.03   DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, terms used are defined as follows:



   1.   “After-hours lighting” means a reduction of standard light
levels by 75% during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. through the means
of a control system or systems for outdoor general area lighting.



   2.   “Candlepower” means luminous intensity of a light in a
specified direction measured in candelas (cd) (e.g., an ordinary wax candle
has a candlepower of one candela).



   3.   “Cut off angle” (of a luminaire) means the angle, measured
up from nadir, between the vertical axis and the first line of sight at which
the light source is not visible, displayed as follows:







   4.   “Cutoff fixture” means a luminaire which has a light
distribution where the candlepower does not exceed 2.5% of the lamps’ rated
initial lumen output at an angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and does not
exceed 10% of the lamps’ rated initial lumen output at a vertical angle of
80 degrees above nadir.  This applies to all lateral angles around the
luminaire.



   5.   “Luminous flux” means a quantitative expression of the
brilliance of a source of visible light measured in lumens.



   6.   “Foot candle” (FC) means a unit of illumination when one
lumen is evenly distributed on a one square foot area.



   7.   “Forward throw” means any downlight luminaire whose
distribution pattern is Type IV (as defined by the IESNA).  These luminaires
have minimal backlight effect, thereby reducing light trespass.



   8.   “Full cutoff fixture” means a luminaire which has a light
distribution where the candlepower does not exceed 0% of the lamps’ rated
initial lumen output at an angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and does not
exceed 10% of the lamps’ rated initial lumen output at a vertical angle of
80 degrees above nadir.  This applies to all lateral angles around the
luminaire.



   9.   “Glare” means the sensation produced by luminances within
the visual field that are sufficiently greater than the luminance to which
the eyes are adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual
performance and visibility.



   10.   “IESNA” means the Illuminating Engineering Society of
North America.



   11.   “Illuminance” means lumens per unit area incident on a
surface, measured in foot candles (1FC = 1 lm/sf).



   12.   “Illumination” is an alternative term for illuminance,
most commonly used to avoid confusion between illuminance and luminance
(e.g., it can be used in a qualitative sense to designate the act of
illuminating or quantitatively by stating level of illumination).



   13.   “Light trespass” means light falling beyond the intended
target area where it is not wanted or needed, including, by way of
illustration but not necessarily limited to, across property boundaries.



   14.   “Lumen” (lm) means a unit of luminous flux (e.g., 1800
lumens is the approximate equivalent to a 100 watt incandescent bulb).



   15.   “Luminaire” means a complete lighting unit consisting of a
lamp or lamps together with the components designed to distribute the light,
such as reflectors, refractors, lenses, etc.



   16.   “Luminance” means the luminous intensity of a surface in a
given direction per unit of projected area (e.g., candela/sf).  This is not
to be confused with ILLUMINANCE.



   17.   “Mounting height” means the vertical distance from the
face of the luminaire to the surface area intended to be lit.



   18.   “Nadir” means the vertical line projecting downward to the
ground from the center of the lens of a luminaire, displayed as follows:







   19.   “Standard light level” means maximum light level approved
for the property.



168.04   GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   1.   After-Hours Lighting.  The hours between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. are defined as after-hours and must comply with after-hours lighting
definition.  Businesses open between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. are exempt,
however they must comply with the requirements of this chapter within one
hour of closing.



   2.   Mounting Heights.  The maximum luminaire mounting height shall
be limited to twenty-eight (28) feet for all luminaires, with the exception
of sports lighting, which shall follow IESNA guidelines.



   3.   Light Sources.  The use of incandescent lamps shall not be
permitted for outdoor lighting except for residential properties.  In
addition, low pressure sodium and mercury vapor HID lamps shall not be
permitted in all cases.



168.05   LIGHT TRESSPASS.



   1.   Residential and Public Right-of-Way.  Illumination measured at
the property line adjoining residential parcels and public rights-of-way
shall not exceed 0.5 horizontal foot candles and 2.0 vertical foot candles.



   2.   Commercial, Industrial and Agricultural.  Illumination
measured at the property line adjoining commercial, industrial, and
agricultural parcels shall not exceed 1.0 horizontal foot candles and 4.0
vertical foot candles.



   3.   Compliance Methods.  Methods of complying with the
requirements include, by way of illustration but are not necessarily limited
to, fixture shielding, directional control designed into the fixture, fixture
location, fixture height, and fixture aim.



168.06   CONTROL OF GLARE – LUMINAIRE DESIGN.



   Any luminaire rated at more than 1800 lumens shall be a full cut-off
fixture with the exception of those used for lighting recreational
facilities, which shall comply with Section 168.09 of this chapter.



168.07   BUILDINGS AND VERTICAL STRUCTURES.



   Luminaires intended to illuminate buildings and other vertical
structures shall:



   1.   Be located within five (5) feet of the building or vertical
structure that is being illuminated;



   2.   Not allow illumination to extend beyond the intended building
or vertical structure;



   3.   Not exceed an average maintained vertical foot candle
measurement of ten (10); and



   4.   Not have a vertical foot candle measurement that exceeds thirty
(30).



168.08   STREET LIGHTING.



   Street lighting owned, operated, maintained, or leased by the City of
Hiawatha shall be exempt.  The City may establish via resolution guidelines
for public lighting.



168.09   RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.



   1.   Lighted recreational facilities shall satisfy the requirements
set forth in the most current editions of the Illuminating Engineering
Society of North America (IESNA) RP-6 Recommended Practice for Sports and
Recreational Area Lighting and the IESNA Lighting Handbook.  Appropriate
lighting criteria shall be selected based on the Class of Play of the
facility and participants, as defined by the IESNA.



   2.   No outdoor recreational facility, public or private, shall be
illuminated after 11:00 p.m. except to conclude a specific activity which is
in progress under such illumination prior to 11:00 p.m.



   3.   Luminaires shall be installed to meet the criteria of a cutoff
fixture.



   4.   Luminaires shall be aimed no greater than a distance two (2)
mounting heights or less from the base of the pole (a maximum angle of 63
degrees up from nadir or a minimum of 27 degrees down from horizontal),
displayed as follows:







   5.   Light trespass attributable to the recreational facility
lighting system shall not exceed one-half (0.5) initial horizontal foot
candles and two (2.0) initial vertical foot candles on adjacent properties
within a residential zoning district, except public ways.



   6.   Initial illumination levels shall not exceed the target levels
specified by the IESNA by more than 30% to account for light loss factors
such as lamp lumen depreciation and luminaire dirt depreciation.



168.10   SPECIAL LIGHT SOURCES.



   1.   Laser Source Light.  The use of laser source light or any
similar high intensity light is prohibited.



   2.   Towers.  Lighting on towers is prohibited except as required
by regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration.



   3.   Searchlights.  The operation of searchlights for advertising
is prohibited.



   4.   Variances.  As with other light sources, variances from the
provisions of this section may be granted as provided in Section 168.14.



168.11   EXEMPTIONS.



   1.   All areas that have a luminaire producing 1800 lumens or less
shall be exempt from this chapter.



   2.   All temporary emergency lighting needed by the Police or Fire
Departments or other emergency services, as well as all vehicular luminaires,
shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.



   3.   All hazard-warning luminaires required by Federal regulatory
agencies are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.



   4.   A building or structure that has been designated for historic
preservation by the City of Hiawatha, the State of Iowa, or the Federal
Government shall be exempt from the full cutoff fixture requirements, if an
historic restoration cannot be achieved by other means.



   5.   Any Federal, State or local laws that conflict with this
chapter shall take precedence over the conflicting provisions of this chapter.



168.12   GRANDFATHERING OF NONCONFORMING LUMINAIRES.



   Except as provided below, all outdoor light fixtures lawfully installed
prior to and operable on the effective date of this chapter are exempt from
the requirements of this chapter.



   1.   There shall be no change in use or lamp type, or any
replacement (except for same-type and same-output lamp replacement) or
structural alteration made, without conforming to all applicable requirements
of this chapter.  If more than 50 percent of the luminaires on a parcel of
property are being replaced within a 12-month period of time, such replaced
luminaires must comply with the provisions of this chapter, even if the
replacements are of the same type and same output.  Further, if the property
is abandoned, or if there is a change in use of the property, the provisions
of the chapter will apply when the abandonment ceases or the new use
commences.



   2.   All lighting fixtures in zoning districts (other than
residential) that are capable of being aimed must be aimed in a manner than
complies with this chapter within one year of enactment of the outdoor
lighting ordinance.



   3.   All lighting fixtures in zoning districts (other than
residential) that can be converted to full cutoff fixtures by adding a
shielding device manufactured by the original equipment manufacturer must do
so within two years of enactment of the outdoor lighting ordinance.



168.13   DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.



   1.   Submission Contents.  The applicant for any permit or site
plan required by any provision of the ordinances of the City of Hiawatha
involving non-residential outdoor lighting shall submit one outdoor lighting
plan for operating hours, and one outdoor lighting plan for after-hours
lighting (as part of the application for site plan or permit). Each outdoor
lighting plan must provide evidence the proposed work or activity will comply
with this chapter. The outdoor lighting plans shall be submitted to the
building official for approval and issuance of an outdoor lighting permit. 
The outdoor lighting plans shall include:



      A.   Plans indicating the location, and the type of
illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other
devices;



      B.   A detailed description of the illuminating devices,
fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices.  The description
shall include manufacturer’s catalog cuts and drawings, including sections
when requested;



      C.   A point-by-point footcandle array, photometric data, such
as that furnished by manufacturers, showing the angle of the designed full
cutoff, aiming angle and light emissions.



   2.   Additional Submission.  The above required plans, descriptions
and data shall be sufficiently complete to enable the building official to
readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this chapter
will be satisfied.  If such plans, descriptions and data do not enable the
building official to make this determination, the applicant shall
additionally submit certified reports of tests proving compliance.  Such
tests shall have been performed and certified by a recognized testing
laboratory.



   3.   Luminaire Substitution. Should any outdoor light fixture, or
the type of light source therein, be changed after an outdoor lighting permit
has been issued, a change request must be submitted to the building official
for approval, together with adequate information to assure compliance with
this chapter, which must be received prior to substitution.



168.14   VARIANCE.



   1.   Purpose.  The Board of Adjustment, upon appeal in specific
cases and after public hearing, may temporarily vary the regulations of this
chapter in harmony with the general purpose and intent where the Board makes
findings of fact in accordance with the standards hereinafter prescribed, and
further finds that there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships
in the way of carrying out the literal provisions of this chapter.



   2.   Application for Variance and Notice of Hearing.  An
application for a temporary variance shall be filed, in writing, with the
Building Inspector.  The application shall be in the number of copies and
contain such information as the Board may, by rule, require.  The Board
shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the request for a
temporary variance.  Notice of the time and place of such public hearing
shall be published at least once in a publication of general circulation
within the City of Hiawatha, said publication to be made not less than 7 or
more than 20 days before the date of the hearing.  The Board shall reach its
decision within 45 days from the date of the hearing unless such time is
extended by mutual consent of the petitioner and the Board.



   3.   Authorized Variance.  Temporary variances from the regulations
of this chapter may be granted by the Board.  The Board may temporarily
vary, modify, or waive the requirements of this chapter so that substantial
justice may be done and the public interest is secured provided, however,
that such temporary variance, modification, or waiver will not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.  In granting a
temporary variance, the Board may impose such additional conditions as are
necessary to secure substantially the objectives of the requirements
temporarily varied, modified, or waived.  In no event shall a variance be
granted which:



      A.   Exceeds five (5) days; and



      B.   Is substantially similar to a variance that has
previously been granted within the prior twelve (12) months.



168.15   FIELD VERIFICATION.



   If measurements on private property are not possible or practical,
light level measurements may be made at the boundary of the public street
right-of-way that adjoins the property or at any other location on the
property.  All measurements shall be made thirty-six (36) inches above the
ground.  Horizontal measurements shall be taken with the meter held parallel
to the ground pointing up.  Vertical measurements shall be taken with the
meter oriented towards the brightest light bank.  The meter shall have
cosine and color correction and have an accuracy tolerance of no greater than
plus or minus five percent (5%).  Measurements shall be taken with a light
meter than has been calibrated within the year.  Light levels are specified,
calculated, and measured in foot candles (FC).  All FC values are initial
foot candles.



168.16   PENALTIES.



   1.   Violation.  It is a municipal infraction for any person to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter.  Both the landowner and
occupant of real estate on which a violation of this chapter exists shall
have committed a municipal infraction.  Each day during which the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.



   2.   Violations and Legal Actions.  If, after investigation, the
City of Hiawatha finds that any provision of this chapter is being violated,
the City of Hiawatha shall give written notice of such violation to the owner
and/or to the occupant of such premises, demanding that the violation be
abated within ninety (90) days of the date of the written notice.  If the
violation is not abated within the 90-day period, the City of Hiawatha shall
institute actions and proceedings to enjoin, restrain, and abate such
violation and to collect the penalties provided for in paragraph 3 below for
such violations.



   3.   Penalties.  A violation of this chapter, or any provision
thereof, resulting in the owner and/or occupant of the premises receiving
written notice of violation, as provided for in paragraph 2 above, shall be
punishable by a civil penalty of $500.00 for a first violation thereof.  Any
subsequent violation resulting in the same person or entity receiving another
notice of violation, as provided for in paragraph 2 above, shall be
punishable by a civil penalty of $750.00.  Each day, after the expiration of
the 90-day period provided for in paragraph 2 above, that a violation occurs,
or is permitted to exist, constitutes a separate violation for the purpose of
civil penalty and is punishable by an additional civil penalty in the same
amount imposed for the first day of the violation.



 

EDITOR’S NOTE


The Lighting Code, adopted August 6, 2003, by Ordinance No. 535, and
amendments thereto, contained in a separate volume, are a part of this Code
of Ordinances and are in full force and effect.  The following ordinances
have been adopted amending the Lighting Code of the City.


ORDINANCE
 
ADOPTED
 
SUBJECT




795
 
8-20-14
 
Development Permits


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 


 
 




 



 


