12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 1/358
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 19 - 10
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF MASON CITY, IOWA, BY REPEALING TITLE 10 “BUILDING
REGULATIONS”, CHAPTER 2: “BUILDING CODES”, ARTICLE F: “HOUSING CODE” SECTION 3: “AMENDMENTS TO CODE;
CHAPTER 1”AND SECTION 8: “AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE; CHAPTER 6:” AND ADOPTING A NEW SECTION 3 AND
SECTION 8 IN LIEU THEREOF
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa:
Section 1: That the City Code of the City of Mason City, Iowa, should be and the same is hereby amended by repealing Title 10: “Building
Regulations”, Chapter 2: “Building Codes”, Article F: “Housing Code”, Section 3: “Amendments to Code: Chapter 1” and adopting new Section 3 in lieu
thereof as follows:
"TITLE 10
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE F. HOUSING CODE
10-2F-3: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; Chapter 1: Chapter 1, Scope And Administration, of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code (or the most current
edition) is adopted, except as hereby amended, deleted, modified, revised, or added to, as specifically set forth as follows:
A. 101.1, Title: Delete and replace. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Mason City, Iowa,
hereinafter referred to as "the Housing Code", or "this Code".
B. 103.1, General: Delete and replace. Enforcement and administration of this Code shall be the responsibility of the Code official, under direction of the
Director of Development Services.
C. 103.5, Fees: Delete and replace. The fees for activities and services performed by the Development Services Department in carrying out its
responsibilities under this Code shall be determined from time to time by resolution adopted by the City Council.
D. 106.3, Prosecution Of Violation: Delete and replace last sentence only. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal
means or resource.
E. 108.4 Placarding: Delete and replace. Upon failure of the owner, owner’s authorized agent or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions
within the time given, the code official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing a statement of the penalties provided for
occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
F. 108.4.1 Placard removal: delete and replace. The code official shall remove the placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the placarding
action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a placard without the approval of the code official shall be subject to the
penalties provided by this code.
G. 109.1, Imminent Danger: delete and replace first and second sentence only. When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure
or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the
occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of
explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, or when
the occupants are using the premises for illegal activities or storage of illegal substances that may pose a danger to the occupants or persons in
proximity thereof, or a condition exists from which the code official determines that immediate action is required to protect the health or safety of the
occupants or the general public, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises
forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted at the front or main entrance to such structure a placard declaring the structure to be unsafe and
prohibiting its occupancy.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 2/358
H. 111.1, Application For Appeal: Delete and replace first sentence only. Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code official or a notice or order
issued under this Code shall have the right to appeal to the Housing Advisory and Appeals Board, provided that a written application for appeal is filed
no more than twenty (20) calendar days after the action or decision being appealed.
I. 111.2, Membership Of The Board: Delete and replace. The board shall be comprised of five (5) persons who shall be appointed by the Mayor with
approval of the City Council. The Code official shall serve as a non-voting ex-officio member of the board.
J. 111.2.1, Alternate Members: Delete.
K. 111.2.2, Chairman: Delete and replace. Chair and Vice-Chair. The board shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair from among its members. Such Chair, or in
his/her absence, the Vice-Chair, shall conduct all meetings and may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
L. 111.2.4, Secretary: Delete and replace. The Code official shall serve as Secretary to the board and shall distribute all decisions and findings in writing to
the landlord and the occupant. The Secretary shall cause all records and minutes of the board to be maintained by the Development Services
Department and the City Clerk.
M. 111.2.6, add subsection: Terms: Members of the board shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years, from the first day of April following their
appointment, except for appointments to fill vacancies which shall be for the unexpired term of any member. The Mayor, for cause, may remove any
member from office. Upon completion of their term of office, members shall continue to serve in their full capacity until a successor has been duly
appointed.
N. 111.2.7, add subsection: Vacancies: Vacancies on the board caused by death, resignation or other reason shall be promptly filled by appointment of the
Mayor and approval of the City Council for the unexpired term of office.
O. 111.3, Notice Of Meetings: Delete and replace. Upon receipt of a complete appeal application and filing fee, the Code official shall establish a date for
the hearing to be held within fifteen (15) business days of the date upon which the completed application was received, and shall send a notice of the
hearing to the appellant as well as the respective property owner and occupant, if different from owner.
P. 111.4.2, add subsection: Extensions Of Time: In response to an appeal of a notice and order, the board may grant an extension of time to comply with a
notice and order for not more than twelve (12) months, subject to appropriate conditions, and provided that the board makes specific findings of fact
based upon evidence relating to the following:
1. That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in carrying out the strict letter of any notice and order; and
2. That such an extension is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Code in securing the public health, safety and general welfare;
and
3. That the violation(s) in question do not constitute an imminent danger, per section 109.1.
Q. 111.4.3, add subsection: Variances: In response to an appeal of a notice and order, the board may grant a variance from a specific provision of this
Code in a specific case, subject to appropriate conditions and provided the board makes specific findings of fact based upon evidence related to the
following:
1. That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in carrying out the strict letter of any notice and order; and
2. That the effect of the application of the provisions would be arbitrary in the specific case; and
3. That an extension would not constitute an appropriate remedy for these practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships; and
4. That the variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Code in securing the public health, safety and general welfare and
does not constitute an imminent danger to the public.
(2017 Code)
R. 112.4, Failure to Comply: Delete and replace. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to citation for a simple misdemeanor, as outlined in
section 1-4-1 of the city code.
Section 2: That the City Code of the City of Mason City, Iowa, should be and the same is hereby amended by repealing Title 10: “Building
Regulations”, Chapter 2: “Building Codes”, Article F: “Housing Code”, Section 8: “Amendments to Code: Chapter 6” and adopting a new Section 8 in lieu
thereof as follows:
"TITLE 10
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE F. HOUSING CODE
10-2F-8: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 6: Chapter 6, Mechanical And Electrical Requirements, of the 2015 International Property Maintenance
Code (or the most current edition) is adopted, except as hereby amended, deleted, modified, revised, or added to, as specifically set forth as follows:
A. 602.1, Facilities Required, add to end of section: Heating systems requiring electrical energy for operation shall be provided with an independent circuit.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 3/358
B. 602.2, Residential Occupancies, delete and replace last sentence only: Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall unvented fuel burning space
heaters be used, as a means to provide required heating. No fuel burning furnace shall be located within any sleeping room or bathroom unless
provided with adequate ducting for air supply from the exterior, and provided the combustion chamber for such heating unit is sealed from the room in
an airtight manner. Fuel burning space heaters are prohibited in dwelling units.
C. 602.2, Residential Occupancies, delete the "Exception" paragraph.
D. 602.3, Heat supply, delete and replace [DATE] to [DATE]: September 15 to May 15.
E. 602.34, Occupiable Work Spaces, delete and replace: Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat, during the period from September 15
to May 15 to maintain a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
F. 604.2, Service, add to end of section: Where fusible equipment is in place, Type S fuses will be required.
G. 605.2, Receptacles, delete and replace third (second to last) sentence only: Any bathroom or toilet room receptacle outlet shall have ground fault
interrupter protection. In any room other than a bathroom or toilet room, any receptacle within 36 inches (36") of a water source and all exterior outlets
shall have ground fault interrupter protection.
H. 605.3, Luminaires, delete and replace first sentence only: Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room
and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire with a switch that is easily accessible from the entrance to the room. All dwellings shall
have lighted entrances and exits controlled by interior switches that are convenient and accessible.
(2017 Code)
Section 3: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section 4: If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect
the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section thereof, or part thereof, not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 5: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its final passage, approval and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 2nd day of July, 2019.
/s/Bill Schickel Bill Schickel,
Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/Aaron Burnett________
Aaron Burnett, City Clerk
1st consideration: June 4, 2019
2nd consideration: June 18, 2019
3rd consideration: July 2, 2019
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 19 - 14
AN ORDINANCE TO UPDATE CERTAIN PORTIONS OF
THE CITY CODE RELATING TO MOBILE VENDORS
AND CERTAIN PERSONAL SERVICES
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 4/358
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Mason City has received a request from the Chief of Police of Mason City, Iowa to make certain changes to the City
Code of Mason City, Iowa;
AND, WHEREAS, said changes relate to the regulation of mobile vendors and certain personal services involving fortune tellers, palmists, and clairvoyants in the
City of Mason City, Iowa;
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, by the City Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa:
Section 1: THAT Section 3-9-2: DEFINITIONS of the City Code of the City of Mason City, Iowa, should be and the same hereby is amended to read as
follows:
3-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
PEDDLER/VENDOR: Any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to house or
upon the public street.
SOLICITOR: Any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any order for goods, services,
subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a future date.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Iowa Code section 9C.1 and any revisions thereto defines the term transient merchant and lists State requirements for applicants. This
section of the Iowa Code also lists specific exemptions that do not require a transient merchant license. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
AND THAT Section 3-9-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS of the City Code of the City of Mason City, Iowa, should be and the same hereby is amended to read as
follows:
3-9-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. Licensee shall maintain a distance of seventy five feet (75') from the entrance of any business which is selling the same type of product as the peddler/vendor. Mobile
vendors may be prohibited in areas where sidewalks are not wide enough to accommodate both pedestrians and the vendor.
B. There shall be maintained a distance of not less than twenty feet (20') between vendors.
C. The vendor's operation shall not impede the free flow of pedestrian traffic along sidewalks or plaza right-of-way, nor shall they interfere with pedestrian movement into
or out of retail establishments. (1985 Code)
D. No pushcart shall have dimensions exceeding four feet (4') in width, eight feet (8') in length, and eight feet (8') in height. All pushcarts must be aesthetically pleasing in
appearance, and shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. Each pushcart shall be capable of being moved and kept under control by one (1) person traveling on
foot. The City Administrator may grant a special license to a handicapped person to operate a pushcart propelled by an electric motor; provided, that the applicant meets
all other conditions for a license. During transit of the pushcart (whether it be towed by vehicle, carried by trailer, or pushed by hand) the pushcart operator shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle as provided by law except as to the provisions which by their very nature can have no application.
E. The applicant shall have obtained all necessary permits required by the State of Iowa Department of Health or other applicable regulatory agency.
F. The construction of an addition to an existing store front for permanent, temporary or seasonal use of abutting public right-of-way shall require an encroachment permit
as specified in title 5, chapter 1, article C of this Code.
G. All peddlers and solicitors are only permitted to go door-to-door between sunrise and sunset.
H. No person, firm, corporation or other organization shall sell, display, or otherwise offer for sale any merchandise or other materials on any sidewalk, street, public
right-of-way, or other public property without first obtaining approval by the City Council or by a duly authorized representative. Application for such license shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk. The Clerk shall refer such application to the appropriate City departments for review and report. Said application along with the
appropriate department reports shall then be forwarded to the City Council or to a duly authorized representative for action to approve or disapprove. Persons, firms,
corporations or other organizations having valid contracts with the City authorizing activities hereinbefore described are excepted from the terms of this subsection for the
activities specifically authorized in the contract.
The City Council reserves the right to require the relocation of any licensed pushcart or transient merchant to a new location in the event public safety or congestion so
requires, based on the discretion of the Council. (1985 Code; and. 2017 Code)
AND THAT Section 8-3-9: FORTUNE TELLERS, PALMISTS, CLAIRVOYANTS of the City Code of the City of Mason City, Iowa, should be and the same is
hereby repealed as follows:
Section 2: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the revisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section 3: If any section, revision, or part of this ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudications shall not affect the validity
of the ordinance as a whole or any section thereof, or part thereof, not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 4: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its final passage, approval and publication as required by law.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 5/358
PASSED AND APPROVED this 19th day of November, 2019.
/s/Bill Schickel
Bill Schickel, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/Aaron Burnett
Aaron Burnett, City Administrator/City Clerk
City of Mason City, Iowa
1st consideration: October 15, 2019
2nd consideration November 5, 2019
3rd consideration November 19, 2019
PREFACE
This City Code of Mason City, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including Ordinance 19-9, passed June 18, 2019. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 17-15
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE OFFICIAL CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF MASON CITY, CERRO GORDO COUNTY, IOWA TO BE KNOWN AS THE
"2017 CITY CODE, MASON CITY, IOWA"; PROVIDING FOR THE ADOPTION AND READOPTION OF ALL ORDINANCES OF A GENERAL NATURE
AND PROVIDING FOR THE RETENTION OF ALL SPECIAL ORDINANCES AND PROVIDING A SAVING CLAUSE
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa:
Section 1: The official City Code of Mason City shall be and comprise that certain loose leaf volume published by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., containing
thirteen (13) titles and appropriate chapters, articles and sections within the titles published upon order of the City Council and containing all of the general
effect ordinances of the City.
Section 2: The ordinances of a general nature contained in this official City Code shall be deemed to be continuous provisions and not reenactments of the
same material on the same subject. Nor shall the repeal of any general ordinance affect or be deemed to cause any special ordinance to have been
repealed, but such special ordinances, including but not limited to franchise ordinances, tax levy ordinances, land description ordinances or bonding
ordinances shall continue in full force and effect as though no new City Code had been prepared and hereby adopted.
Section 3: Amendments to the official 2017 City Code, as hereby adopted, shall be made by ordinance amending or repealing a specific title, chapter,
article or section of this Code. Such amendments shall refer to the said section to be amended or repealed by section number and such changes, when
adopted by the governing body, shall be incorporated into the official Code by replacement pages, properly marked and identified and prepared by Sterling
Codifiers, Inc., for insertion in each of the official Code books in existence.
Section 4: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section 5: If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity
of the Ordinance as a whole or any section thereof, or part thereof, not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 6: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its final passage, approval and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 5th day of December, 2017.
/s/Eric Bookmeyer
Eric Bookmeyer, Mayor
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 6/358
ATTEST:
/s/Kevin Jacobson
Kevin Jacobson, Interim City Clerk
1st consideration: November 7, 2017
2nd consideration: November 21, 2017
3rd consideration: December 5, 2017
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Governing Body, this Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of the CITY OF MASON
CITY, IOWA. Any reference made to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same under its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this
Code by title in any legal document. (1985 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this State
as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect. (1985 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
A. Any additions or amendments to this Code, when passed as ordinances amending this Code, and which indicate the intention of the Council to make
the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that a reference to the Code shall be understood as including them.
B. Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. (1985
Code)
1-1-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND AGENTS:
When the provisions of any section of this Code prohibit the commission of an act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the
directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person shall be guilty of the offense described
and liable to the penalty set forth. (1985 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this Code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following section), from which are
excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing
the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the City; and all special ordinances. (1985 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, services or rates of public
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 7/358
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this Code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1985 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the
same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of
this Code. (1985 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: DEFINITIONS; RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the City, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise:
CITY: The City of Mason City, in the County of Cerro Gordo, in the State of Iowa.
CITY COUNCIL, COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Mason City.
CITY SEAL: The seal of the City described as follows: a disk having around the margin thereof the words "City Seal" and within the circle on the face
thereof the words "City of Mason City, Iowa".
CODE: The Code of Mason City, Iowa, and all amendments thereto.
COMPUTING TIME: In computing time, the first day shall be excluded and the last included, unless the last falls on Sunday, in which case the time
prescribed shall be extended so as to include the whole of the following Monday.
COUNTY: The County of Cerro Gordo in the State of Iowa.
FISCAL YEAR: The Municipal fiscal year beginning on July 1 of each year and ending on June 30 of the following year.
GENDER: Whenever the masculine gender is used, females as well as males shall be deemed to be included.
IN THE CITY: All territory over which the City now has or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction.
JOINT AUTHORITY: Words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of them, unless it shall be otherwise expressed in the ordinance or resolution giving the authority.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUMBER: Whenever any words in any section of this Code import the plural number, the singular shall be deemed to be included and whenever the
singular number shall be used, it shall be deemed to include the plural.
OATH: The word "oath" shall be deemed to include an affirmation, and the word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed".
OCCUPANT OR TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who holds a written or oral lease of, or actually occupies the whole or
part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
OR, AND: The word "or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.
OWNER: Any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or a part of any property, either alone or with
others.
PERSON: A natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or
assigns or the agent of any of them.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every species of property, except real property as defined by this section.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Real and personal property.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 8/358
REAL PROPERTY: Lands, tenements and hereditaments and shall embrace all chattels real.
SHALL: The word "shall" is mandatory.
STATE: The State of Iowa.
STATUTE REFERENCES: Whenever reference is made to the Iowa Code, this shall mean and have reference to the latest edition of the Iowa Code, as
amended and supplemented.
TENSE: Words in the present tense shall include the future.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: Printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but unless a facsimile signature is authorized when the written
signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person or in
case he is unable to write, by his proper mark, witnessed as required by law.
YEAR: A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed. (1953 Code § 3-1; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 1476, 1-15-1979; 2017 Code)
1-3-2: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1985 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person who shall be found guilty of violating the provisions of any section of this Code now existing, or hereafter enacted, for which no other penalty is
provided, shall be punished as provided in Iowa Code sections 903.1(1)(a) and 364.3(2) in the case of simple misdemeanors or as provided in Iowa Code
section 364.3(6) in the case of Municipal infractions. (Ord. 01-22, 10-16-2001; amd. 2017 Code)
ARTICLE A. MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
1-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
MUNICIPAL INFRACTION: Except those provisions specifically provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious
misdemeanor or a simple misdemeanor under chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, the doing of any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful, an
offense or a misdemeanor by the Code of ordinances, City of Mason City, or any ordinance or Code herein adopted by reference, or omission or failure to
perform any act or duty required by the Code of ordinances, City of Mason City, or any ordinance or Code herein adopted by reference, is a Municipal
infraction and is punishable by a civil penalty as provided herein.
OFFICER: Any employee or official authorized to enforce the Code of ordinances of the City of Mason City.
REPEAT OFFENSE: A recurring violation of the same section of the Code of ordinances. (Ord. 88-29, 12-5-1988)
1-4A-2: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ALTERNATIVE RELIEF:
A. A Municipal infraction is punishable by a civil penalty of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation or, if the infraction is a
repeat offense, a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each repeat offense. (Ord. 01-23, 10-16-2001; amd. 2017 Code)
B. Each day that violation occurs or is permitted to exist by the violator constitutes a separate offense.
C. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude a City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. (Ord. 88-
29, 12-5-1988)
1-4A-3: CIVIL CITATIONS:
A. Any officer authorized by the City to enforce the Code of ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a Municipal infraction.
B. The citation may be served by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
C. A copy of the citation shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court. (Ord. 88-29, 12-5-1988)
D. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 9/358
1. The name and address of the defendant.
2. The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the citation.
3. The location and time of the infraction.
4. The time and place of court appearance.
5. The penalty for failure to appear in court. (Ord. 88-29, 12-5-1988; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 5
CORPORATE LIMITS
1-5-1: CORPORATE LIMITS:
The corporate limits of the City of Mason City, Iowa, are hereby declared to be as they have been legally established according to law, and shall embrace
the territory lying within the boundary of the following described perimeter:
Beginning at the Northwest corner of Section Thirty-two (32) in Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
Thence running Easterly along the North line of said Section Thirty-two (32), and Sections Thirty-three (33), Thirty-four (34) and Thirty-five (35), all in
Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty (20) West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, a distance of approximately Three and one-fourth (31/4) miles
to the Northeast corner of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of said Section Thirty-five (35);
Thence Southerly a distance of approximately three-eighths (3/8) of a mile, thence easterly approximately one-quarter (1/4) mile to centerline of Section
Thirty-five (35), in Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
Thence Southerly approximately one-sixth (1/6) of a mile on centerline of Section Thirty-five (35), in Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty (20),
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
Thence Westerly approximately one-tenth (1/10) of a mile; thence southerly four feet (4'), thence westerly approximately one-sixth (1/6) of a mile to the
West line of the West one-half (W1/2) of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4), thence southerly to the north line of Section Two (2), in Township Ninety-six (96)
North, Range Twenty (20), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
Thence Easterly along the North line of said Section Two (2) a distance of approximately Three-fourths (3/4) mile to the Northeast corner of said Section
Two (2);
Thence Southerly along the East line of said Section Two (2) to the Southwest corner of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4)
of Section One (1) in Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
Thence Easterly on the South line of the North one-quarter (N1/4) of said Section One (1) and Section Six (6) and Section Five (5), in Township Ninety-six
(96) North, Range Nineteen (19), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, a distance of approximately Two and one-half (21/2) miles to the North and South
Quarter line of said Section Five (5);
Thence Southerly along the North and South Quarter lines of said Section Five (5) and Section Eight (8) and Section Seventeen (17), in Township Ninetysix
(96) North, Range Nineteen (19) West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, a distance of approximately two and one-quarter (21/4) miles to the center of said
Section Seventeen (17);
Thence Westerly along the East-West quarter line of said Section Seventeen (17) and Section Eighteen (18) in Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range
Nineteen (19), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, and Section Thirteen (13) in Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the Fifth
Principal Meridian, a distance of approximately two and one-half (21/2) miles to the East Quarter corner of Section Fourteen (14), in Township Ninety-six
(96) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
Thence Southerly along the East line of said Section Fourteen (14), a distance of approximately one-half (1/2) mile to the Southeast corner of said Section
Fourteen (14);
Thence Westerly along the South lines of said Section Fourteen (14) and Section Fifteen (15) in Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range Twenty (20) West
of the Fifth Principal Meridian, to a point on the Southwesterly right of way line of the Union Pacific Railroad, said Southwesterly right of way line being
approximately 1186.3 feet East of the Southwest Corner of said Section 15; thence Southeasterly along said Southwesterly right of way line to a point on
the Easterly line of the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 22, Township 96 North, Range 20 West of the 5th P.M.; thence Southerly
along said Easterly line to the Southeast Corner of said Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter; thence Westerly along the Southerly line of said
Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter and along the Northerly line of Robinson's Addition to Cerro Gordo County, Iowa to the Northwest Corner of
said Robinson's Addition; thence Southerly along the Westerly line of said Robinson's Addition to the Southwest Corner of said Robinson's Addition, said
point also being on the Northerly line of Sondergaard's Addition to Cerro Gordo County, Iowa; thence Westerly along said Northerly line to a point on the
Westerly right of way line of South Delaware Avenue; thence Southerly along said Westerly right of way line to a point on the Northerly right of way line of
County Road 245th Street; thence Westerly along said Northerly right of way line to a point on the Northerly extension of a line 225.00 feet Easterly,
measured at a right angle, from the Westerly line of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 22; thence Southerly along said Northerly extension and along
said line to a point on the Northerly line of that tract of land described in Warranty Deed filed August 1, 2001 in Book 2001 Page 6726 in the Office of the
Cerro Gordo County Recorder; thence Easterly, 125.4 feet along said Northerly line to the Northeast Corner of said tract of land; thence Southerly, 150.00
feet along the Easterly line of said tract of land to a point on the Southerly line of the North 483.62 feet of the Northwest Quarter of said Southwest
Quarter; thence Easterly, 71.00 feet along said Southerly line to the Northeast Corner of that tract of land described in Warranty Deed filed October 28,
1993 in Book 93 Page 9184 in the Office of the Cerro Gordo County Recorder; thence Southerly, 735.37 feet along the Easterly line of said tract and along
the Easterly line of that tract of land described in Warranty Deed filed April 23, 1987 in Book 87 Page 2329 in the Office of the Cerro Gordo County
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 10/358
Recorder to the Southeast Corner of said tract of land, said point also being on the Northerly line of that tract of land described in Report of Change of Title
filed February 29, 1984 in Book 248 Page 200 in the Office of the Cerro Gordo County Recorder; thence Easterly, 138.62 feet along said Northerly line to
the Northeast Corner of said tract of land; thence Southerly along the Easterly line of said tract of land and along the Southerly extension of said Easterly
line to a point on the Southerly line of said Southwest Quarter; thence Easterly along said Southerly line to the Southeast Corner of said Southwest
Quarter; thence Easterly along the Southerly line of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 22 to a point on the Westerly right of way line of the Union
Pacific Railroad; thence Southerly along said Westerly right of way line to a point on the Northerly right of way line of U.S. Highway No. 18, said point
designated as centerline metric Station 203+20 ± PL, 77 meters left of centerline, as shown on Iowa Department of Transportation Plans for Project
Number NHS-18-5(80)--9-17; thence Southwesterly along said Northerly right of way line to centerline metric Station 201+02 ± PL, 59 meters left of
centerline; thence Southwesterly along said Northerly right of way line to centerline metric Station 199+00, 51 meters left of centerline; thence Westerly
along said Northerly right of way line to Ramp A metric Station 1597+00.270, 26 meters left of Ramp baseline; thence Northwesterly along said Northerly
right of way line to Ramp A metric Station 1595+50, 28 meters left of Ramp baseline; thence Northwesterly along said Northerly right of way line to Side
Road Station 2259+50, 60 meters right of centerline Side Road U.S. Highway 65; thence Westerly across U.S. Highway 65 to Side Road Station
2259+40.000, 64.000 meters left of centerline Side Road U.S. Highway 65 as shown on Exhibit A attached to Warranty Deed filed February 29, 1996 in
Book 96 Page 1413 in the Office of the Cerro Gordo County Recorder; thence Southwesterly, 589.52 feet along said Northerly right of way line; thence
Southwesterly, 598.43 feet along said Northerly right of way line to a point on the Southerly line of the Northeast Quarter of Section 28, Township 96 North,
Range 20 West of the 5th P.M.; thence Westerly along said Northerly right of way line and along said Southerly line to the Southwest Corner of said
Northeast Quarter; thence Westerly along the Southerly line of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 28 and along said Northerly right of way line to the
most Easterly point of that tract of land described in Warranty Deed and shown in Acquisition Plat 2 of 2, both filed February 29, 1996 in Book 96 Page
1412 in the Office of the Cerro Gordo County Recorder; thence Northwesterly, 999.32 feet along said Northerly right of way line; thence Northwesterly,
1020.66 feet along said Northerly right of way line; thence Northwesterly, 525.68 feet along said Northerly right of way line to a point on the Easterly right
of way line of the Union Pacific Railroad; thence Northerly along said Easterly right of way line to the Northwest Corner of Lot 1 Golden Grain Energy First
Subdivision Cerro Gordo County, Iowa; thence continuing Northerly along said Easterly right-of-way line a distance of Six hundred sixty-two and forty-five
hundredths (662.45) feet, thence continuing Northeasterly along said right-of-way a distance of Two hundred forty-eight and seventy-six hundredths
(248.76) feet on a nontangential curve concave to the Southeast having a central angle of 07°30'47", a radius of Eighteen hundred fifty-nine and eightyeight
hundredths (1859.88) feet and a chord azimuth of 184°08'36", thence continuing Northeasterly along said right-of-way Eleven hundred fifty-five and
fifty-three hundredths (1155.53) feet on a nontangential curve concave to the Southeast having a central angle of 35°35'48", a radius of Eighteen hundred
fifty-nine and eighty-eight hundredths (1859.88) feet and a chord azimuth of 25°46'23", thence Northeasterly tangent to said curve 43°34'17", azimuth
along said Southeasterly right-of-way line, Six hundred sixty-four and sixty-one hundredths feet (664.61) to the North line of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4)
of Section 20, Township 96 North, Range 20 West of the 5th P.M.; thence Westerly along the North line of said Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) to the Northwest
corner of said Northeast Quarter (NE1/4);
Thence Westerly along the South lines of Sections Seventeen (17) and Eighteen (18) in Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, and Section Thirteen (13) in Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range Twenty-one (21) West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, a
distance of approximately Two and one-half (21/2) miles to the South Quarter corner of said Section Thirteen (13);
Thence Northerly along the North and South Quarter lines of Sections 13 and 12 in Township 96 North, Range 21 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian
approximately One and one-half miles (11/2 mi.) to the center of said Section 12;
Thence Northerly 182.34 feet to the north right-of-way line of IA 122;
Thence Westerly along said right-of-way approximately 2578.39 feet;
Thence Northwesterly 23.78' to the easterly right-of-way line of Lark Avenue;
Thence North 00°11'14" West Two thousand four hundred thirty-nine and ninety-eight hundredths feet (2,439.98') along said right-of-way line to the north
line of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of said Section 12;
Thence North 89°55'49" East Two thousand six hundred five and thirty-eight hundredths feet (2,605.38') along said north line to the South Quarter (S1/4)
corner of Section 1 in Township 96 North, Range 21 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
Thence Northerly along the North and South quarter line of said Section 1 approximately One (1) mile to the North Quarter (N1/4) corner of said Section 1;
Thence Easterly along the North lines of said Section One (1) and Section Six (6) in Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the Fifth
Principal Meridian, a distance of approximately One and one-half (11/2) miles to the Southwest corner of Section Thirty-two (32) in Township Ninety-seven
(97) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
Thence along the West line of said Section Thirty-two (32), a distance of approximately One (1) mile to the place of beginning.
(Ord. 05-22, 8-16-2005)
1-5-2: CORPORATE PROPERTY:
As permitted by section 364.4, Code of Iowa, the City does hereby declare all ordinances of the City heretofore lawfully adopted to apply and be enforced
upon the real estate located on U.S. Highway 18, three (3) miles west of the corporate limits, commonly known as the Mason City Airport; legally described
as follows:
That part of the South Half (S1/2) of Section Thirty-three (33), Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-one (21) West, and that part of Section
Four (4), the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of Section Five (5), the East Half (E1/2) of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of Section Eight (8) and Section Nine (9),
all in Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range Twenty-one (21) West, Cerro Gordo County, Iowa, described as follows:
Commencing at the Southwest (SW) corner of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of said Section Thirty-three (33); thence Easterly on an assumed azimuth
from North of 89°50'16" azimuth along the South line of said Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) one thousand three hundred twenty-eight and three hundredths
feet (1,328.03') to the point of beginning; thence Northerly 359°27'00" azimuth six hundred eighteen and fifty-seven hundredths feet (618.57'); thence
Westerly 269°27'00" azimuth fifteen hundred feet (1500.00'); thence southerly 179°27'00" azimuth six hundred eight and fifty four hundredths feet (608.54')
to the North line of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of said Section Thirty-three (33); thence continue Southerly 179°27'00" azimuth two thousand six
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 11/358
hundred eleven and twenty-five hundredths feet (2,611.25') to the North line of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of said
Section Four (4); thence Westerly along the North line of said Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) to the Northwest (NW) corner
thereof; thence Southerly along the West line of said Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) to the Northeast (NE) corner of the
Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of said Southwest Quarter (SW1/4); thence Westerly along the North line of said Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of the Southwest
Quarter (SW1/4) to the Southeast (SE) corner of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of said Section Five (5); thence Northerly
along the East line of said Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter to the North line of the South five hundred feet (500.00') of said Northeast Quarter
(NE1/4) of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4); thence Westerly along said North line to the East line of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of said Southeast
Quarter (SE1/4); thence Northerly along said East line to the Northeast corner of said Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4); thence
Westerly along the North line of said Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) to the Northwest (NW) corner thereof; thence Southerly along the West line of said
Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) to the Northwest (NW) corner of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of said Section Eight (8); thence Easterly along the North line of
said Northeast Quarter to the Northwest (NW) corner of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of said Northeast Quarter (NE1/4); thence Southerly along the West
line of the East Half (E1/2) of said Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) to a point which lies three hundred thirteen and fifty hundredths feet (313.50') Northerly, as
measured along said West line, from the Northerly right-of-way line of old U.S. Highway 18; thence Easterly perpendicular to said West line two hundred
fourteen and fifty hundredths feet (214.50'); thence Southerly parallel to said West line to the Northerly right-of-way line of old U.S. Highway 18; thence
Westerly along said Northerly right-of-way line to the West line of said East Half (E1/2) of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4); thence Southerly along said West
line to the center line of said old U.S. Highway 18; thence Easterly along said center line to the West line of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of said Section
Nine (9); thence Easterly perpendicular to said West line thirty-three feet (33.00'); thence Southerly parallel to said West line to the Northerly right-of-way
line of U.S. Highway No. 18; thence Easterly along said Northerly right-of-way line to its intersection with a line that bears 179°27'00" azimuth from the
point of beginning; thence Northerly 359°27'00" azimuth to the point of beginning.
AND EXCEPT that part of the previously described tract described as follows:
Commencing at the Southwest (SW) corner of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of said Section Nine (9); thence Easterly
on an assumed azimuth from North of 89°33'03" azimuth along the South line of said Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) seven hundred sixteen and thirty five
hundredths feet (716.35'); thence Northerly 01°54'03" azimuth four hundred thirty-five feet (435.00') to the point of beginning; thence continue Northerly
01°54'03" azimuth four hundred twenty-five feet (425.00'); thence Westerly 271°54'03" azimuth seven hundred feet (700.00'); thence Southerly 181°54'03"
azimuth four hundred twenty-five feet (425.00'); thence Easterly 91°54'03" azimuth seven hundred feet (700.00') to the point of beginning.
TOGETHER WITH that part of the West Half (W1/2) of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of Section Nine (9), Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range Twentyone
(21) West, Cerro Gordo County, Iowa, described as follows:
Commencing at the Northwest (NW) corner of said Southeast Quarter (SE1/4); thence Southerly 179°18'20" azimuth along the West line of said Southeast
Quarter (SE1/4) one hundred seventy-three and ninety-seven hundredths feet (173.97') to the Southerly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 18 and the
point of beginning; thence continue Southerly 179°18'20" azimuth along said West line one thousand one hundred forty-six and forty-eight hundredths feet
(1,146.48') to the Southwest (SW) corner of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4); thence Easterly 89°36'48" azimuth along the
South line of said Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) five hundred ninety-seven and seventy-eight hundredths feet (597.78');
thence Southerly 179°27'00" azimuth one thousand two hundred sixty-two and ninety-four hundredths feet (1,262.94') to the Northerly right-of-way line of
the County Road; thence Easterly 85°41'00" azimuth along said Northerly right-of-way line thirty-five and seven hundredths feet (35.07'); thence Northerly
359°27'00" azimuth nine hundred fifty-five and seventy-five hundredths feet (955.75'); thence Easterly 89°27'00" azimuth forty feet (40.00'); thence
Northerly 359°27'00" azimuth three hundred four and sixty-seven hundredths feet (304.67') to the South line of the Northwest Quarter of the Southeast
Quarter (SE1/4); thence Easterly 89°36'48" azimuth along said South line six hundred thirty-three and forty-eight hundredths feet (633.48') to the
Southeast (SE) corner of said Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4); thence Northerly 359°14'17" azimuth along the East line of
said Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) one thousand one hundred thirty-eight and twenty-eight hundredths feet (1,138.28') to
the Southerly right-of-way line of said U.S. Highway No. 18; thence Westerly along said Southerly right-of-way line one thousand three hundred five and
six hundredths feet (1,305.06') to the point of beginning.
(1985 Code)
AND EXCEPT that part of the previously described tract as follows:
The North half (N1/2) of vacated Highway 18 lying South of a tract of land located in the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of
Section 8, Township 96 North, Range 21, Cerro Gordo County, Iowa, described as follows: Beginning at a point on the west line of the Southeast Quarter
(SE1/4) of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of said Section 8 where it intersects the North line of State Highway No. 18 continuing thence North on said line
19 rods, thence due East at right angles with said West line of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of said Section 8 a distance of
13 Rods, thence South and parallel with the said west line of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of said Section 8 to a point
where it intersects the north right-of-way line of said Highway No. 18 before its relocation; thence Southwesterly (SWLY) along said north right-of-way line
to the place of beginning.
(Ord. 86-21, 9-15-1986)
Chapter 6
CITY COUNCIL
1-6-1: THE COUNCIL:
Composition of the City Council shall consist of one (1) Council member from each of the four (4) wards established in section 1-9-5 of this title, together
with two (2) Council members elected at large, as provided in section 372.13, Iowa Code. (1953 Code § 6-1; amd. 1985 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 12/358
1-6-2: POWERS; DUTIES:
The Council shall have and exercise all legislative powers, functions and duties conferred upon the Council by the applicable statutes of the State of Iowa
and the provisions of this Code. It shall levy all taxes, apportion and appropriate all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts and claims. The Council
shall have and exercise general authority, either directly or through the authority of the City Administrator, over the City waterworks, the wastewater
treatment plant, the City Library and its Board of Trustees, the MacNider Art Museum and its Board of Trustees, City Airport and its Board of Trustees, the
City park system and the Park and Recreation Board, the Civil Service Commission, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Community
Development Director, the Public Works Director, the City Attorney, the Finance Director, the City Clerk and all commissions, boards and officers provided
by law and not specifically assigned to any other department. (1953 Code § 6-2; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
1-6-3: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: The time for holding regular meetings of the City Council is hereby fixed at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on the first and third Tuesdays
of each month, except that if any regular meeting date is a legal holiday, an alternate date shall be designated and posted as required. (Ord. 97-10, 4-
15-1997; amd. 2017 Code)
B. Special Meetings: The City Council may hold special meetings when called by the Mayor or a majority of the members of the Council. (1953 Code § 6-
4; amd. Ord. 935, 4-20-1964; 2017 Code)
C. Quorum: A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of a majority of the usual number of members of the Council to which the City is entitled,
except that a lesser number may adjourn any meeting to a day and hour certain. (1953 Code § 6-5)
D. Presiding Officer: The Mayor, or in the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem, shall preside at all Council meetings. In the absence of either of the
foregoing, the Council may appoint a Council member to chair the meeting. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum and may have
persons creating disorder removed from the meeting. (Ord. 89-31, 12-18-1989)
1-6-4: STANDING COMMITTEES:
A. Establishment: The Council shall establish standing committees as they deem necessary, consisting of three (3) or more members as appointed by the
Mayor with Council approval; the first person named shall chair the meeting(s). All standing committees shall establish rules of procedure. The Mayor
will be an ex officio member of all committees.
B. Committee Reports: Reports of committees may be presented at a subsequent Council meeting, or at any meeting the committee deems necessary. A
statement of the issues, the opinions and recommendations of the committee shall be presented orally or in writing thereon; and any final
recommendation must be presented in the form of a proposed ordinance, resolution or motion. (Ord. 89-31, 12-18-1989)
Chapter 7
MAYOR
1-7-1: QUALIFICATIONS AND DUTIES:
The Mayor shall be elected at large and shall be the presiding officer of the City Council and shall have and exercise all powers and duties conferred upon
him by section 372.14, Code of Iowa, and the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996)
1-7-2: CONSERVATOR OF THE PEACE:
The Mayor may take command of the police and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of emergency or public danger
exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders, as provided in section 372.14, Code of Iowa.
(1953 Code § 19-4; amd. 1985 Code)
1-7-3: REPORTS:
The Mayor shall, at the first regular meeting of the newly elected Council in January and at such other times as he may deem expedient, report to the
Council concerning the Municipal affairs of the City and recommend the adoption of such measures as to him may seem advisable. (1953 Code § 19-5)
1-7-4: DUTIES:
The Mayor shall also perform such other duties compatible with the nature of his office as herein required or as may hereinafter be required by the
provisions of this Code or resolution of the Council. The Mayor may vote to break a tie vote on motions not involving ordinances, resolutions, spending
over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or appointments made by the Council alone, as provided in section 372.4, Code of Iowa. (Ord. 93-29, 10-5-1993)
1-7-5: MAYOR PRO TEM:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 13/358
Except for limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor in case of absence or inability of the Mayor to
perform the duties of his office. In the exercise of the duties of his office, the Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to employ or to discharge from
employment officers or employees that the Mayor has power to appoint or discharge. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the
Council. (1985 Code)
Chapter 8
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-8-1: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
The Director of Finance and no others shall, prior to entering upon performance of duties, provide an official's bond, as required by law in the penal
amount as may from time to time be fixed by the City Council, but in no event less than the minimum penal amount of two hundred seventy five thousand
dollars ($275,000.00). (Ord. 95-20, 10-17-1995)
1-8-2: BLANKET BONDS:
The following officers and no others shall be covered by a blanket bond purchased by the City in the penal amount as may from time to time be fixed by
the City Council indemnifying and holding harmless the City against loss occasioned by their failure to perform faithfully their respective duties:
Attorney
Chief of Police
City Administrator/City Clerk
City Engineer
Mayor
Mayor Pro Tem
Operation and Maintenance Manager
All officers and employees, except those specified in this section and section 1-8-1 of this chapter, shall be covered by a blanket bond indemnifying and
holding harmless the City against loss occasioned by embezzlement or any other dishonest act in such penal amounts as may from time to time be fixed
by the City Council. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997; 2017 Code)
1-8-3: AUTHORITY TO PURCHASE:
The Mayor and Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to purchase individual and blanket bonds as provided in sections 1-8-1 and 1-8-2 of this chapter
from funds of the City legally usable for such purposes and to carry out, in all other respects, the policy of placing under blanket bonds all officers and
employees as near as may be. (Ord. 696, 7-1-1955)
1-8-4: SALARIES DETERMINED:
The annual salaries of officials of the City shall be determined by the Council. Said salaries shall be paid on a biweekly basis, in twenty six (26) equal
installments, and shall be in the amounts fixed by the Council from time to time. (Ord. 1079, 7-7-1969)
1-8-5: SALARIES OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
Commencing January 1, 2014, the salary of Council members of the City is hereby fixed at the sum of four thousand nine hundred dollars ($4,900.00) per
year, payable biweekly. Commencing January 1, 2015, the salary of Council members of the City is hereby fixed at the sum of seven thousand four
hundred dollars ($7,400.00) per year, payable biweekly. (Ord. 13-17, 5-21-2013)
1-8-6: SALARY OF MAYOR:
Commencing January 1, 2014, the salary of the Mayor is hereby fixed at the sum of ten thousand seven hundred dollars ($10,700.00) per year, payable
biweekly. Commencing January 1, 2015, the salary of the Mayor is hereby fixed at the sum of thirteen thousand two hundred dollars ($13,200.00) per year,
payable biweekly. (Ord. 13-18, 5-21-2013)
1-8-7: MILEAGE:
Each officer or employee driving his own automobile on City business shall be entitled to claim reimbursement for the expenses thereof at the current rate,
as established by the U.S. General Service Administration, per mile of actual and necessary driving in the course of his employment. Verified and itemized
claims for such reimbursement shall be filed monthly upon forms provided by the Finance Director and shall set out the name of the claimant, his official
capacity, the number of miles actually and necessarily driven on City business, and any other expenses actually and necessarily incurred on behalf of the
City. Such claims shall be paid only upon approval by the Finance Director. (Ord. 1537, 3-3-1980; amd. Ord. 95-20, 10-17-1995; 2017 Code)
1-8-8: GIFTS:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 14/358
No public official, public employee, or candidate, or that person's immediate family member shall, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series
of gifts from a restricted donor, as set out in sections 68B.2 and 68B.22, Iowa Code. "Gift" means a rendering of anything of value in return for which legal
consideration of equal or greater value is not given and received. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996)
ARTICLE A. DEPUTY CITY CLERK
1-8A-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The Deputy City Clerk shall be appointed by the City Administrator/City Clerk, subject to the approval of the City Council, as provided by subsection 1-8C-
3Q of this chapter and shall hold office thereafter, or until a successor is duly appointed and qualified.
The Deputy City Clerk shall perform all the duties prescribed by this Code and the laws of the State for the Deputy Clerk.
A. Exception: The Administrator/City Clerk shall authenticate all measures or documents. Only in the absence of the City Administrator/City Clerk shall the
Deputy City Clerk be authorized to authenticate all measures or documents. (Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
1-8A-2: SEAL; RECORDS; DOCUMENTS:
The Deputy City Clerk shall be the keeper of the seal of the City and shall, under the direction of the Administrator/City Clerk or other authorized officer,
affix the seal to all public instruments, or documents which by law or provisions of this Code are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal. The
Deputy City Clerk shall have the custody of and safely keep all public records, documents, ordinances, resolutions, orders of the Council, and such other
papers and documents which may be filed in the office or delivered into the custody of the Deputy City Clerk. The Deputy City Clerk shall be custodian of
all bonds running in favor of the City. (Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
1-8A-3: COUNCIL RECORDS; ORDINANCES:
The Deputy City Clerk shall attend all sessions of the Council and keep true and correct minutes of the proceedings thereof in a book or books to be kept
and provided for that purpose. The Deputy City Clerk shall also file all original drafts of ordinances and resolutions passed or adopted by the Council and
shall accurately record such ordinances and resolutions in the ordinance book and resolution book, respectively, and shall properly index the same. The
Deputy City Clerk shall cause all ordinances requiring publication to be published as directed therein and shall, upon publication, preserve the original
proof thereof in a book or file kept and maintained for that purpose, all in accordance with section 380.7, Iowa Code. (Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997; amd. 2017
Code)
1-8A-4: DEEDS; EASEMENTS; AGREEMENTS; CONTRACTS:
The Deputy City Clerk shall keep a book of deeds, easements, agreements and contracts in which the Deputy City Clerk shall cause to be recorded all
deeds, contracts, agreements and easements executed or entered into by the City, and shall keep an index of the contents thereof. (Ord. 97-29, 11-18-
1997)
1-8A-5: COPY OF RECORDS:
It shall be the duty of the Deputy City Clerk to furnish to any City officer charged with the duty of serving any notice, order or resolution, a copy of such
notice or paper. (Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
ARTICLE B. DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
1-8B-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The Director of Finance shall be appointed by the City Administrator, subject to the approval of the City Council, as provided by article C of this chapter
and shall hold office thereafter, or until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. (Ord. 94-6, 3-1-1994)
1-8B-2: DUTIES:
The Director of Finance shall have and perform all of the powers and duties prescribed by law and the provisions of this Code, and shall be the general
accountant of the City. He shall receive and preserve in his office all account books, vouchers, documents, and papers relating to all accounts and
transactions of the City, its revenues, debts, and fiscal affairs; he shall be the custodian of the bond of the Clerk and of all public records and papers
relating to his office except such as are by law placed in the custody of some other officer. (Ord. 1179, 3-6-1972; amd. Ord. 91-6, 4-2-1991; Ord. 94-6, 3-1-
1994)
1-8B-3: CHIEF WARRANT OFFICER:
A. The Director of Finance shall be the Chief Warrant Officer of the City, and as such, is hereby authorized and directed to affix his signature to all warrants
on behalf of the City. In the absence of the Chief Warrant Officer, the City Administrator/City Clerk shall act as his alternate to sign warrants on behalf of
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 15/358
the City. (Ord. 91-6, 4-2-1991; amd. Ord. 94-6, 3-1-1994; 2017 Code)
B. The Director of Finance shall keep a warrant register, upon which shall be entered the number, date of issuance, to whom issued, amount, and fund
upon which each warrant is drawn. He shall also keep a distribution ledger, showing the number of each warrant, the fund upon which it is drawn, the
purpose for which it is drawn, and the amount appropriated for each fund, together with the balance remaining therein, together with such other and
further records and books as may be required to keep an accurate record of all monies received by the City, the funds to which the same are allocated,
and of all monies paid out by the City, together with the funds upon which the same are charged to.
C. The Director of Finance is authorized to pay routine claims for regular monthly recurring routine bills in advance of the approval of the City Council.
(Ord. 1179, 3-6-1972; amd. Ord. 91-6, 4-2-1991; Ord. 94-6, 3-1-1994)
1-8B-4: REPORTS:
The Director of Finance shall make a detailed monthly report to the Council, which report shall contain a list of all warrants drawn, all receipts from any
source whatsoever, the funds to which the same were credited, and the balances in the various funds. He shall also make a summarized monthly report to
the Council containing a statement of the receipts and disbursements in the various funds. On or before December 1 of each year, he shall furnish a
certified copy of all annual reports required by specified officials of the State. (Ord. 1539, 3-3-1980; amd. Ord. 91-6, 4-2-1991; Ord. 94-6, 3-1-1994; 2017
Code)
1-8B-5: PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES:
The Director of Finance shall purchase all goods, materials, and supplies needed by the City, and shall enter into consultations with department heads and
the City Council to determine needs for all departments of the City, and shall enforce quality standards for goods purchased. He shall prepare detailed
claims for all purchases made by the City before payment for said goods is made. (Ord. 1179, 3-6-1972; amd. Ord. 91-6, 4-2-1991; Ord. 94-6, 3-1-1994)
1-8B-6: ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES:
The Director of Finance shall be responsible for the management and operations of the City's Data Processing Division, IT Division, GIS Director, Grant
Administrator, and the Cashier's Division. The Director shall also perform all duties and functions as the Chief Investment Officer and Treasurer for the
City. (Ord. 13-03, 3-5-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8B-7: ASSISTANT FINANCE DIRECTOR:
When authorized by the City Administrator, an Assistant Finance Director may be appointed by the Director, subject to the approval of the City
Administrator, and shall hold office thereafter, or until a successor is appointed and qualified. The Assistant Director shall, in the absence or inability of the
Director to act, perform all the duties and acts which may be required by the Director, Mayor, or Council. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996)
ARTICLE C. CITY ADMINISTRATOR/CITY CLERK
1-8C-1: CREATION; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
The Office of City Administrator/City Clerk is hereby created as provided by section 372.4, Iowa Code. The City Administrator/City Clerk shall be appointed
by majority vote of the City Council for an indefinite term until removed or until a successor has been duly appointed and qualified. The Administrator/Clerk
shall be chosen by the Council solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to actual experience in or
knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office hereinafter set forth. At the time of appointment, the person need not be a resident of
the City or State, but during the Administrator's/Clerk's tenure of office, shall reside within a ten (10) mile radius of the City or according to terms of
employment agreement. The City Administrator/City Clerk shall receive an annual salary in such amount as may be fixed from time to time by the Council.
(Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997; 2017 Code)
1-8C-2: REMOVAL:
The City Council may remove the City Administrator/City Clerk at any time by a majority vote of the Council on the recommendation of the Mayor or on its
own initiative. Any removal shall be subject to the provisions of section 372.15, Iowa Code. Except for removal for cause, after the completion of twelve
(12) months' service, the City Administrator/City Clerk may not be removed without sixty (60) days' notice. (Ord. 93-18, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-
1997)
1-8C-3: ADMINISTRATION AND DUTIES:
The City Administrator/City Clerk shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the City and shall be responsible to the Mayor and City Council for the proper
administration of all affairs of the City. All departments of the City, except as otherwise provided by ordinance, shall be responsible to the
Administrator/Clerk. The duties of the Administrator/Clerk shall be as follows: (Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
A. Implement all policy directives promulgated by the Mayor, in his executive capacity, and by the City Council, in its legislative capacity.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 16/358
B. Supervise enforcement and execution of the City laws and supervise the City's administrative policies and procedures including personnel and
purchasing.
C. Coordinate and direct all City services provided through the various departments of the City.
D. Attend all meetings of the Council unless excused by the Mayor.
E. Keep the Mayor and City Council informed on the progress of City projects, programs and policies. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993)
F. Recommend to the Council, from time to time, any measures as the Administrator/Clerk shall deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or
welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services within the City.
G. Supervise and direct the official conduct of all officials and those employees of the City whom the Administrator/Clerk has power to appoint and also
those department heads or supervisors who report to or through the Office of City Administrator/City Clerk.
H. Prepare a proposed budget annually in cooperation with appropriate supervisory personnel of the City and all City boards, commissions or other
administrative agencies, and submit it to the Council. The Administrator/Clerk shall be responsible for administering the budget as adopted by the
Council and ensuring all expenditures are provided for by the budget or such amendments to the budget as may, from time to time, be approved by the
Council.
I. Keep the Mayor and City Council fully apprised of the financial and other conditions of the City and of future needs. The Administrator/Clerk shall
prepare and submit a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City within thirty (30) days of the end of each fiscal year and
shall provide such other reports as the City Council may request. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
J. Cooperate with any administrative agency, board or commission of the City and act as technical advisor when applying for grants to enable the Mayor,
City Council, boards and commissions to enhance their funding.
K. Supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance and management of all City property, capital improvements and undertakings of the City,
including the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans, drawings, specifications and estimates for capital improvements except for those
activities subject to the management or control of an administrative board, commission or agency. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993)
L. Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies, and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget and may approve capital and repair
expenditures up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for operational needs and up to twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for emergency needs.
The Administrator/Clerk shall negotiate and recommend to the City Council, for its approval, all other contracts for the necessary operation of or
maintenance of City services not subject to the bidding requirements of section 26.3, Iowa Code. On all expenditures for public improvements in
excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) let for public bid pursuant to chapter 26, Iowa Code, the Administrator/Clerk shall receive the
sealed bids and present them to the Council with a recommendation for awarding the contract1. (Ord. 07-26, 10-16-2007; amd. 2017 Code)
M. Conduct or supervise all business affairs of the City and cause accurate records to be kept by modern and efficient accounting methods. (Ord. 93-28,
9-7-1993)
N. Have charge and control of the Police and Fire Departments, except that the Mayor shall take command of the police and govern the City by
proclamation upon making a determination that a time of emergency or public danger exists as provided in section 372.14, Iowa Code. The Mayor may,
at any time, delegate in writing to the Administrator/Clerk, such emergency powers. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
O. Perform all other duties as may be required by the direction of the Council. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993)
P. Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under the Administrator's/Clerk's jurisdiction, with the approval of the City Council. (Ord.
93-28, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
Q. Appoint or employ, classify or reclassify appointed officials, subject to the approval of the City Council and all employees of the City, except for the
provisions of the Veteran's Preference Law, chapter 35C and Civil Service Law, chapter 400, and except for provisions of section 372.8, Iowa Code,
governing the Office of the City Clerk and such other officials or employees for whom another method of appointment is specifically provided by
ordinance or by State law. (Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
R. Have the power to discipline and to discharge summarily any official, appointee or employee the Administrator/Clerk is empowered to appoint or employ
subject, however, to the provisions of Civil Service Law, any personnel policy duly adopted by the Council, and subject to the right of hearing provided
by section 372.15, Iowa Code.
S. Summarily investigate, or cause to be investigated, the affairs and conduct of any department, agency, officer or employee subject to the supervision of
the Administrator/Clerk. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
T. Assist the City Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission in the carrying out of the Comprehensive Plan for City development and assist all
other forms of planning within the City government. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 17/358
1-8C-4: COUNCIL NOT TO INTERFERE WITH APPOINTMENTS OR REMOVALS:
Neither the Council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or removal from, Office by the City Administrator/City
Clerk or any of the Administrator's/Clerk's subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officials and employees in the
administrative services of the City. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely
through the City Administrator/City Clerk and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the City
Administrator/City Clerk, either publicly or privately. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
1-8C-5: BOND:
The City Administrator/City Clerk shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the Council, said bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of all
the Administrator's/Clerk's duties and in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The premium of the bond shall be paid by the City. (Ord. 93-28,
9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
ARTICLE D. CITY ATTORNEY
1-8D-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Council shall appoint a City Attorney and any Assistant City Attorney to serve at the discretion of the Council. Engagement of the City Attorney and
any Assistant City Attorney shall be at compensation levels and upon other terms and conditions established by the Council. Any Assistant City Attorney
shall have duties and responsibilities assigned by the City Attorney and approved by the City Administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the City Attorney
may be shared or divided with any Assistant City Attorney subject to approval by the City Administrator. (Ord. 11-20, 11-1-2011)
1-8D-2: ATTORNEY FOR CITY:
The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all legal matters affecting the City's interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court,
tribunal, commission or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all actions and proceedings involving the City when requested to do so by the
Council or City Administrator. (Ord. 11-20, 11-1-2011)
1-8D-3: POWER OF ATTORNEY:
The City Attorney shall sign in behalf of the City all appeal bonds and other bonds and papers that may be necessary in connection with matters before
any court and the City shall be bound with respect thereto. (Ord. 11-20, 11-1-2011)
1-8D-4: ADDITIONAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The City Attorney shall be the Chief Legal Advisor to the Council and other City officers in respect to their duties. In connection therewith, the City Attorney
shall have the duty and responsibility to:
A. Upon request of the Council, Mayor or City Administrator, attend meetings of the Council.
B. Draw ordinances and report to the Council respecting defects in ordinances when they become known to the City Attorney.
C. Prepare documents of a legal nature regarding matters in which the City is interested at the request of any Council member, the Mayor or City
Administrator.
D. Give advice or issue opinions on questions of law arising out of any ordinance, contract, claim, dispute, demand, proceeding or matter affecting the City,
at the request of any Council member, the Mayor or City Administrator.
E. Provide such other legal services respecting matters affecting the City as required by City ordinances or State law or as requested by the Council,
Mayor or City Administrator. (Ord. 11-20, 11-1-2011)
1-8D-5: REPORT TO COUNCIL:
The City Attorney shall submit to the Council not later than January 31 of each year a report on all civil cases involving the City settled or decided during
the preceding year ended December 31 and as of then pending. (Ord. 11-20, 11-1-2011)
1-8D-6: SPECIAL COUNSEL:
When deemed necessary or appropriate, special counsel may be retained by the City upon approval by the Council. (Ord. 11-20, 11-1-2011)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 18/358
ARTICLE E. CITY ASSESSOR
1-8E-1: APPOINTMENT:
There shall be selected a City Assessor in accordance with the provisions of section 441.1, Code of Iowa, as amended. (1985 Code)
1-8E-2: MEETINGS:
The Mayor is hereby ordered and directed to call joint meetings of the Conference Board, consisting of the Board of Supervisors of Cerro Gordo County,
the School Board of Mason City Independent School District and the Council of the City, from time to time as may be required by law to comply with and to
put into effect the provisions of said section 441.6, Code of Iowa, as amended. (1953 Code § 23-5; amd. Ord. 1626, 3-15-1982)
1-8E-3: EXAMINING BOARD:
There is hereby created, as set forth in chapter 441 of the Code of Iowa, a three (3) member Examining Board consisting of a representative from each
unit of the Conference Board, who shall serve a term of six (6) years; the purpose of said Examining Board is to conduct examinations and certify eligible
candidates for the position of Assessor to the Conference Board. (1985 Code)
1-8E-4: BOARD OF REVIEW:
There is hereby created, as set forth in section 441.31, Code of Iowa, a Board of Review whose purpose is to hold annual sessions during the month of
May and for an additional period as required under section 441.37, Code of Iowa, and shall hold as many meetings as required to discharge its duties,
which is to equalize assessments on property. (1985 Code)
ARTICLE F. DEPARTMENT OF CITY ENGINEER
1-8F-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the department of City Engineering in the City, which shall consist of the Engineering Division which includes the Traffic Control
Division, water supply and waterworks system, the sanitary sewer system and the stormwater collection system of the City. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996; amd.
2017 Code)
1-8F-2: CITY ENGINEER; APPOINTMENT:
Said City Engineer shall be appointed by the City Administrator, subject to the approval of the City Council and shall hold office thereafter, or until a
successor is duly appointed and qualified. Said City Engineer shall be a registered professional engineer, registered by the Board of Engineering
Examiners of the State of Iowa, or if a registered professional engineer in another state, be able to obtain registration in the State of Iowa within one (1)
year of appointment. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8F-3: DUTIES:
The City Engineer shall be responsible for the management, operation and maintenance of the Engineering Division and the Supervisors/Superintendents
of each division, subject to the approval of the City Administrator. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8F-4: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
In all cases where private property is proposed to be assessed for public improvements, it shall be the duty of the City Engineer to advise the City
Administrator/Council with reference to the value of the respective lots, parts of lots, or parcels of land, and the property of any railway company or street
railway company whose property may be liable for such special assessment, and to determine the amounts which may be assessed against the owners
thereof. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8F-5: ASSISTANT CITY ENGINEER:
A. Appointment, Term: When authorized by the City Administrator, an Assistant City Engineer may be appointed by the City Engineer, subject to the
approval of the City Administrator, and shall hold office thereafter, or until a successor is appointed and qualified. Said Assistant shall be a registered
engineer in training at time of appointment.
B. Supervision, Duties: The Assistant City Engineer shall be under the direct supervision of the City Engineer, and shall perform all utilities and engineering
related duties and functions as assigned by the City Engineer. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996; amd. 2017 Code)
ARTICLE G. DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 19/358
1-8G-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is established the Department of Human Resources in the City, which shall consist of the Director of Human Resources and such other employees
as may from time to time be appointed by the City Administrator. (Ord. 11-21, 11-1-2011)
1-8G-2: APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR:
The Director of Human Resources shall be appointed by the City Administrator and serve under the supervision and direction of the City Administrator.
(Ord. 11-21, 11-1-2011)
1-8G-3: DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
A. Manage, operate and maintain Department of Human Resources.
B. Administer personnel system subject to personnel rules approved and adopted by the City Council and subject to applicable City ordinances and as
directed by the City Administrator.
C. Make all appointments to City service in accordance with personnel rules then in effect, unless such power is specifically assigned by law to another
appointing authority.
D. Act as liaison between Civil Service Commission and City and support person for commission.
E. Recruit applicants for civil service and noncivil service positions.
F. Prepare and periodically review and revise personnel rules and regulations for presentation to the City Council for adoption, covering titles,
classifications, working hours, leaves of absence, transfers and promotions, cause for discharge and suspension, sexual harassment and such other
subjects as may be necessary or advisable to carry out the intent and purpose of the City personnel system.
G. Negotiate and administer labor management contracts within the purview of the State Public Employment Relations Act.
H. Process all Municipal employment appointments, status changes and other personnel actions and maintain personnel records.
I. Coordinate employee training programs.
J. Ensure that all employment policies and practices of the City are administered consistently with applicable law.
K. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the City Administrator. (Ord. 11-21, 11-1-2011)
ARTICLE H. DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT
1-8H-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created and established a Development Services Department in the City of Mason City, which shall consist of the Director of Development
Services and such other employees as may from time to time be appointed by the City Administrator.
A. The Development Services Department shall be organized into the following divisions, which shall be under the direction of the Director of Development
Services:
1. The Planning and Zoning Division;
2. The Transit Operations and Safety Division;
3. The Building Inspections Division; and
4. The Code Enforcement Division. (Ord. 13-04, 3-5-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8H-2: DIRECTOR; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
The Director of Development Services shall be appointed by the City Administrator. (Ord. 13-04, 3-5-2013)
1-8H-3: DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 20/358
The Director of Development Services shall be under the direct administrative supervision of the City Administrator, and shall have the following duties and
perform the following functions:
A. Direct development of the community's Comprehensive Plan, subdivision and zoning ordinances, including the necessary research, analysis, plan
preparation, design, program development, and writing and editing of reports.
B. Direct development and implementation of the City's community development plans and redevelopment plans, and coordinate with other departments
and agencies regarding housing initiatives, and assist in Building and Zoning Code enforcement.
C. Direct analysis of the City's physical and socioeconomic characteristics; direct land use, population and economic forecasts.
D. Act as technical advisor on planning, economic growth and development matters to the Mayor, City Council, City Administrator, Planning and Zoning
Commission, Zoning Board of Adjustment and appear before the Council and commission to report or advise on major planning, economic growth and
community development projects, significant economic, housing, land use and population study findings, and new planning and development
techniques being utilized in other communities.
E. Work with all City departments in matters relating to planning, economic growth and community development programs.
F. Work with Federal, State and adjoining local governments in implementing the City's planning, economic growth and community development programs.
G. Prepare and administer the departmental budgets; assign staff, determine schedules, and review progress of departmental projects and initiatives.
H. Review public works projects referred to the department by other City departments, special districts, the County and other governmental agencies.
I. In cooperation with other departments, maintain the long range capital needs list, prepare the capital improvements program, and aid in the development
of the annual budget.
J. Prepare educational and informational materials, consult with developers, public officials, local agencies and citizens on planning, economic growth and
development matters; coordinate and review work performed by professional consulting firms retained for planning, and development studies. (Ord. 13-
04, 3-5-2013)
K. Manage the personnel process and related agreements for animal control Code enforcement and stray animal shelter responsibilities under title 8 of
this Code and related duties as assigned by the Director of Development Services.
L. Shall be responsible for the management, operation and maintenance of the Development Services Department and shall appoint staff required to
operate the department subject to the approval of the City Administrator, and as approved by the City Council, from time to time. (Ord. 13-04, 3-5-2013;
amd. 2017 Code)
1-8H-4: PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION:
The Planning and Zoning Division shall be under the direction of the Planning and Zoning Manager. The Planning and Zoning Division shall be responsible
for administration of all planning, zoning, subdivision and related duties and functions as required or authorized by this Code and applicable State and
Federal regulations or statutes; zoning administration and enforcement; and related duties as assigned by the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 13-
04, 3-5-2013)
1-8H-5: TRANSIT OPERATIONS AND SAFETY DIVISION:
The Transit Operations and Safety Division shall be under the direction of the Transit Operations and Safety Manager.
A. Transit Operations: The Transit Operations and Safety Division shall manage the City's transit functions. In addition, Division Manager shall prepare and
manage the division budget, ensure proper use of public funds, seek improvements to the operation of the City transit system, conduct studies, and
encourage growth of the system.
B. Safety: The Transit Operations and Safety Manager shall coordinate the City's safety function, to promote employee and public safety, manage and
minimize liability risk, and provide training as necessary or as required to meet local, State and Federal guidelines and requirements. (Ord. 13-04, 3-5-
2013; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8H-6: BUILDING INSPECTIONS DIVISION:
The Building Inspections Division shall be under the direction of the Chief Building Official. The Chief Building Official shall have the following duties:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 21/358
A. Serves as the Chief Building Official of the City. Reviews and enforces building safety ordinances. Examines plans and inspects construction projects to
determine compliance with City ordinances.
B. Acts as advisor on building and Code enforcement matters to the City Administrator, Director of Development Services, Mayor, City Council and other
City departments.
C. Supervises the building maintenance and repairs of City Hall.
D. Works with other City departments in matters relating to building codes and Building Code enforcement.
E. In consultation with the Code Enforcement Division, supervises condemnation and demolition of unsafe or abandoned structures within Mason City.
F. Consults with contractors, developers, public officials, local agencies, and citizens on Building Code matters; coordinates and reviews work performed
by architects, contractors and developers.
G. Other related duties as assigned by the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 13-04, 3-5-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8H-7: CODE ENFORCEMENT DIVISION:
The Code Enforcement Division shall be under the direction of the Code Enforcement Manager.
A. The Code Enforcement Division shall perform all Nuisance Code enforcement responsibilities under title 4 of this Code and the Housing Code and
rental dwelling unit inspection requirements under title 10, chapter 2, article F of this Code.
B. The Code Enforcement Officers shall observe and investigate Nuisance and Housing Code complaints and violations, issue and serve notice to abate,
and shall make reasonable accommodations to violators to gain compliance with this Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officers shall have authority to issue citations and authority to act as an officer of the court when requested.
D. The Code Enforcement Division shall consult with the Building Inspections Division regarding condemnation and demolition of unsafe or abandoned
structures, and shall supervise the process. (2017 Code)
ARTICLE I. BAND DIRECTOR
1-8I-1: EMPLOYMENT OF BAND DIRECTOR:
The City Administrator, subject to the approval of the Council, shall enter into a contract of employment of a band director and for members of the
Municipal band. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8I-2: PROVISIONS OF CONTRACT:
The contract for the band shall provide for the furnishing of free concerts for a reasonable period of time during the summer months and shall also provide
for the compensation to be paid to said band director and to the members of said band. (1953 Code § 25-2)
1-8I-3: PAYMENTS FROM BAND FUND:
The compensation of the band director, members of the band, and all expenses with reference to the band shall be paid from funds of the City legally
usable for such purposes. (1953 Code § 25-3)
Chapter 9
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
1-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are hereby defined:
ELECTIONS: Municipal or special elections approved by the City Council, provided by chapter 376, Iowa Code.
MAJORITY: One (1) vote more than one-half (1/2) the number of votes cast for all candidates for a particular office, as provided in section 376.9, Iowa
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 22/358
Code, provided, however, that in at large elections in which more than one (1) position is to be filled, "majority" shall be one (1) vote more than the total
number of votes cast for all candidates divided by the number of positions to be filled. (Ord. 97-24, 10-7-1997)
1-9-2: CANDIDATES FOR CITY OFFICES:
All candidates for all elective City offices shall be nominated by petition as provided by sections 376.4 through 376.9, Iowa Code, and any amendments
thereto. (Ord. 97-24, 10-7-1997)
1-9-3: RUNOFF ELECTIONS ADOPTED:
The provisions of section 376.9, Iowa Code, providing for a runoff election are hereby adopted in lieu of the requirement for a primary in sections 376.6
and 376.7 thereof. (Ord. 97-24, 10-7-1997; amd. 2017 Code)
Each candidate at a Municipal election receiving a majority of all votes cast for the office sought shall be declared elected. A runoff election shall be held
only for positions unfilled because of failure of a sufficient number of candidates to receive a majority vote in the regular City election. Candidates for runoff
are those who do not receive a majority of the votes cast for the office for which they have filed as follows:
A. If no candidate for a single office receives a majority of the votes cast for that office, the two (2) candidates receiving the largest number of votes
shall be placed upon the runoff ballot.
B. In an at large election to fill more than one (1) position, any candidate receiving a "majority" of the votes as defined in section 1-9-1 of this chapter
shall be declared elected. If a sufficient number of candidates do not receive a majority of the votes to fill all of the positions, those candidates
receiving the highest number of votes less than a majority equal to twice the number of positions remaining to be filled shall be placed on the runoff
ballot.
Any such runoff election shall be held four (4) weeks after the date of the regular City election and shall be conducted in the same manner as regular City
elections.
Candidates in the runoff election who receive the highest number of votes cast for each office on the ballot are elected to the extent necessary to fill the
positions open. (Ord. 97-24, 10-7-1997)
1-9-4: ELECTION COSTS:
The cost of any Municipal election shall be borne by the City and shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 1477, 1-15-1979)
1-9-5: ELECTION WARDS AND PRECINCTS:
A. Ward 1 Precinct 1: Beginning at the intersection of the North City Limits with U.S. Highway 65, thence Southeast along U.S. Highway 65 to North
Federal Avenue, thence South along North Federal Avenue to 18th Street Northeast, thence East along 18th Street Northeast to North Pennsylvania
Avenue, thence South along North Pennsylvania Avenue to 11th Street Northeast, thence West along 11th Street Northeast to North Federal Avenue,
thence South along North Federal Avenue to East State Street, thence East along East State Street to its intersection with South Virginia Avenue,
thence Northerly then West along unnamed, paved East Park road to 4th Street Northeast, thence West along 4th Street Northeast to North Carolina
Avenue, thence North along North Carolina Avenue to its intersection with the North City Limits, thence West along the City Limits to the point of
beginning.
Ward 1 Precinct 2: Beginning at the intersection of the North City Limits with North Carolina Avenue, thence South along North Carolina Avenue to 9th
Street Northeast, thence East along 9th Street Northeast to Birch Drive, thence Southeast along Birch Drive to its intersection with the Canadian Pacific
Railway tracks, thence northeasterly along the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks to its intersection with the North City Limits, thence West and North
following City Limits line to the point of beginning.
Ward 1 Precinct 3: Beginning at the intersection of the North City Limits with the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks, thence Southwesterly along the
Canadian Pacific Railway tracks to Birch Drive, thence Northwest along Birch Drive to its intersection with 9th Street Northeast, thence East along 9th
Street Northeast to its intersection with North Carolina Avenue, thence South along North Carolina Avenue to 4th Street Northeast, thence East along
4th Street Northeast to its intersection with the unnamed, paved East Park road, thence East along the unnamed, paved East Park road East and
South to its intersection with East State Street, thence East along East State Street to South Indiana Avenue, thence South along South Indiana
Avenue to 4th Street Southeast, thence East along 4th Street Southeast to its intersection with the East City Limits, thence North and West along City
Limits to the point of beginning.
Ward 2 Precinct 1: Beginning at the intersection of the Union Pacific Railroad tracks with 12th Street Northwest, thence East along 12th Street
Northwest to North Federal Avenue, thence South along North Federal Avenue to West State Street, thence West along West State Street to South
Washington Avenue, thence South along South Washington Avenue to 2nd Street Southwest, thence West along 2nd Street Southwest to the
intersection of South Monroe Avenue and 2nd Street Southwest, thence continuing West along a line extending from the intersection of 2nd Street
Southwest and South Monroe Avenue to the Union Pacific Railroad tracks, thence North along the Union Pacific Railroad tracks to the point of
beginning.
Ward 2 Precinct 2: Beginning at the intersection of the West City Limits with 4th Street Southwest, thence East along 4th Street Southwest to South
Pierce Avenue, thence North along South Pierce Avenue to 2nd Street Southwest, thence East along 2nd Street Southwest to South Jackson Avenue,
thence North along South Jackson Avenue to 1st Street Southwest, thence East along 1st Street Southwest to the Union Pacific Railroad tracks,
thence north along the Union Pacific Railroad tracks to 6th Street Northwest, thence West along 6th Street Northwest to North Tyler Avenue, thence
North along North Tyler Avenue to 8th Street Northwest, thence West along 8th Street Northwest to North Pierce Avenue, thence North along North
Pierce Avenue to 12th Street Northwest, thence West along 12th Street Northwest to North Taft Avenue, thence North along North Taft Avenue to 15th
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 23/358
Street Northwest, thence West along 15th Street Northwest to North Taft Avenue, thence North along North Taft Avenue to its intersection with the
North City Limits, thence West and South along City Limits to the point of beginning.
Ward 2 Precinct 3: Beginning at the intersection of the North City Limits with North Taft Avenue, thence South along North Taft Avenue to 15th Street
Northwest, thence East along 15th Street Northwest to North Taft Avenue, thence South along North Taft Avenue to 12th Street Northwest, thence East
along 12th Street Northwest to North Pierce Avenue, thence South along North Pierce Avenue to 8th Street Northwest, thence East along 8th Street
Northwest to North Tyler Avenue, thence South along North Tyler Avenue to 6th Street Northwest, thence East along 6th Street Northwest to the Union
Pacific Railroad tracks, thence North along Union Pacific Railroad tracks to 12th Street Northwest, thence East along 12th Street Northwest to North
Federal Avenue, thence South along North Federal Avenue to 11th Street Northeast, thence East along 11th Street Northeast to North Pennsylvania
Avenue, thence North along North Pennsylvania Avenue to 18th Street Northeast, thence West along 18th Street Northeast to North Federal Avenue,
thence North along North Federal Avenue to U.S. Highway 65 to its intersection with the North City Limits, thence West and South along City Limits to
the point of beginning.
Ward 3 Precinct 1: Beginning at the intersection of South Washington Avenue and West State Street, thence East along West State Street to East
State Street to its intersection with South Indiana Avenue, thence South along South Indiana Avenue to 4th Street Southeast, thence West along 4th
Street Southeast to South Louisiana Avenue, thence South along South Louisiana Avenue to 6th Street Southeast, thence West along 6th Street
Southeast to South Federal Avenue, thence North along South Federal Avenue to 4th Street Southwest, thence West along 4th Street Southwest to
South Washington Avenue, thence North along South Washington Avenue to the point of beginning.
Ward 3 Precinct 2: Beginning at the point of intersection of the South City Limits with the Union Pacific Railroad tracks which pass along the West side
of Georgia Hanford Park, thence West to the intersection of 27th Street Southwest and South Federal Avenue, thence North along South Federal
Avenue to 22nd Street Southeast, thence East along 22nd Street Southeast to South Pennsylvania Avenue, thence North along South Pennsylvania
Avenue to 12th Street Southeast, thence West along 12th Street Southeast to South Federal Avenue, thence North along South Federal Avenue to the
Canadian Pacific Railway tracks, thence East along the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks to South Pennsylvania Avenue, thence North along South
Pennsylvania Avenue to the intersection of South Pennsylvania Avenue and a line extending West from the intersection of 9th Street Southeast and
South Jersey Avenue, thence East along said line to the intersection of 9th Street Southeast and South Jersey Avenue, thence East along 9th Street
Southeast to South Georgia Avenue, thence North along South Georgia Avenue to 6th Street Southeast, thence East along 6th Street Southeast to
South Virginia Avenue, thence South along South Virginia Avenue to 19th Street Southeast, thence West along 19th Street Southeast to the
abandoned Union Pacific Railroad tracks, thence South along abandoned Union Pacific Railroad tracks to its intersection with the South City Limits,
thence West along City Limits to the point of beginning.
Ward 3 Precinct 3: Beginning at the intersection of the South City Limits with the abandoned Union Pacific Railroad tracks, thence North along
abandoned Union Pacific Railroad tracks to 19th Street Southeast, thence East along 19th Street Southeast to South Virginia Avenue, thence North
along South Virginia Avenue to 6th Street Southeast, thence East along 6th Street Southeast to South Louisiana Avenue, thence North along South
Louisiana Avenue to 4th Street Southeast, thence East along 4th Street Southeast to its intersection with the East City Limits, thence South and West
along City Limits to the point of beginning.
Ward 4 Precinct 1: Beginning at the intersection of South Pierce Avenue with 2nd Street Southwest, thence East along 2nd Street Southwest to South
Jackson Avenue, thence North along South Jackson Avenue to 1st Street Southwest, thence East along 1st Street Southwest to the Union Pacific
Railroad tracks, thence South along the Union Pacific Railroad tracks to the intersection of the Union Pacific Railroad tracks and a line extending West
from the intersection of 2nd Street Southwest and South Monroe Avenue, thence East along said line to the intersection of 2nd Street Southwest and
South Monroe Avenue, thence East along 2nd Street Southwest to South Washington Avenue, thence South along South Washington Avenue to 4th
Street Southwest, thence East along 4th Street Southwest to South Federal Avenue, thence South along South Federal Avenue to 6th Street
Southeast, thence East along 6th Street Southeast to South Georgia Avenue, thence South along South Georgia Avenue to 9th Street Southeast,
thence West along 9th Street Southeast to the intersection of 9th Street Southeast and South Jersey Avenue, thence West along a line extending from
the intersection of 9th Street Southeast and South Jersey Avenue to its intersection with South Pennsylvania Avenue, thence South along South
Pennsylvania Avenue to the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks, thence West along the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks to South Federal Avenue, thence
South along South Federal Avenue to 12th Street Southeast, thence East along 12th Street Southeast to South Pennsylvania Avenue, thence South
along South Pennsylvania Avenue to 19th Street Southeast, thence West along 19th Street Southeast to South Federal Avenue, thence North along
South Federal Avenue to 15th Street Southwest, thence West and North along 15th Street Southwest to the intersection of South Monroe Avenue,
thence South along South Monroe Avenue to the intersection of the Union Pacific Railroad tracks, thence North along the Union Pacific Railroad tracks
to the intersection of the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks, thence West along the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks to Cheslea Creek, thence North
along Cheslea Creek to 4th Street Southwest, thence East along 4th Street Southwest to South Pierce Avenue, thence North along South Pierce
Avenue to the point of beginning.
Ward 4 Precinct 2: Beginning at the point of intersection of the South City Limits with a line extending South from the South end of South Pierce
Avenue, thence North along said line to beginning of South end of South Pierce Avenue and continuing North along South Pierce Avenue to the
intersection of 19th Street Southwest, thence West along 19th Street Southwest to Cheslea Creek, thence North along Cheslea Creek to the Canadian
Pacific Railway tracks, thence East along the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks to the intersection of the Union Pacific Railroad tracks, thence Southeast
along the East fork of the Union Pacific Railroad tracks to South Monroe Avenue, thence North along South Monroe Avenue to the intersection of 15th
Street Southwest, thence South and East along 15th Street Southwest to South Federal Avenue, thence South along South Federal Avenue to 19th
Street Southeast, thence East along 19th Street Southeast to South Pennsylvania Avenue, thence South along South Pennsylvania Avenue to 22nd
Street Southeast, thence West along 22nd Street Southeast to South Federal Avenue, thence South along South Federal Avenue to the intersection of
27th Street Southwest and South Federal Avenue, thence West from the intersection of 27th Street Southwest and South Federal Avenue to the
intersection of City Limits and the Union Pacific Railroad, thence South and East around City Limits to the point of beginning.
Ward 4 Precinct 3: Beginning at the intersection of the West City Limits with 4th Street Southwest, thence East along 4th Street Southwest to Cheslea
Creek, thence South along Cheslea Creek to 19th Street Southwest, thence East along 19th Street Southwest to South Pierce Avenue, thence South
along South Pierce Avenue to the Southern end of South Pierce Avenue, thence South to the point of intersection with a line extending South from the
end of South Pierce Avenue to its intersection with the South City Limits, thence West and North along City Limits to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 11-07, 8-16-2011)
1-9-6: VOTING PLACES:
The following designated locations are hereby established as voting places within the precincts of the City, to remain in effect for all elections held in the
City of Mason City until such time as the City Council deems it necessary and advisable to change said locations: (Ord. 91-25, 11-5-1991)
MC01 Ward 1 pct 1 Trinity Lutheran Church 213 N. Pennsylvania Ave.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 24/358
MC02 Ward 1 pct 2 Highland Golf Course club house 944 17th St. NE
MC03 Ward 1 pct 3 Grace Evangelical Free Church 440 N. Illinois Ave.
MC04 Ward 2 pct 1 Cerro Gordo Courthouse boardroom 220 N. Washington Ave.
MC05 Ward 2 pct 2 First Presbyterian Church 100 S. Pierce Ave.
MC06 Ward 2 pct 3 Grace United Methodist Church 200 14th St. NW
MC07 Ward 3 pct 1 Masonic Temple 304 1st St. SE
MC08 Ward 3 pct 2 Wesley United Methodist Church 1405 S. Pennsylvania Ave.
MC09 Ward 3 pct 3 First Covenant Church 411 S. Ohio Ave.
MC10 Ward 4 pct 1 NIACOG Building 525 6th St. SW
MC 11 Ward 4 pct 2 Rolling Acres CR Church 340 19th SW
MC 12 Ward 4 pct 3 Newman Catholic High School 2445 19th St. SW
(Ord. 91-25, 11-5-1991; amd. Ord. 93-31, 10-19-1993; 2017 Code)
Chapter 10
CONTRACT LETTING PROCEDURES
1-10-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall implement the provisions of Iowa Code chapters 23A.3, 26.3, 73A, 362, 572 and 573 regulating the advertisement and award of public
improvement contracts. This chapter establishes uniform requirements for construction contractors, subcontractors, vendors and suppliers who perform
services or construction work for a governmental body of the City on public improvement projects, and is to be construed, applied and enforced in
accordance with Iowa law. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
1-10-2: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe the City Administrator's, or a designee, authority to administer public improvement contracts. In order to protect
the public interest, it is the expressed purpose of this chapter to simplify, clarify and modernize the City's contract letting procedure to prevent fraud,
misrepresentation, collusion, favoritism, discrimination, improvidence, price fixing and bid peddling in the administration of public contracts. (Ord. 94-20, 8-
16-1994)
1-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined unless the context otherwise requires:
ADDENDA: Any written notice, typed statement or graphic instrument issued to prospective bidders prior to the receipt of bids.
BIDDER: Any business which submits an offer or proposal on the prescribed form setting forth the prices for the work to be performed.
BIDDING DOCUMENTS: The advertisement or invitation for bids, instructions to bidders, the bid form and the proposed contract documents, including all
addenda issued prior to receipt of bids.
BIDDING REQUIREMENTS: The advertisement or invitation for bids, general instruction to bidders, prebid instructions to bidders and the bid form.
BUSINESS: Any person, corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock, company, joint venture or any other private legal entity.
Business also means a contractor, subcontractor, vender or supplier.
CHANGE ORDER: A written order directing a contractor to make changes under that clause of the contract which allows the City to order changes without
consent of the contractor, and all such change orders shall require written approval from the Public Services Director, or a designee.
CONSTRUCTION: The process of building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of
any kind to any public real property. It does not include the routine operation, standard repair or customary maintenance of existing structures, buildings or
real property.
CONTRACT: All types of City agreements, regardless of their identification and any claim, account or demand against or agreement with a government
body, expressed or implied. The term "contract" shall not include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
CONTRACT MODIFICATION: Any written alteration approved by the Public Services Director or a designee, in specifications, delivery point, rate of
delivery, period of performance, price, quantity, or other provisions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract.
CONTRACTOR: Any business having a fully executed contract with a government body.
DATA: Recorded information regardless of form or characteristic.
DEFECTIVE WORK: Work that is unsatisfactory, faulty, deficient or fails to conform to the contract drawings and specifications, or does not meet the
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 25/358
requirements of any inspection, reference standard, test or approval referred to in the drawings and specifications or has been damaged prior to
recommendation of final payment.
DESIGNEE: A duly authorized representative of the Public Services Director holding an appointed position.
EMERGENCY: A sudden or unexpected situation or occurrence which would vitally affect the life, safety, health or property of citizens, or cause serious
loss or injury to the City. Emergency does not mean situations or occurrences which could have been anticipated through reasonable diligence and
foresight.
EMPLOYEE: An individual drawing a salary from the City of Mason City, whether elected or not, and any noncompensated individual performing personal
services for the City.
GOVERNMENT BODY: Any City department, commission, board, committee or agency.
GRATUITY: Consideration in any form, including but not limited to a gift, commission, discount and bonus.
IRRESPONSIBLE BIDDER: A bidder or a prospective bidder who fails to furnish, upon request from the Public Services Director or a designee, proof of
qualifications, financial stability, Iowa Labor Department certification and any other data required by this chapter. The term also means a bidder or
prospective bidder who has repeatedly made slow or unsatisfactory deliveries or progress during prior construction contracts, or who has violated, or
attempted to violate the provisions of other City contracts.
LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER: The bidder whose bid is the lowest of those bidders possessing the skill, financial resources and the ability to faithfully
perform the work outlined in the project manual.
MATERIALLY VARIES: Any item in the project manual that is made mandatory and nonwaivable.
PLANS: All drawings, diagrams, illustrations, schedules and other data or information which are specifically prepared or assembled in the project manual.
PROJECT MANUAL: The bidding requirements (invitation to bid and instructions to bidders), the contract forms (agreement, bond and certificates), the
contract conditions (general conditions, modifications to general conditions) and the project specifications.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS: Any building or construction work, either within or outside the corporate limits of the City, to be paid for, in whole or in part, by
the use of funds of the City, regardless of sources, including a building or improvement constructed or operated jointly with any other public or private
agency, but excluding urban renewal and low rent housing projects, industrial aid projects under Iowa Code chapter 419, emergency work or work
performed by employees of the City or a government body.
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER: A business which has the capability in all respects to perform fully the work as outlined in the project manual, and the integrity
and reliability which will assure good faith performance.
RESPONSIVE BIDDER: A business which has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects with the project manual, both as to the method and
timeliness of submission and to the substance of any contract provision.
SERVICES: The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are merely
incidental to the required performance. This term shall not include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
SPECIFICATIONS: Those portions of the contract document consisting of the mandatory written technical descriptions of materials, equipment,
construction systems, standards of workmanship as applied to the work and certain administrative details applicable thereto.
SUPPLIER: A manufacturer, fabricator, supplier, distributor, material person or vendor having a direct contract with the contractor or with any subcontractor
to furnish materials or equipment to be incorporated in the work by the contractor or any subcontractor.
TARGETED SMALL BUSINESS: A business as defined in the City's Targeted Small Business Guidelines, which is fifty one percent (51%) or more owned
and daily controlled by a female or a minority and is a mandatory requirement on all City projects.
WORK: The entire completed construction or the various separately identifiable parts thereof required to be furnished under the contract drawings and
specifications. Work also includes the contractor performing or furnishing labor, materials and equipment into the construction, and performing or providing
services and submitting documentation, all as required by the contract specifications. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994; amd. Ord. 94-20, 8-16-1994; 2017 Code)
1-10-4: GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF APPLICABLE LAW:
Unless provided elsewhere in this chapter, the principles of law and equity, including the Uniform Commercial Code of Iowa, and laws relative to capacity
to contract, agency, fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion, mistake or bankruptcy shall supplement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-
1994)
1-10-5: LAWS AND REGULATIONS:
Every bidder and contractor shall give all notices and comply with all laws and regulations of the City and State applicable to successfully performing a City
contract. If a bidder or contractor's action in connection with a contract is contrary to the laws and regulations of the City, the contractor or bidder shall bear
all claims, costs, losses and damages caused by, arising out of or resulting therefrom. A contractor or bidder shall be presumed to know or have
constructive knowledge of all laws and regulations of the City. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
1-10-6: REQUIREMENT OF GOOD FAITH:
All government bodies, businesses, bidders and contractors involved in the solicitation, negotiation, performance or administration of a City contract shall
act in good faith and fair dealing in trade. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 26/358
1-10-7: LOCAL PURCHASES:
The City Administrator, or designee, shall establish a City policy which requires consideration of purchasing goods, services and construction work from
Mason City owned businesses and from targeted small businesses which offer their goods, services and construction work at a cost and consideration,
relatively equal to businesses not located in the corporate limits of Mason City. (Ord. 94-20, 8-16-1994)
1-10-8: PROHIBITED INTERESTS IN PUBLIC CONTRACT:
In accordance with Iowa Code section 362.5, no City officer or employee shall have an interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or material
or the profits thereof or services to be furnished or performed for the officer's or employee's City. Except as provided for in subsections 3a through 3m of
section 362.5, a contract entered into in violation of this chapter shall be void. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
1-10-9: CONTRACT LETTING PROCEDURE:
When the estimated total cost to the City of a public improvement exceeds the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or the adjusted
competitive bid threshold established in Iowa Code section 314.1B, the Public Services Director, or designee, shall advertise for sealed bids for the
proposed improvement by posting a notice to bidders as provided in Iowa Code section 362.3, except that the notice to bidders may be posted not less
than thirteen (13) days and not more than forty five (45) days before the date for filing bids. When the cost of a public improvement is less than one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or the adjusted competitive bid threshold established in Iowa Code section 314.1B, the Public Services Director,
or designee, will not be compelled to advertise for sealed bids, but shall solicit, on an equal basis, sealed quotations from three (3) or more bidders,
including targeted small businesses. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this section shall not apply to contracts for emergency repairs to public improvements;
provided, however, that such emergency repairs shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of
the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
1-10-10: DIVULGING SEALED BIDS:
No public officer, deputy or employee shall directly or indirectly or in any manner whatsoever, at any time or in any manner than as provided by law, open
any sealed bid or convey or divulge to any person, business or bidder any part of the contents of a sealed bid, on any proposed public project under this
chapter. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
1-10-11: OPENING OF BIDS:
A. Receive And Open Bids: The Public Services Director, or designee, and the City Clerk shall preside at the public meeting convened to receive, open
and announce the amount of the bids. The Public Services Director shall reject any and all bidders who have been deemed irresponsible and unreliable
under section 1-10-16 of this chapter, based on the bidder's past work performance with the City. Each bidder shall accompany the bid with a bid
security amounting to not less than ten percent (10%) of the estimated total contract cost of the public improvement, or the amount of each bid. The bid
security shall be submitted in a separate sealed envelope and shall be opened by the City Clerk before the bid is disclosed. The bidder's security shall
be in the form of a cashier's or certified check drawn on a bank in Iowa or a bank chartered under the laws of the United States, or a certified share
draft drawn on a credit union in Iowa or chartered under the law of the United States, or a corporate surety which is satisfactory to the City.
B. Bid Security: The City Clerk shall determine the legal sufficiency of the bid security before the bidder's proposal is opened. The bid security shall contain
no condition except as provided by law. All bids that are submitted with legally insufficient bid security shall be rejected and returned to the bidder by
the City Clerk. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the bidder fails to execute the contract as provided in the plans and specifications, or by this
chapter, the full amount of the bid security shall be forfeited to the City in liquidation of damages for such failure. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
1-10-12: REJECTION OF BIDS:
General bids shall be for the complete work as outlined in the plans and specifications. Every general bid shall be on the form supplied by the City. No
general bid shall be rejected because the bidder failed to submit prices for, or information related to, any item or items for which no specific space is
provided on the form or which contains minor numerical errors. A bid containing minor immaterial defects or minor irregularities shall be accepted and read
under advisement; provided, however, that the reading of a bid, or the reading of a bid under advisement, shall not operate as a waiver of any immaterial
defects or deficiencies in the bid. Bids that materially vary from the project specifications shall be rejected for any of the following reasons:
A. If the bid is on a form other than that which is found in the project manual, as if the form is altered or any part thereof is detached.
B. If there are unauthorized additions, conditional or alternate bids, or irregularities of any kind which make the bid incomplete, indefinite or ambiguous as
to its meaning.
C. If the bidder adds any unauthorized provisions in the bid reserving the bidder a right to accept or reject an award of the contract, or adds any provision
giving the bidder a right to not enter into a contract with the City after approval of award.
D. If the bid does not contain a unit price for each pay item listed in the bid form, except in the case of authorized alternate pay items or if any unit prices
are obviously unbalanced, either in excess of or below the reasonable market analysis values.
E. If the bidder knowingly submits false, misleading or deceptive data or information with its bid proposal or commits the same for its subcontractors. (Ord.
08-15, 11-4-2008)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 27/358
1-10-13: CONTRACT AWARD:
A. Bid Tabulation: The City Engineer, or designee, shall submit a bid tabulation to the City Council at a public City Council meeting which will include a brief
description of any defects or irregularities. The City Council thereafter may waive any and all such immaterial defects or irregularities upon determining
such waiver to be in the best interest of the City. The City Council shall reserve the right to reject any and all general bids if it determined that the low
bidder, or their subcontractors, are not competent to perform the work as specified in the contract, and may reject any and all bids received, fix a new
date for receiving bids and order publication of a new notice to bidders.
B. Notice Of Award: Should the City Council award the contract, the City Clerk shall give the successful bidder an official notice of award within thirty (30)
days of the opening of the bids. Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice of award of contract, the successful bidder shall execute at least three
(3) counterparts of the agreement and provide the City Clerk with a performance payment bond as required by Iowa Code chapter 573, and such other
contract documents as required by the project manual. Failure on the part of the successful bidder to fully comply with the foregoing submissions within
twenty (20) days of receiving notice shall be considered just cause for voiding the agreement and the bidder forfeiting its bid bond.
C. Disclosure Of Subcontractors: A bidder awarded a construction contract with the City shall disclose the names of all subcontractors, who will work on
the project being bid, within forty eight (48) hours after the approval of the contract. If a subcontractor named by a bidder awarded a City construction
contract is replaced, or if the cost of work to be done by a subcontractor is reduced, the bidder shall disclose the name of the new subcontractor or the
amount of the reduced cost. (Ord. 08-15, 11-4-2008)
1-10-14: TIE LOW BIDS:
In the event identical low bids are received for the project from general bidders who are deemed to be responsive and responsible, the City Council may
award the contract to a locally owned business as it deems to be in the best interests of the City. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
1-10-15: SUSPENSION OF BIDDERS:
Based on the recommendation of the City Administrator, or designee, the City Council may suspend a bidder, contractor or subcontractor, depending on
the severity of the offense, from participating in other City construction contracts, or from taking part in City work as a subcontractor, for a period of not less
than six (6) months, nor more than eighteen (18) months. Any bidder, contractor or subcontractor who violates any provision in this section shall be
suspended for a period of time after a public hearing before the City Council Public Services Committee when it finds that the bidder, contractor or
subcontractor engaged in any of the following acts: (Ord. 94-20, 8-16-1994)
A. Continually failed or refused to correct deficient work or replace substandard or unauthorized materials found by the Public Services Department, or its
agent, or fails to make prompt progress payments to subcontractors for materials or labor in accordance with Iowa Code chapter 573.
B. Continually found not to be in reasonably close conformity with the project document or failed to correct work so as to be reasonably acceptable. (Ord.
94-3, 2-15-1994)
C. Continually failed to carry on the work in an acceptable manner or refused to comply with a written order of the Public Services Director, or designee,
within a reasonable time, or has responded to the Public Services Director, designee, City official or employee in any manner which is either
threatening, disparaging or insulting.
D. Persistently failed to timely complete a contract, or sought unreasonable extensions of time on current projects, or refused to comply with directives of
the Public Services Director, designee or the City Council.
E. Failed to perform the contract with skilled workers as required in the project document, or otherwise assigned or disposed of work to an unauthorized
contractor or to subcontract any portion thereof without approval of the Public Services Director, or a designee. (Ord. 94-20, 8-16-1994)
F. Forfeited a bid bond or failed to enter into a contract upon an offer of award by the City Council in response to a prior advertisement for bids for the
same project, or any combination of projects involving the same work for which the award is currently being considered.
G. Failed to comply with the nondiscrimination requirements of the standard specifications or special provisions as outlined in the contract.
H. Persistently or repeatedly refuses or fails to comply with the City's Target Small Business Program requirements and to effectively utilize female and
minority owned businesses on City public improvement projects, or has wilfully disregarded the rules, regulations and directives of the Mason City
Human Rights Commission1.
I. Failed to comply with the requirements of the Federal Davis Bacon requirements to pay prevailing wages during the course of a federally funded project,
as required by Federal law.
J. Been disqualified, suspended or debarred by any agency of the State, any of its municipalities or any Federal agency.
K. Subcontracted, employed, or otherwise used the services of anyone who has been disqualified by the City Council from working on City projects, or
employed or otherwise used the services of a City employee as prescribed in section 1-10-8 of this chapter.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 28/358
L. Been convicted of, or pled guilty to, or declared nolo contendere to, a charge of engaging in any conspiracy, collusion, price fixing or combination
thereof, or other unlawful act in restraint of trade, or business discrimination, or of similar charges in any Federal Court or a court of this or any other
state.
M. Offered, promised or given a gratuity to any person elected, selected, appointed, employed or otherwise engaged in public service to secure or fulfill a
City contract, or has employed as its own employees during the course of the project any of the foregoing. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
1-10-16: PROCEDURE FOR SUSPENSION:
A. Suspension: Following an investigation, the City Administrator, or authorized designee, shall determine if cause exists to suspend a bidder, contractor or
subcontractor from participating in subsequent City construction or repair work. If the City Administrator, or designee, finds that cause exists to
suspend, such findings shall be set forth in writing with a recommendation for suspension to the City Council Public Services Committee. The City
Administrator, or designee, shall officially serve notice on the respondent party within five (5) working days of the finding. The notice shall set forth in
detail the reasons supporting the recommendation, and the suggested period of suspension. The notice shall be sent to the respondent by certified
mail, return receipt requested.
B. Protest: Any business which receives official notification from the City Administrator, or designee, that suspension has been recommended may protest
the finding to the Public Services Committee. The protest shall be submitted in writing to the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the
notice. The City Clerk shall immediately schedule a hearing at which time the business must be allowed to present evidence or argument against the
suspension. The Public Services Committee hearing shall be scheduled by the City Clerk within ten (10) days of receipt of the written protest. Following
the suspension hearing, the Public Services Committee shall issue a proposed decision to the City Council to either support the suspension for a time
specified by the committee, or overrule the City Administrator's, or designee's, determination.
C. Action On Decision: If the City Council does not act on the Public Services Committee's proposed decision within thirty (30) days thereafter, the
committee's decision shall be considered accepted and binding. If suspension is the final outcome of the procedure outlined herein, the business shall
be immediately suspended. (Ord. 94-20, 8-16-1994)
1-10-17: MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION:
Reconsideration of an adverse decision of the Public Services Committee may be requested by the contractor, appellant, or any interested party who
submitted comments during the Public Service Committee proceeding, and any agency involving the protest. The motion for reconsideration shall contain
a detailed statement of the factual and legal grounds upon which reversal or modification is deemed warranted, specifying any errors of law made or
information not previously considered. Such motions shall be filed not later than ten (10) days after official service notice and receipt of such adverse
decision. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
1-10-18: EX PARTE COMMUNICATION:
No Public Services Committee member or City Council member shall receive, ex parte, any evidence, explanation, analysis or advice, whether written or
oral, regarding any matter at issue in an appeal, nor shall any person, contractor or employee directly or indirectly, ex parte, submit to the Public Services
Committee or City Council, any evidence, explanation, analysis or advice, whether written or oral, regarding any matter at issue in a protest or appeal.
(Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
1-10-19: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
A business adversely affected by a decision of the City may file a petition for judicial review in the Cerro Gordo County District Court. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-
1994)
1-10-20: DECEPTION RELATING TO CITY CONTRACTS:
A business commits a prima facie violation of this chapter if, in the course of business, it wilfully makes false statements, whether by affidavit, report or
other representation to any City official, employee, board or commission for the purpose of influencing the acceptance of a bid or contract. A business
which wilfully prevents or attempts to prevent any City officer or employee from performing their duty commits a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-
1994)
1-10-21: PENALTY:
Any business which is found after hearing to have violated the provisions of subsections 1-10-15I, J, K and L and section 1-10-18 of this chapter shall be
disbarred for three (3) years from conducting business with the City, or participating in any other City public improvement for a period not exceeding three
(3) years. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 29/358
Chapter 1
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
2-1-1: PURPOSE:
The Civil Service Commission of the City shall be an administrative tribunal created under the authority of chapter 400, Iowa Code. The purpose of said
commission shall be to preserve and protect the rights and privileges of civil service employees within City government, and to ensure efficient, effective
and harmonious public service for residents of Mason City. The purpose of the commission shall also be to hear and determine matters as set out in
section 2-1-8 of this chapter involving the rights and privileges of civil service employees based on the merits of each case. (Ord. 1616, 11-16-1981)
2-1-2: APPOINTMENTS; TERMS:
The Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council, shall appoint three (3) Civil Service Commissioners who shall hold office, one (1) until the first
Monday in April of the second year, one (1) until the first Monday in April of the third year, and one (1) until the first Monday in April of the fourth year after
such appointment, and whose successor shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years except that in case of a vacancy, the appointment shall be made to
fill the unexpired term. (Ord. 97-22, 9-2-1997)
2-1-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The Commissioners must be citizens of Iowa, eligible electors as defined in chapter 39, Iowa Code, and residents of the City preceding their appointment
and shall serve without compensation. A person, while on the commission, shall not hold or be a candidate for any office of public trust. (Ord. 87-20, 9-21-
1987; amd. 2017 Code)
Civil Service Commissioners shall not buy from, sell to, or in any manner become parties directly to any contract to furnish supplies, material, or labor to
the City in which they are Commissioners. (Ord. 87-20, 9-21-1987)
2-1-4: CHAIRMAN; CLERK; RECORDS:
The commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members. (Ord. 87-20, 9-21-1987)
For purposes of this chapter, the City Clerk, or a designee of the City Clerk, shall be Clerk of the commission and custodian of all records of the
commission. If an employee is appointed Clerk of the commission who is employed in a civil service status at the time of appointment as Clerk of the
commission, the appointee shall retain the civil service rights held before the appointment. (Ord. 97-22, 9-2-1997)
The Civil Service Commission shall keep a record of all its meetings and also a complete individual service record of each civil service employee which
record shall be permanent and kept up to date.
When duly certified by the Clerk of the commission, copies of all records and entries or papers pertaining to said record shall be admissible in evidence
with the same force and effect as the originals. All civil service records shall be confidential except as otherwise provided by State law, and shall be kept
under locked file. (Ord. 87-20, 9-21-1987)
2-1-5: MEETING PLACE; SUPPLIES:
The Civil Service Commission shall hereby be authorized the use of a meeting room within City Hall and the Council shall supply the commission with all
necessary equipment and qualified staff to enable it to properly perform its duties. (Ord. 97-22, 9-2-1997)
2-1-6: DUTIES:
The Civil Service Commission shall have and exercise the powers and duties as set forth in chapter 400, Iowa Code. The Civil Service Commission shall
adopt rules and regulations governing the administration of the Civil Service Program and shall also have the power to adopt, amend and rescind any
other rules and regulations necessary for the conducting of its business and for the preparation and administration of civil service examinations. (Ord.
1616, 11-16-1981)
2-1-7: APPLICABILITY; EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all appointive officers and employees except those positions set out in section 400.6, Iowa Code, or the most
recent amendment thereto. (Ord. 97-22, 9-2-1997; amd. 2017 Code)
2-1-8: HEARINGS AND APPEALS:
The Civil Service Commission shall have jurisdiction over suspensions, demotions, and discharges if no grievance procedure is provided in a collective
bargaining agreement applicable to a civil service employee and shall hold hearings on appeals regarding the same, if requested, within the terms of the
Civil Service Rules and Regulations. (Ord. 97-22, 9-2-1997)
2-1-9: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 30/358
Judicial review of the final actions of the commission may be sought in accordance with section 400.27, Iowa Code. (Ord. 1616, 11-16-1981)
Chapter 2
CITY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-2-1: APPOINTMENT OF COMMISSION:
Pursuant to chapter 414, Code of Iowa, there shall be a City Planning and Zoning Commission which shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be
citizens of the City and shall be qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the development of a City plan and the amending of
City zoning ordinances, and who shall not hold any elective office in the Municipal government. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to
the approval of the City Council for terms of five (5) years following their appointment, and shall serve without compensation except for actual expenses,
which shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 1355, 5-3-1976; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
2-2-2: VACANCIES:
A member whose term has expired shall continue to serve until a successor is appointed and approved. In the event of any vacancies on the City Planning
and Zoning Commission, the appointment of a successor shall be made by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Council, and shall be for the balance
of the unexpired term. (Ord. 1355, 5-3-1976; amd. 2017 Code)
2-2-3: ORGANIZATION:
This commission shall annually, at its first meeting in April, choose one (1) of its members to act as Chair of the commission, and another of its members
Vice Chair, who shall perform all the duties of the Chair during his/her absence or disability. (Ord. 1355, 5-3-1976; amd. 2017 Code)
The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its organization and procedures as may be deemed
necessary. (Ord. 1355, 5-3-1976)
2-2-4: POWERS AND DUTIES, PLANNING:
A. Approval Of Plats: When required by title 11, chapter 3 of this Code, all plans, plats or replats of subdivisions of land embraced in Mason City or within
the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the public,
shall first be submitted to the City Planning and Zoning Commission, and its recommendation obtained before action by the City Council.
B. Approval Of Street Or Park Improvement: No plan for any street, park, parkway, boulevard, trafficway, river front or other public improvement affecting
the City plan shall be finally approved, or the character or location thereof determined, unless such proposal shall first have been submitted to the City
Planning and Zoning Commission. Such requirements for recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action where the commission, after thirty (30)
days' written notice requesting such recommendations, has failed to file the same.
C. Recommendations To Improvements: No statuary, memorial or work of art in a public place, and no public building, public structure or appurtenance
shall be located or erected or a site for such structure obtained until and unless the design and proposed location of such structure be submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for its recommendation. No permits for such structures shall be issued without the commission having made the
above recommendation. However, such requirements for recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action where the commission, after thirty (30)
days' written notice requesting such recommendations, has failed to file the same.
D. Comprehensive Plan: The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall have full power and authority to make or cause to be made such surveys,
studies, maps, plans or charts of the City limits which, in the opinion of the commission, bears relation to a comprehensive plan. It shall bring its studies
and recommendations to the attention of the Council, and the commission may publish said studies and recommendations.
1. For the purpose of making a Comprehensive Plan for the physical development of the City, the commission shall make careful and comprehensive
studies of present conditions and future growth of the City with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the
general purposes of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the City and its environs which will, in
accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience and economy in the process of development.
2. The plan shall be made with consideration of the smart planning principles in section 18B.1, Iowa Code, and may include the information specified in
section 18B.2, subsection 2, Iowa Code.
3. Before the adoption of said Comprehensive Plan, or any part of it, or any substantial amendment to it, the commission shall hold at least one (1)
public hearing. Legal notice of such hearing will be given by one (1) publication not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date
of the hearing. The adoption of the plan, or part, or amendment, shall require a vote of not less than two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the
commission.
4. After adoption of said plan or amendment of the same by the commission, the plan shall be forwarded for approval by the Council. If the commission
disapproves the proposed plan or amendment thereof, it may be adopted by the Council with an affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the total
membership of the Council.
5. When said plan, or any modification or amendment, shall receive the approval of the council, the said plan shall constitute the official City plan of the
City of Mason City until subsequently modified or amended. (Ord. 1355, 5-3-1976; amd. 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 31/358
2-2-5: POWERS AND DUTIES, ZONING:
A. Recommend to the City Council the boundaries of the various original zoning districts of the City and appropriate regulations and restrictions to be
enforced therein.
B. After the adoption of such zoning district boundaries, regulations and restrictions, the City Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend to the
City Council amendments, supplements, changes or modifications. (Ord. 1355, 5-3-1976)
C. Before presenting any recommendation to the City Council, the commission shall, with due diligence, prepare a preliminary report and hold a public
hearing thereon before submitting its final recommendation to the City Council, in accordance with the requirements of section 12-4-2 of this Code. The
City Council shall not hold its public hearings or take action until it has received the final recommendation from the City Planning and Zoning
Commission. (Ord. 1355, 5-3-1976; amd. 2017 Code)
2-2-6: REPORTS:
Immediately following the expiration of the Municipal fiscal year, the City Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a report to the City Council of its
proceedings, together with a full statement of its receipts, disbursements and the progress of its work for the preceding fiscal year. (Ord. 1355, 5-3-1976)
Chapter 3
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT1
2-3-1: MEMBERSHIP:
A Zoning Board of Adjustment, to be hereinafter referred to as the "board", is hereby established pursuant to section 414.7, Code of Iowa. The board shall
consist of five (5) members, and two (2) alternates, each to be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council, for a term of five (5)
years. Alternate members shall participate and vote on matters before the board only when called upon to make up a quorum or comprise a full five (5)
member panel at any meeting. In no case shall they actively participate where all five (5) regular members are present. A member whose term has expired
shall continue to serve until a successor is appointed and approved. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner for the unexpired term of the member
whose office becomes vacant. The members of the board shall serve without pay and shall be removable by the Council only for cause upon written
charges and after a public hearing. (Ord. 10-16, 7-6-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
2-3-2: ORGANIZATION:
The board shall elect a Chairman from among its own members. Such Chairman, or in his absence the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. There shall be a fixed place of meeting, and all meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The presence of
three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and it shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed
in the office of the board and shall be a public record.
Subject to the approval of the Council, the board may employ such clerical and technical assistance as may be needed to carry on its work; it shall have
the power to call upon any City official or department for assistance in the performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty of any such official or
department to render such assistance as may reasonably be expected. (Ord. 10-16, 7-6-2010)
2-3-3: DUTIES:
The Board of Adjustment shall have the powers and duties outlined in section 12-5-1 of this Code. (Ord. 10-16, 7-6-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 4
BOARD OF HEALTH
2-4-1: DESIGNATION OF LOCAL BOARD OF HEALTH:
Pursuant to chapter 137, Code of Iowa, the Cerro Gordo County Board of Health shall be the local Board of Health for the City of Mason City. (Ord. 01-24,
11-6-2001)
2-4-2: JURISDICTION OF LOCAL BOARD OF HEALTH:
All public health matters within the City shall be under the jurisdiction of the Cerro Gordo County Board of Health, which shall have all of the powers
prescribed by sections 137.103 and 137.104 of the Iowa Code and shall also have the power to enforce appropriate ordinances of the City within its
boundaries. (Ord. 01-24, 11-6-2001; amd. 2017 Code)
2-4-3: SANITARY INSPECTOR:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 32/358
The City Administrator may from time to time appoint a Sanitary Inspector to act as the City's Health Officer.
The Sanitary Inspector shall enforce the rules and regulations of the County Health Board within the City, shall enforce the health ordinances of the City
and shall carry out such other duties as may from time to time be assigned by the City Administrator. (Ord. 01-24, 11-6-2001)
2-4-4: POLICE TO EXECUTE ORDERS:
The Chief of Police shall execute all lawful orders of the Cerro Gordo County Board of Health relating to health matters within the Municipal limits and shall
serve notices required in connection with the work of the Cerro Gordo County Board of Health in the performance of its duties and responsibilities which
require police services within the City limits. (Ord. 01-24, 11-6-2001)
2-4-5: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
The Cerro Gordo County Board of Health, in addition to any rights or powers established by State law, County ordinances, or by the rules and regulations
of the local Board of Health, shall have the right to examine any cellar, room, or any other building or any place with a view to ascertain the sanitary
condition of the same, and shall have free access thereto for the purpose of examining or removing any nuisance, source of filth, or cause of sickness.
(Ord. 01-24, 11-6-2001)
2-4-6: UNSANITARY CONDITIONS:
The Cerro Gordo County Board of Health shall have full power within the Municipal limits, in addition to any and all powers provided by State law, County
ordinance or by local Board of Health rules and regulations, to require all premises within the Municipal limits which are or may hereafter become unclean
or unsanitary, or the source of nuisance, to be properly cleaned and disinfected and such nuisance removed, and to order all sources of filth, sickness,
disease or other conditions dangerous to the public or causing discomfort to the public removed, corrected, or abated at the expense of the owner of the
property. Whenever the owner of any premises disregards any such order of the Board of Health, the board may require that the order be complied with,
and the costs thereof assessed against the property in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 01-24, 11-6-2001)
2-4-7: CLOSING OF PREMISES:
Whenever the owner of any property shall fail to obey the order of the Board of Health for the removal of any unclean or unsanitary condition or any source
of filth, sickness, disease or nuisance, the board may order the occupants of said premises to move therefrom and fix some reasonable time for
compliance with such order. If the order is not complied with, the Board of Health may forcibly remove the occupants of said premises, and such premises
shall not be again occupied as a dwelling or place of business without the written permission of the local Board of Health. (1953 Code § 46-72)
2-4-8: QUARANTINE:
As set forth in chapter 139A, Code of Iowa, the local Board of Health shall see that the procedure for quarantining shall be enforced. (1985 Code; amd.
2017 Code)
2-4-9: STABLES AND MANURE:
All barns, sheds, pens or other buildings or places where animals or chickens are kept shall be kept free and clean from manure or other filth. All manure
and other filth arising from the keeping of such animals or fowls shall be kept in watertight bins or receptacles and shall be kept covered during the months
of May, June, July, August and September. All such manure and refuse shall be removed from the premises at least once each week and more often if, in
the opinion of the Health Department, such removal is necessary to preserve the health of the inhabitants of the City. (1953 Code § 46-15)
2-4-10: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter, or of the rules of the local board, or any lawful order, written or oral, of said board, or of its
officers or authorized agents, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1953 Code § 46-16; amd. Ord. 951, 9-24-1964)
Chapter 5
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
2-5-1: BOARD CREATED:
A Park and Recreation Board is hereby created pursuant to section 392.1, Code of Iowa, to advise the City Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa, on the
needed facilities to provide open space such as parks, playgrounds and community facilities for other forms of recreation, pursuant to the Code of Iowa. It
shall also plan and oversee City programs and encourage other programs for the leisure time of the City's residents of all ages. (Ord. 1331, 7-21-1975;
amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
2-5-2: BOARD ORGANIZATION:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 33/358
The board shall consist of five (5) members, all citizens of the City of Mason City, Iowa, whose terms of office shall be for four (4) years. Each term of office
shall commence on January 2 following a regular Municipal election.
A. Vacancies: Any vacancy occurring on the board more than sixty (60) days prior to the next regular Municipal election shall be filled by appointment by
the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council. Any person so appointed shall serve until the next regular Municipal election at which a member
shall be elected to serve the remainder of the term for which the vacancy occurred.
B. Compensation: All members shall serve without compensation, but shall be entitled to the necessary expenses including travel expenses incurred in the
discharge of their duties. (Ord. 84-13, 4-2-1984; amd. 1985 Code)
2-5-3: DUTIES OF BOARD:
A. The Park and Recreation Board shall set policies, rules, regulations, and adopt procedures for the management of parks, recreation centers, recreation
programs, recreation buildings, pools, trails, golf courses, campgrounds and any other facilities dedicated to park use by the City Council.
B. The Park and Recreation Board shall make recommendations to the Council with regard to the acquisition, sale, lease or exchange of any property
dedicated or proposed to be dedicated to park and recreation use within the City.
C. The Park and Recreation Board shall develop a plan for recreation, recreation facilities, park development and maintenance. The board will update and
revise the plan as required.
D. A Park Superintendent, a Recreation Superintendent and a Golf Course Manager shall be appointed by the City Administrator subject to the approval of
the Park and Recreation Board.
E. The City Administrator shall cooperate with the Park and Recreation Board to provide for an allotment of sufficient personnel and equipment resources
to meet the park and recreation needs of the City. (Ord. 02-04, 2-5-2002)
F. The Park and Recreation Board shall annually submit a capital improvement plan to the City Administrator. (Ord. 02-04, 2-5-2002; amd. 2017 Code)
2-5-4: REPORTS:
The board shall make written reports to the Council of its activities from time to time as it deems advisable, or upon Council request. Its revenues and
expenditures shall be reported monthly by the Finance Director in the manner of other departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each
member of the board and in the Finance Director's report to the Council. (Ord. 1331, 7-21-1975)
2-5-5: RULES:
The board shall have power to make rules and regulations for the use of park or other recreational facilities, or for the conduct of recreation programs,
subject to the approval of the rules by the City Council. Such rules shall be either posted on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide
adequate notice to the using public. (Ord. 1331, 7-21-1975)
2-5-6: PENALTIES:
Violation of a board rule which has been approved by the City Council and adopted by ordinance may be cause for denial of use of a facility or
participation in a program, but such denial which extends more than one (1) day may be appealed to the board or to the City Council for a hearing. The
violation may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor if a serious offense. (Ord. 1331, 7-21-1975)
Chapter 6
ACTIVE LIVING AND TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
2-6-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
As the City Council has deemed it to be in the public interest of the citizens to improve livability and well being in Mason City, there is hereby created the
Active Living and Transportation Commission. (Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016)
2-6-2: ORGANIZATION:
A. The commission shall initially consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the City.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 34/358
B. Members of the commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Members shall demonstrate a passion for
our quality of life influenced by the land use and transportation planning choices made to transform our community to a healthier, safer place to live that
provides access to economic opportunities. (Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016)
C. The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a total of five (5) Commissioners. In addition, there shall be the following ex officio
member representatives: the Operation and Maintenance Manager, City Engineer, Director of Development Services, County Conservation Director,
County Supervisor, and North Iowa Area Council of Governments (NIACOG) Regional Planning Affiliation (RPA) Transportation Planner. Three (3)
members shall serve three (3) year terms and two (2) members shall serve two (2) year terms after initial appointments. After establishment, future
terms will be three (3) year terms. (Ord. 17-3, 1-3-2017)
D. Members may serve for more than one (1) term and each member shall serve until the appointment of a successor.
E. Vacancies occurring in the commission, other than expiration of term of office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term of the member
replaced.
F. Vacancies shall be filled by the City according to the original selection as aforesaid.
G. The Mayor and City Council may appoint a member of the Council as a nonvoting ex officio member to such commission.
H. The commission shall appoint a Chairperson and Vice Chair from its members.
I. Members shall serve without compensation.
J. A simple majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
K. The City Administrator will designate a staff member to serve as the Secretary for the commission. The Secretary to the commission shall be
responsible for maintaining written records of the commission's proceedings. (Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016)
2-6-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this commission shall be to:
A. Improve livability and well being in Mason City and provide recommendations for land use, waterways, and transportation systems that best support
active living while promoting the aesthetic inspiration of our rural American culture.
B. Become the premier Midwest micropolitan community for active living transportation.
C. Develop goals and priorities to create a network of streets and public spaces to support active living and provide education and advocacy for the goals.
D. Provide recommendations for land use and transportation systems that better support the ability to move about the community.
E. Establish and promote healthy food and beverage policy at City sponsored youth sporting events.
F. Improve amenities and quality of life in the City to strengthen workforce retention and attraction of the City.
G. Educate, advocate and enforce the community on outcomes of the active living and transportation work.
H. Inform City Council of barriers to accomplishing goals, and measure and track progress.
I. Make an annual report to the City Council in December of each year. (Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016)
2-6-4: DEFINITIONS:
COMMISSION: The Mason City Active Living and Transportation Commission, as established by this chapter.
COMPLETE STREETS: Roads designed that are safe, comfortable and able to accommodate diverse modes, users, and activities including walking,
cycling, public transit, automobile, nearby businesses, and residents of all ages and abilities. Such street design helps create more multi-modal transport
systems and more liveable communities.
LAND USE: A. Protections that provide land use policies and zoning regulations that promote, expand and protect sites for community gardens and
farmers' markets.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 35/358
B. Establish and promote community gardens and farmers' markets and ensure protections through City Code.
LIVEABILITY: A. The quality of life a place allows and is heavily influenced by the land use and transportation planning choices made in the areas of built
environment and transportation.
B. The built environment impacts health, well being and happiness - either positively or negatively. It is a reflection of the care and thoughtfulness put
into creating the places where we live, work, and play.
C. Through our work of becoming a Blue Zones Community, we know research shows that walkable, bikeable, and livable communities are also
healthier communities, not only in terms of individual health, but also environmental and economic health.
TRANSPORTATION: Bikes, cars, public transit, all modes of transportation, and pedestrians mobility meeting ADA requirements.
WATERWAYS: Water features including rivers, canals and streams, lakes, and docks. Related features include weirs, rapids. (Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016; amd.
2017 Code)
2-6-5: POWERS OF COMMISSION:
A. Collect Organization Metrics: The commission will work with staff to determine appropriate metrics to support successes and develop data to determine
future goals.
B. Assess And Prioritize: The commission shall assess and prioritize short and long term vision and goals and develop and make recommendations to the
City Council for capital improvement projects during their annual report.
C. Create Partnerships: The commission will invite and seek advice from other community, county and regional organizations.
D. Grant Awards: The commission will cooperate with the Federal and State governments and any other entities in the pursuance of grants for the
purchase and improvement of properties of the commission.
E. Other Powers: In addition to those duties and powers specified above, the commission may, with City Council approval and supervision:
1. Solicit, recommend and assist in the receipt by the City of gifts and donations of real and personal property, including money for the purpose of
facilitating their goals and visions.
2. Recommend and assist in the acquisition for the City by purchase, bequest, or donation, properties for active living use.
3. Recommend and assist in the negotiation of leases, and transfer or disposition of properties in order to support active living and transportation
subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner that will preserve the property.
4. Promote, educate, and provide advocacy for availability and benefits of safe and increased usage and understanding of the amenities. (Ord. 16-2, 3-
15-2016)
2-6-6: MEETINGS:
The commission shall meet at least quarterly in the months of February, April, July and November or as necessary. Time and location of the meeting shall
be determined by the commission. (Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016)
2-6-7: BUDGET:
The commission may apply for grants and raise funds to complete desired projects with Council approval. (Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016; amd. 2017 Code)
2-6-8: TERMINATION OF COMMISSION:
Such commission, known as the ALT Commission, may be discontinued by adoption of an ordinance proposing such action preceded by the publishing of
notice, as prescribed in section 362.3 of the Iowa Code, of such ordinance. (Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016)
Chapter 7
BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES
2-7-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
As provided in section 392.5, Code of Iowa, the Board of Trustees of the Mason City Public Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board, shall consist of
seven (7) members. All Board members shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975; amd. 1985
Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 36/358
2-7-2: QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES:
All of the members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the City of Mason City, Iowa. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975)
2-7-3: ORGANIZATION OF BOARD:
A. Terms Of Office: All appointments to the Board shall be for six (6) years, except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments
shall be made every two (2) years of one-third (1/3) the total number as near as possible, to stagger the terms. The present incumbents are confirmed
in their appointments and terms.
B. Vacancies: The position of any Trustee shall be vacant if he moves permanently from the City, or if he is absent from six (6) consecutive regular
meetings of the Board, except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the City. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled by appointment by the
Mayor with approval of the City Council, and the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-
1975)
C. Compensation: Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for necessary travel and other expenses incurred
while on official library business. Such reimbursement shall come from the funds appropriated to the library. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975; amd. 1985 Code)
2-7-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975)
A. To meet and elect from its members a President and such other officers as it deems necessary. The City Treasurer shall serve as Board Treasurer, but
shall not be a member of the Board. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975; amd. 2017 Code)
B. To have charge, control and supervision of the public library, its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
C. To direct and control all the affairs of the library.
D. To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper management of the
library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, that prior to such employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and employees shall
have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the Board voting in favor thereof. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975)
E. To remove by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the Board, the librarian and provide procedures for the removal of assistants or employees for misdemeanor,
incompetency or inattention to duty, subject however to the provisions of chapter 336, Code of Iowa. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975; amd. 2017 Code)
F. To select, or authorize the librarian to select and make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals or other library
materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
G. To authorize the use of the library by nonresidents of the City of Mason City and to fix charges therefor.
H. To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations not inconsistent with ordinances and the law, for the care, use, government and
management of the library and the business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
I. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for library purposes by the City Council, and of all monies available by gift or otherwise
for the erection of library buildings, and of all other monies belonging to the library, including fines and rentals collected under the rules of the Board.
J. To accept gifts of real property, personal property or mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to said property in
the name of the library; to execute deeds and bills of sale for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them from such
gifts, for the improvement of the library.
K. To keep a record of its proceedings.
L. To enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by the City by action of the City Council.
M. To have authority to make agreements with local County historical associations, where such exist, and to set apart the necessary room and to care for
such articles as may come into the possession of the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and
materials for the preservation and protection of such articles as are, in their judgment, of a historical and educational nature, and pay for the same out
of funds allocated for library purposes. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975)
2-7-5: POWER TO CONTRACT WITH OTHERS FOR USE OF LIBRARY:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 37/358
A. Contracting: The Board may contract with any other Boards of Trustees of free public libraries, any other City, school corporation, private or semiprivate
organization, institution of higher learning, Township or County, or with the Trustees of any County Library District for the use of the library by their
respective residents.
B. Termination: Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority vote of
the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the Governing Body of
a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent (5%) in number of the electors who voted for Governor in the territory of the party at
the last general election. The petition must be presented to the Governing Body not less than forty (40) days before the election. The proposition may
be submitted at any election provided by law that is held in the territory of the party who is seeking to terminate the contract. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975)
2-7-6: NONRESIDENT USE OF LIBRARY:
The Board may authorize the use of the library by nonresidents in any one (1) or more of the following ways:
A. By lending the books or other materials of the library to nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or upon payment of a
special nonresident library fee.
B. By establishing depositories of library books or other materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
C. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or other library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
D. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other library materials to nonresidents. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975)
2-7-7: LIBRARY ACCOUNT:
All monies appropriated by the City Council from the General Fund for the operation and maintenance of the library shall be set aside in an account for the
library. Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President. The warrant writing officer is the City Finance Director. (Ord.
1332, 7-21-1975; amd. 2017 Code)
2-7-8: ANNUAL REPORT:
The Board shall make a report to the City Council immediately after the close of the Municipal fiscal year. This report shall contain statements of the
condition of the library, the number of books added thereto, the number circulated, the amount of fines collected, and the amount of money expended in
the maintenance of the library during the year, together with such further information required by the City Council. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975)
Chapter 8
BOARD OF CEMETERY TRUSTEES
2-8-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
There is hereby created a Board of Cemetery Trustees consisting of five (5) residents of the City to be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of
the City Council, as provided by chapter 392, Code of Iowa. Said Trustees shall be appointed and shall serve for a period of five (5) years from April 1
following their appointment, except appointments to fill vacancies for the unexpired term of any of said Trustees. (1953 Code § 12-1; amd. 1985 Code;
2017 Code)
2-8-2: AUTHORITY:
Said Trustees shall serve without pay except they shall be paid for the actual expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties. Said Trustees
shall select from their number a Chairman and shall have authority to employ a Superintendent, a Secretary and such other officers and employees as in
their judgment may be required for the proper management of the cemetery. (1953 Code § 12-2)
2-8-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
There is hereby conferred upon said Board of Trustees the duty of general management of said Elmwood-St. Joseph Municipal Cemetery, and it shall
have and exercise in connection therewith all of the powers and duties imposed by law in connection with the management of cemeteries, except the
power and authority to levy and impose taxes. (1953 Code § 12-3; amd. 2017 Code)
All funds shall be deposited with the City Clerk to the credit of the Cemetery Board and shall be disbursed only on order of said board by written warrants
of the City Finance Director, pursuant to mutually acceptable procedures established by the Board of Trustees and the City Council. Its revenues and
expenditures shall be reported monthly by the Finance Director, in the manner of other departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each
member of the board and in the Finance Director's report to the Council. (1953 Code § 12-3; amd. 1985 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 38/358
2-8-4: REPORTS:
The Board of Trustees shall annually, on or before December 15 of each year, file with the Finance Director a proposed estimate of expenditures for the
following fiscal year setting forth the estimated receipts, the estimated itemized disbursements and balance on hand in all funds under its management
and control, together with askings for the amount to be raised by taxation for cemetery purposes. Said Board of Trustees shall annually, on or before
August 1 of each year, file with the Finance Director a detailed report showing the amount of monies received by it during the preceding fiscal year, the
source of such receipts, and a statement of the expenditures made by it, and the purpose for which same were expended. (Ord. 1478, 1-15-1979)
ARTICLE A. CEMETERY PERPETUAL CARE FUND
2-8A-1: TRUSTEESHIP:
Pursuant to section 523I.502A, Code of Iowa, the City hereby states its willingness and intention to act as the Trustee for the perpetual maintenance of
interment spaces in Elmwood Cemetery, a cemetery located in and wholly owned by the City of Mason City, Iowa (referenced herein as "cemetery"). (2017
Code)
2-8A-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF TRUST FUND:
A perpetual trust is hereby established for said Elmwood Cemetery in accordance with Iowa Code chapter 523I, the Iowa Cemetery Act. A restricted fund
is created, to be known and designated as the "Perpetual Care Cemetery Fund", which shall be funded by the deposit of an amount equal to twenty
percent (20%) of the gross selling price, or fifty dollars ($50.00) per individual interment space included in the sale, whichever is more, for each sale of
interment space(s) within the cemetery. The fund shall be administered in accordance with the purposes and provisions of Iowa Code chapter 523I.
The Perpetual Care Cemetery Fund shall be maintained separately from all operating funds of the cemetery and the principal of the fund shall not be
reduced voluntarily except as specifically permitted by the Iowa Cemetery Act and applicable administrative regulations. (2017 Code)
2-8A-3: SALE OF INTERMENT RIGHTS:
The sale or transfer of interment rights in the cemetery shall be evidenced by a certificate of interment rights or other instrument evidencing the
conveyance of exclusive rights of interment upon payment in full of the purchase price. The agreement for interment rights shall disclose all information
required by the Iowa Cemetery Act, including the amount or percentage of money to be placed in the Perpetual Care Cemetery Fund. (2017 Code)
2-8A-4: PERPETUAL CARE REGISTRY:
The cemetery shall maintain a registry of individuals who have purchased interment rights in the cemetery subject to the care fund requirements of the
Iowa Cemetery Act, including the amounts deposited in the Perpetual Care Cemetery Fund. (2017 Code)
Chapter 9
ART MUSEUM BOARD
2-9-1: MUSEUM ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a Municipal art museum to be hereafter known as the Charles H. MacNider Art Museum. (Ord. 950, 9-21-1964; amd. 1985
Code)
2-9-2: ART MUSEUM BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
As provided in chapter 392, Code of Iowa, there is hereby appointed a Board of Trustees, said Board to consist of nine (9) bona fide citizens and residents
of the City of Mason City, whose terms of office shall be for four (4) years from July 1 following their appointment to the Board, except appointments to fill
vacancies for the unexpired terms of any of said Trustees. All appointments to the Board shall be made by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City
Council. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
2-9-3: VACANCY:
Any Trustee who permanently moves outside of the City limits of Mason City, or is absent from six (6) consecutive regularly scheduled meetings of the
Board without due explanation, such as sickness or temporary absence from the area, shall render the office of said Trustee vacant. (Ord. 950, 9-21-1964;
amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
2-9-4: COMPENSATION:
Members of said Board shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for necessary travel and other expenses incurred while
on official museum business. Such reimbursement shall come from the funds appropriated to the art museum. (Ord. 950, 9-21-1964; amd. 1985 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 39/358
2-9-5: POWERS:
Such Board of Art Museum Trustees shall have and exercise the following powers:
A. To meet and organize by the election of one (1) of their number as President of the Board, and by the election of a Secretary and such other officers
and committees as the Board may deem necessary.
B. To have charge, control and supervision of the public art museum, its works of art, appurtenances, fixtures and buildings or rooms containing the same,
directing and controlling all the affairs of such art museum. (Ord. 950, 9-21-1964)
C. To employ a Director and such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the management of said art museum and to fix their compensation
in such amount as may be fixed from time to time by said Board of Trustees.
D. To remove by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of such Board the Director and to provide procedures for the removal of said assistants and employees for
misdemeanor, incompetency or inattention to the duties of such employment, subject however to the provisions of chapters 35C and 400, Code of
Iowa. (Ord. 950, 9-21-1964; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
E. To accept on behalf of the City gifts of works of art, to select and make purchases of pictures, portraits, paintings, statuary and relics and other objects
of art, in the original and in replicas or copies, books, periodicals, papers and journals on the subject of art, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies
for such art museum.
F. To receive, hold and dispose of all gifts, donations, devises and bequests that may be made to the City for the purpose of establishing, increasing or
improving such art museum, but when any such gift, donation, devise or bequest shall be conditioned upon any act of the City, the Council must first
determine whether such condition can or shall be complied with.
G. To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal bylaws, rules or regulations not inconsistent with law for the care, use, government and management of
such art museum and the business of said Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for the violation thereof. (Ord. 950, 9-21-1964)
H. To have exclusive control of all funds derived from taxation allocated by the City Council for its purposes, as provided by law, and of the expenditure of
all monies available by gift or otherwise for the erection of art buildings or for the promotion of such art museum and of all other money belonging to the
Art Museum Fund. All funds shall be deposited with the Finance Department to the credit of the Art Museum Board and shall be disbursed only on
orders of said Board by written warrants of the City Finance Director, pursuant to mutually acceptable procedures established by the Board of Trustees
and City Council. Its revenues and expenditures shall be reported monthly by the Finance Director, in the manner of other departmental expenditures,
and a copy shall be provided to each member of the Board and in the Finance Director's report to the City Council. (Ord. 950, 9-21-1964; amd. 1985
Code; 2017 Code)
2-9-6: RECORDS:
Said Board shall keep a record of all of its proceedings. Immediately after the close of each Municipal fiscal year, said Board shall file with the Council a
written report which shall cover the last preceding fiscal year and contain a statement of the condition of the art museum, the number of pictures, portraits,
paintings, statuary or relics contained in the gallery, and all additions thereto, the amounts of fines collected, the amount of donations, devises and
bequests received during the year and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of such art museum, together with such further information as
may be required by the City Council. (Ord. 950, 9-21-1964)
Chapter 10
HUMAN RIGHTS AND HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
2-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of the City of Mason City, Iowa, in enacting this chapter are:
A. To exercise the police power of the City for the protection of public health, safety and general welfare, and for the maintenance of peace and good
government, and to ensure equal opportunity for all persons in their pursuit of employment, housing, public accommodations or services and credit
transactions.
B. To prohibit discriminatory practices, whether direct or indirect, which inexcusably and/or unjustifiably deny any person rights and/or opportunities
because of a prohibited basis, and to provide for the execution of the policies embodied in the Federal Civil Rights Act (titles VI, VII and VIII), the Equal
Credit Opportunity Act, the Iowa Civil Rights Act of 1965 (as subsequently amended), the Vocational Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act
and to promote cooperation between the City and State and Federal agencies enforcing those Acts; and to establish a Commission on Human Rights
for the accomplishment of such purposes; and to these ends, the provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed. (Ord. 14-15, 12-16-2014)
2-10-2: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted as the complete "Mason City Human Rights Code", the most current edition, of chapter 216, Code of Iowa, prepared and edited
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 40/358
by the Legislative Service Bureau. Said Civil Rights Code of the State of Iowa is, by this reference, duly adopted as fully and completely as if set out in
detail herein except as provided in this chapter. A copy of said Code is now on file in the Office of the City Clerk and at the Mason City Public Library for
public inspection. (Ord. 14-15, 12-16-2014)
2-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to, or in place of the definitions included in chapter 216, Code of Iowa, and for the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter:
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION: A plan whereby a set of specific, result oriented procedures are established and to which a "person" is required to apply every
good faith effort to achieve. The objectives of those procedures are equal opportunity in public and private employment, housing, public accommodation,
credit transactions and City contracts.
AGENT OR COMMITTEE'S AGENT: A Commissioner designated by the commission.
AWARDING AUTHORITY: Any City department, agency, commission, authority, board or person, or any authorized employee, officer or Director of any of
the foregoing, including any purchasing agent of the City of Mason City who makes or enters into any contract agreement for the provision of any goods or
services of any kind or nature whatsoever for and on behalf of the City of Mason City.
COMMISSION: The Mason City Human Rights Commission created by this chapter.
COMPLAINANT: Any person filing a complaint with the commission.
CONTRACT: Any agreement which is awarded, let, procured or entered into with, or on behalf of, the City of Mason City or any awarding authority thereof.
CONTRACTOR: Any contractor, supplier, vendor, redeveloper or other person who, through a contract or other arrangement, has received, is to receive,
or is receiving funds, or in-kind contributions from the City of Mason City or any awarding authority thereof, and shall also include any subcontractor who
performs services for the City under a City contract.
PROHIBITED BASIS: Discrimination based upon race, color, familial status, religion, nationality, sex, marital status, age, sexual orientation, gender
identity, disability or ancestry, but also refers to the characteristics of individuals with whom the person or class of persons or individual deals or
associates. (Ord. 14-15, 12-16-2014)
2-10-4: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
A. In all instances, the Mason City Human Rights Code, or commission shall be substituted in place of all mention of the Iowa State Civil Rights Code,
and/or commission with the exception of section 216.19.
B. In all instances, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Mason City shall be substituted in place of all mention to the Governor and General Assembly
or Senate of the State of Iowa.
C. In all instances, the City of Mason City shall be substituted in place of all mention to the State of Iowa.
D. Section 216.3 Commission Appointed and section 216.4 Compensation and Expenses, shall be and the same are hereby repealed in their entirety and
the following is adopted in lieu thereof as provisions of the Mason City Human Rights Code: (Ord. 14-15, 2-16-2014)
Human Rights Commission: There is hereby established, under section 216.19, in the City of Mason City, Iowa, a commission to be known as the
Human Rights Commission, which shall consist of three (3) members from various racial, religious, cultural and economic groups in the City.
Members of said commission shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the commission, subject to the approval of the City Council for a
term of two (2) years, with the term of office expiring on January 1. Vacancies resulting in an unexpired term on the commission shall be filled by
appointment by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council, for the unexpired term. Any Commissioner may be removed from office by the
Mayor for cause.
The commission will elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from its membership. A quorum shall consist of two (2) Commissioners. The
commission shall adopt, amend or rescind rules as necessary for the conduct of its meetings and proceedings.
E. Section 216.6.6.a Unfair Employment Practices should be and the same is hereby amended as to read:
Any employer who regularly employs two (2) or more individuals. For purposes of this subsection, individuals who are members of the employer's
family shall not be counted as employees.
F. Any other section of the Mason City Human Rights Code notwithstanding, any complaint filed with, or under the jurisdiction of, the Mason City Human
Rights Commission, shall be referred to the Iowa Civil Rights Commission for all proceedings and dispositions specified by the Mason City Human
Rights Code and the Iowa Civil Rights Code. (Ord. 14-15, 12-16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
2-10-5: UNFAIR PRACTICES; CITY CONTRACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any contractor or an awarding authority to discriminate against a subcontractor, supplier, or service provider on a prohibited basis.
The commission shall establish administrative rules governing the implementation of this provision. (Ord. 14-15, 12-16-2014)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 41/358
2-10-6: COST AND ATTORNEY FEES:
Except as otherwise provided in Iowa Code section 216.15, subsection 8, and section 216.16, subsection 6, costs including attorney fees shall be allowed
as of course to the prevailing party unless the court otherwise directs. In any administrative or court proceeding which is brought by the commission under
Iowa Code section 216.17, subsection 3 against the respondent in connection with the final agency action, or enforcement thereof, the court shall award
reasonable administrative costs incurred by the commission in connection with such administrative proceeding, and reasonable litigation costs incurred in
connection with such court enforcement proceeding. An award under this section shall be made only for reasonable litigation and administrative costs
which are allocable to the commission and not to any other party. (Ord. 14-15, 12-16-2014)
Chapter 11
RIVER CITY TREES COMMISSION
2-11-1: ESTABLISHING COMMISSION:
As the City Council of the City has deemed it to be in the public interest of the citizens of the City to establish a tree commission, there is hereby created
the River City Trees Commission. (Ord. 94-28, 12-6-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
2-11-2: ORGANIZATION:
A. The River City Trees Commission shall consist of representatives of the Elmwood-St. Joseph Cemetery, the Parks Department or Park Board. The
commission will also consist of two (2) at large members who shall be citizens of the City and appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the
City Council. Members are appointed to serve two (2) year terms and may elect to continue to serve. The commission members shall serve without
compensation.
B. The Street Supervisor, Grant Administrator and Volunteer Program Coordinator shall serve as staff advisors to the commission on commission projects
within City areas; and, as staff advisor to the commission, the Street Supervisor shall recommend and advise the commission on any projects that fall
within areas under the jurisdiction of the Street Supervisor. (Ord. 94-28, 12-6-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
2-11-3: DUTIES:
A. The commission shall investigate, study, review and analyze the urban reforestation needs of the City. The commission will work toward the
reforestation and education of the residents of Mason City. The commission will coordinate its efforts with the appropriate City departments.
B. The commission may report to the City Council from time to time, the results of said studies and the commission's recommendations.
C. Said commission shall have the power to adopt such rules and regulations concerning its meetings and all other matters pertaining to the business of
said commission as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 94-28, 12-6-1994)
2-11-4: MEETINGS:
The commission shall meet at least semiannually or as many times as necessary. (Ord. 94-28, 12-6-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
2-11-5: BUDGET:
The commission will apply for grants and raise funds to complete projected projects. (Ord. 94-28, 12-6-1994)
2-11-6: TERMINATION OF COMMISSION:
The administrative agency known as the River City Trees Commission may be discontinued by adoption of an ordinance proposing such action and
publishing notice as prescribed in section 362.3, Iowa Code, of such ordinance and of a date, time and place of a public hearing on the proposal, which
such discontinuance shall not be sooner than thirty (30) days following said hearing. (Ord. 94-28, 12-6-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 12
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
2-12-1: ESTABLISHING COMMISSION:
As the City Council has deemed it to be in the public interest of the citizens to provide for recognition and promotion of historic sites, there is hereby
created the Historic Preservation (HP) Commission. (Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 42/358
2-12-2: ORGANIZATION:
A. The commission shall initially consist of seven (7) members who shall be residents of the City.
B. Members of the commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Members shall demonstrate a positive
interest in historic preservation, and possess interest or expertise in architecture, architectural history, City planning, building rehabilitation,
conservation in general or real estate.
C. The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a total of seven (7) Commissioners. Commissioners shall serve a four (4) year term.
D. The Mayor and City Council may appoint a member of the Council as a nonvoting ex officio member to such commission.
E. The commission shall appoint a Chairperson and Vice Chair from its members.
F. Vacancies occurring in the commission, other than expiration of term of office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term of the member
replaced.
G. Members may serve for more than one term and each member shall serve until the appointment of a successor or their resignation.
H. Vacancies shall be filled by the City according to the original selection as aforesaid.
I. Members shall serve without compensation.
J. A simple majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
K. Development Services Director or his/her designee will serve as the Secretary for the commission. The Secretary to the commission shall be
responsible for maintaining written records of the commission's proceedings. (Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
2-12-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this commission shall be to:
A. Promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the public through the recognition, enhancement, and perpetuation of sites and
districts of historical and cultural significance.
B. Safeguard the City's historic, aesthetic, and cultural heritage by preserving sites and districts of historic and cultural significance.
C. Stabilize and improve property values.
D. Foster pride in the legacy of beauty and achievements of the past.
E. Protect and enhance the City's attractions to tourists and visitors as well as the support and stimulus to business thereby provided.
F. Strengthen the economy of the City.
G. Promote the use of sites and districts of historic and cultural significance as places for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the City.
(Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
2-12-4: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING: Any structure such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar construction, created principally to shelter any form of human activity. "Building"
may also be used to describe a historically and functionally related unit, such as a courthouse and jail, or a house and barn.
BUILDING CODE: Title 10 of this Code.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the Building Code, or a duly authorized representative.
COMMISSION: The Mason City Historic Preservation Commission, as established by this chapter.
DEMOLITION: Any activity requiring a building permit(s) which results in the permanent destruction and removal of a building or structure, up to and
including the foundation of a building or structure.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 43/358
DEMOLITION PERMIT: An official certificate of permission issued by the building official or designee, to an applicant which authorizes the performance of
a specified demolition activity.
DISTRICT: A contiguous or dis-contiguous area possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united
historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: An area which contains a significant portion of archaeological sites, buildings, structures and/or other improvements which, when
considered as a whole, possesses integrity of location, design setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association; and
A. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction that represents the work of a master, or that possesses high
artistic values, or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction;
B. Is associated with events that have made significant contribution to the broad patterns of our local, State, or national history;
C. Possesses a coherent and distinctive visual character or integrity based upon similarity of scale, design, color, setting, workmanship, materials, or
combinations thereof, which is deemed to add significantly to the value and attractiveness of properties within such area;
D. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
E. Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history.
HISTORIC SITE: An archaeological site, structure, or building which:
A. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history;
B. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction; or that represents a work of a master; or that possesses high
artistic values; or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or
D. Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history.
HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT: Any structure, building, site, property, object or item which is determined by the Mason City Historic Preservation
Commission, National Park Service or State of Iowa Historic Preservation Office to possess integrity and meet one or more of the following:
A. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction that represents the work of a master, or that possesses high
artistic values, or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction;
B. Is associated with events that have made significant contribution to the broad patterns of our local, State, or national history;
C. Possesses a coherent and distinctive visual character or integrity based upon similarity of scale, design, color, setting, workmanship, materials, or
combinations thereof, which is deemed to add significantly to the value and attractiveness of properties within such area;
D. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
E. Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES: National Park Service maintained list of all historically significant places in the United States; list contains
historic districts and historic properties.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES - LISTED DISTRICT: An area designated by the National Park Service that contains a significant portion
of buildings, structures or other improvements which, considered as a whole, possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling
and association, and is determined to be historically significant.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES - LISTED PROPERTY: Generally one property, which is smaller in land area than a historic district, which
is designated by the National Register of Historic Places and which contains a significant building, structure or other improvements which, when
considered as a whole, possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and is determined to be historically
significant.
OBJECT: The term used to distinguish from buildings and structures those constructions that are primarily artistic in nature or are relatively small in scale
and simply constructed. Although it may be, by nature or design, moveable, an object is associated with a specific setting or environment.
SITE: The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished,
where the location itself possesses historic, cultural, or archeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 44/358
STRUCTURE: The term used to distinguish from buildings those functional constructions made usually for purposes other than creating human shelter.
(Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
2-12-5: POWERS OF COMMISSION:
A. Studies And Records: The commission may conduct studies for the identification and designation of historic districts and sites. The commission shall
maintain records of all studies and inventories for public use.
B. Listing On Register: The commission may make a recommendation to the State Historic Preservation Officer for the listing of a historic district or site in
the National Register of Historic Places and may conduct a public hearing thereon.
C. Designation Of Sites And Districts: The commission may investigate and recommend to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and final
approval by the City Council, the adoption of ordinances designating historic sites and historic districts if they qualify as defined herein.
D. Review: The commission shall review and act upon all applications pursuant to the procedures established by this chapter and other applicable laws.
E. Recommendations: The Historic Preservation Commission may further the efforts of historic preservation in the City by making recommendations to the
City Council and City commissions and boards on preservation issues when appropriate, by encouraging the protection and enhancement of buildings
or structures with historical, architectural or cultural value, and by encouraging persons and organizations to become involved in preservation activities.
F. Educate: The Historic Preservation Commission may educate the public at large on the benefits of historic preservation and build a preservation ethic
and public awareness.
G. Consult: The Historic Preservation Commission shall consult on proposed changes to land use and zoning within the local historic districts, when
requested by the City Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council.
H. Obligate: The Historic Preservation Commission shall not obligate itself or the City in any financial undertaking unless authorized to do so by the City
Council.
I. Other Powers: In addition to those duties and powers specified above, the commission may, with City Council approval:
1. Accept or recommend acceptance of unconditional gifts and donations of real and personal property, including money, for the purpose of historic
preservation.
2. Acquire or recommend acquisition by purchase, bequest, or donation, fees and lesser interest in historic properties, including properties adjacent to
or associated with, historic properties.
3. Preserve or recommend the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, maintenance, and operation of historic properties under the ownership or control
of the commission or the City.
4. Lease, sell, and otherwise transfer or dispose of historic properties, or recommend that the City lease, sell or otherwise transfer or dispose of historic
properties, subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner that will preserve the property.
5. Recommend that the City contract with the Federal or State government or other organizations.
6. Cooperate with the Federal and State governments in the pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation.
7. Provide information for the purpose of historic preservation to the City.
8. Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on historic properties within its jurisdiction. (Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
2-12-6: MEETINGS:
The commission shall meet quarterly or more often, as necessary. Time and location of the meeting shall be determined by the Chair. Meetings of the
commission shall be held in accordance with the Iowa Open Meetings Law. (Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
2-12-7: BUDGET:
The City Council may, from time to time, allocate funds to the commission. The commission may apply for grants and raise funds to complete projected
projects. (Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
2-12-8: DEMOLITION REVIEW:
A. Subject To Review: Demolition of the following buildings or structures shall be subject to demolition review:
1. Any building or structure that is fifty (50) years old or older.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 45/358
2. Any building, structure, object or site, either contributing or non-contributing, that is located in a Register of Historic Places - listed district or a locally
designated historic district.
3. Any building, structure, object or site individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or designated as a local landmark.
B. Forward Application: The building official shall, upon receipt of an application for a permit to demolish a building, structure, object, or site meeting the
terms of subsection A of this section, immediately forward said application to the Development Services Director, or designee.
C. Determination: Within fifteen (15) business days, during the time and place of a public meeting, the Historic Preservation Commission shall determine if
the building, structure, object, or site subject to demolition is historically significant. The fifteen (15) business days shall begin on the date the
application is received.
D. Placing A Hold: If the building, structure, object or site is determined to be historically significant, the Historic Preservation Commission may place a
hold of up to, but no more than sixty (60) calendar days, on the issuance of the demolition permit. During this hold, which begins the following calendar
day after the hold is placed, the Historic Preservation Commission shall work with the property owner to explore the following alternatives to determine
if any are feasible:
1. Designation as a local historic landmark.
2. Rehabilitation utilizing State or Federal tax incentives.
3. Adaptation of the building or structure to a new use or incorporating the building or structure into redevelopment plans.
4. Finding a new owner who is interested in preserving or rehabilitating the building or structure.
5. Moving the building or structure to an alternative location.
6. Salvaging building materials.
7. Additional documentation of the building or structure prior to the issuance of a demolition permit.
E. Criteria: If the Historic Preservation Commission places a hold, the Historic Preservation Commission shall indicate which criteria per section 2-12-4 of
this chapter makes the building or structure historically significant (as defined in said section 2-12-4 of this chapter) as part of the permanent minute
record of the Historic Preservation Commission.
F. Notify Building Official: The Development Services Director or designee shall notify the building official of the determination of historic significance by the
Historic Preservation Commission and in the event a hold is placed, indicate what date the hold expires.
G. Notice: The Development Services Director or designee shall place notice of any hold on the Historic Preservation Commission webpage.
H. Action To Structures During Hold Period:
1. During the hold, no permit for demolition of any building, structure, object or site on the tax assessment parcel which has any building, structure,
object or site subject to a hold shall be granted.
2. During the hold, no permit for the erection of a new building, structure, or object on the tax assessment parcel which has any building or structure
subject to a hold shall be granted.
I. Expiration Or Release Of A Hold: Upon meeting the above requirements, or upon a determination by the Historic Preservation Commission at a public
meeting that a hold may be released prior to the expiration of the hold, or upon expiration of the 60-day hold period, the owner of the subject property
may resume the demolition permit process.
J. Approval Of Redevelopment Plan Required: Any building, structure, object or site determined to be historically significant, or that is located within a
locally designated historic district or historic site, or that is located within a National Register of Historic Places - listed district, or that is listed on the
National Register of Historic Places shall not be granted a demolition permit until plans for use or development of the site after demolition have been
filed with the City of Mason City and have been found to comply with all laws pertaining to the issuance of a City-required permit. All approvals
necessary for the issuance of a development permit must be granted and any appeals shall be concluded, prior to the issuance of a demolition permit.
K. Exceptions From Demolition Review: Any building, structure, object or site, or portion thereof, which is determined by the Mason City building official to
be an imminent threat to the health or safety of the public and is ordered demolished by the Mason City building official shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
2-12-9: TERMINATION OF COMMISSION:
Such commission, known as the Historic Preservation Commission may be discontinued by adoption of an ordinance proposing such action and publishing
notice as prescribed in section 362.3, Iowa Code, of such ordinance and of a date, time and place of a public hearing on the proposal, which such
discontinuance shall not be sooner than thirty (30) days following said hearing. (Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
Chapter 13
HOUSING AUTHORITY BOARD
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 46/358
2-13-1: PURPOSE:
The City of Mason City elects to create a public body corporate and politic to be known as the "Municipal Housing Agency" and named the "Mason City
Housing Authority" and to have its powers and authority in connection with the housing assistance programs exercised by the Mason City Housing
Authority Board (hereafter referred to as "board"). (Ord. 06-5, 4-4-2006, eff. 7-1-2006)
2-13-2: COMPOSITION AND MEMBERSHIP:
A. Composition: The board shall consist of five (5) Commissioners from the community. All attempts will be made to maintain participation by real estate
professionals, lending institutions, social service organizations, law enforcement and accounting backgrounds to lend their expertise to housing related
issues. The five (5) Commissioners shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the majority of the Council. (Ord. 06-5, 4-4-2006, eff. 7-
1-2006)
B. Term Of Office: All Commissioners shall serve five (5) year terms, with terms staggering so that one (1) vacancy occurs each year. (Ord. 06-5, 4-4-
2006, eff. 7-1-2006; amd. 2017 Code)
C. Filling Vacancies: If any Commissioner from the board shall leave for any reason, the Mayor shall appoint a successor subject to the majority approval
of the Council.
D. Compensation: All Commissioners shall serve without compensation except for their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the
board.
E. Rules And Regulations: The board shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its organization and procedures, as may be required by local, State
and Federal laws.
F. Committees: The board may establish any committee deemed necessary for the execution of its powers or duties as permitted by local, State and
Federal laws.
G. Removal Of Board Members: For inefficiency, or neglect of duty, or misconduct in office, a Commissioner may be removed by a majority vote of the City
Council only after a hearing before the City Council, and after the Commissioner shall have been given a copy of the charges at least ten (10) days
prior to such hearing, and after the Commissioner shall have had an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel. (Ord. 06-5, 4-4-2006, eff. 7-1-
2006)
2-13-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 403A, it shall be the duty of the board to provide and coordinate the federally subsidized public housing programs. All
powers and responsibilities, including the signatory authority of the annual contributions contract, shall vest with the board. Actions taken by the board
shall be final and not subject to administrative review. The board shall implement policies to effect its duties. (Ord. 06-5, 4-4-2006, eff. 7-1-2006)
2-13-4: APPROPRIATIONS:
The board shall have the authority to make decisions relating to the administration, operation, operating budget, and management of Federal public
housing programs and Section 8 Tenant Based Rental Assistance Programs and to expend for and on behalf of such public housing authority all sums of
money so appropriated. All such expenditures shall be made pursuant to and in conformance with the board's established policies and procedures. The
board shall have no power to contract debts beyond its budget set for the fiscal year in which the debt is to be paid. (Ord. 06-5, 4-4-2006, eff. 7-1-2006)
Chapter 14
MEETINGS
2-14-1: POSTING OF MEETING AGENDAS, PACKETS AND MINUTES:
All boards and commissions shall post all meeting notices, agendas, and packets on the official website of the City of Mason City at least twenty four (24)
hours prior to the commencement of the meeting.
Minutes of all such meetings, including all supplements and amendments thereto, shall also be posted within forty eight (48) hours following their approval.
This requirement shall in no way replace, supersede or negate the requirements of the Iowa Open Meetings Law. (Ord. 12-13, 11-6-2012)
2-14-2: BOARD AND COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP GUIDELINES:
Commission membership guidelines:
A. All members of a City of Mason City board or commission must reside in the City limits of Mason City.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 47/358
B. Citizens will only serve on one City of Mason City board or commission at a time unless otherwise designated by this Code. (Ord. 18-3, 5-1-2018)
Chapter 15
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ADVISORY COMMISSION
2-15-1: ESTABLISHING COMMISSION:
As the City Council has deemed it to be in the public interest to have well-researched and trusted advisory on matter involving science and technology,
there is hereby created the Science and Technology Advisory Commission. (Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
2-15-2: ORGANIZATION:
A. The commission shall initially consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the City.
B. Members of the commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Members shall demonstrate a passion for
science, technology, education, safety, and quality of life.
C. The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a total of five (5) Commissioners. In addition, there shall be the following ex officio
member representatives: Mason City Information Technology representative, City Engineering representative, and a representative from Operations
and Maintenance Department for Mason City. Three (3) members shall serve three (3) year terms and two (2) members shall serve two (2) year terms
after initial appointments. After establishment, future terms will be three (3) year terms.
D. Members may serve for more than one term and each member shall serve until the appointment of a successor.
E. Vacancies occurring in the commission, other than expiration of term of office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term of the member
replaced.
F. Vacancies shall be filled by the City according to the original selection as aforesaid.
G. The Mayor and City Council may appoint a member of the Council as a nonvoting ex officio member to such commission.
H. The commission shall appoint a Chairperson and Vice Chair from its members.
I. Members shall serve without compensation.
J. A simple majority of voting members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
K. The commission will designate a member to serve as the Secretary. The Secretary shall be responsible for maintaining written records of the
commission's proceedings. (Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
2-15-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this commission shall be to:
A. Upon request, advise City staff, the Mayor, and the City Council on designated matters concerning the purchase, sale, or implementation of items of a
highly technological or scientific nature.
B. Present new technology which will improve the efficiency of government, the well-being of citizens, or reduce the cost of doing Municipal business.
C. Give opinions covering a wide-range of scientific topics on a case-by-case basis as requested by City staff, or City Council.
D. When the subject under review is outside the scientific comfort zone of commission members, experts in the field shall be sought out and consulted.
E. Develop ideas and strategies to enhance the technological advancement of the City and its citizens.
F. Make an annual report to the City Council in December of each year. (Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
2-15-4: DEFINITIONS:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 48/358
COMMISSION: The Mason City Science and Technology Advisory Commission, as established by this chapter.
SCIENCE: Any field of study of a scientific nature. This includes such fields as chemistry, physics, electronics, geology, astronomy, etc.
TECHNOLOGY: Any topic of an advanced or emerging scientific nature. This includes such fields as computer science, renewable energy, artificial
intelligence, automation, etc. (Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
2-15-5: POWERS OF COMMISSION:
A. Collect Organization Metrics: The commission will work with staff to determine appropriate metrics to support successes and develop data to determine
future goals.
B. Assess And Prioritize: The commission shall assess and prioritize short and long term vision and goals and develop and make recommendations to the
City Council for capital improvement projects during their annual report.
C. Create Partnerships: The commission will invite and seek advice from other community, County and regional organizations.
D. Grant Awards: The commission will cooperate with the Federal and State governments and any other entities in the pursuance of grants for the
purchase and improvement of City property and capital.
E. Other Powers: In addition to those duties and powers specified above, the commission may, with City Council approval and supervision:
1. Solicit, recommend and assist in the receipt by the City of gifts and donations of real and personal property, including money for the purpose of
facilitating their goals and visions.
2. Recommend and assist in the acquisition for the City by purchase, bequest, or donation, properties of a scientific and/or technological nature.
3. Promote, educate, and provide advocacy for responsible use of technology. (Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
2-15-6: MEETINGS:
The commission shall meet at least quarterly or more frequently if necessary. Time and location of the meeting shall be determined by the commission.
Meetings will be open to the public. (Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
2-15-7: BUDGET:
The commission may apply for grants and raise funds to complete desired projects with Council approval. (Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
2-15-8: TERMINATION OF COMMISSION:
Such commission may be discontinued by adoption of an ordinance proposing such action preceded by the publishing of notice, as prescribed in section
362.3 of the Iowa Code, of such ordinance. (Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
LICENSES AND PERMITS
3-1-1: PURPOSE:
As set forth in chapter 364, Code of Iowa, the purpose of this title is to assure that in the conduct of certain activities, vocations, public amusements and
professions licensed and regulated by this Code, the public health, safety and welfare will be protected and maintained. (1985 Code)
3-1-2: APPLICATION OF TITLE:
Unless otherwise provided or the context indicates a different intention, the provisions of this title apply to all licenses required by the provisions of this
Code or other ordinances of the City. (1985 Code)
3-1-3: EXPIRATION OF LICENSES:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 49/358
Except as specifically otherwise provided, all yearly licenses shall expire on March 31 following the date of their issuance. In cases where the license is
requested during the month of March, it is lawful for the City Clerk to issue a license for the current license year and the following license year upon
payment of the annual license fee. (1985 Code)
3-1-4: ASSIGNMENT, TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Licenses may be issued or transferred by the City Clerk unless City Council approval is specifically required. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
3-1-5: VIOLATION:
Any person who engages in any of the vocations, businesses or acts for which a license is required without having first secured a license so to do, or who
continues in or re-engages in any of such businesses, vocations or acts after the revocation or expiration of the license issued therefor, without securing a
renewal of the expired license or the issuance of a new license is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1985 Code)
3-1-6: DENIAL OF LICENSE, APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police, the City Clerk, the Mayor, or the City Council in the denial of a license as provided in this title,
shall have the right of appeal to the Council or Hearing Board as may be otherwise provided. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk a
written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Council shall set a time and place for the hearing on such appeal and notice of such
hearing shall be given to the petitioner therefor in the same manner as provided for notice of hearing upon revocation. The decisions and order of the
Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. (1985 Code)
3-1-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The City Council may revoke a City issued license if, in their judgment, any business, vocation or act conducted or to be conducted under and by virtue of
said license is or will be detrimental to public safety or morals or liable to lead to the violation of any ordinance or law, or provoke a breach of the peace, or
if any such licensee or any of his agents makes any false or misleading statements or representations in the furtherance of the business conducted under
said license, or violates any ordinance or law in the conduct of the business for which such license is issued. The revocation of any such license shall be
considered sufficient cause to forbid any issuance of another license under this Code to the licensee whose license has been revoked. (1985 Code; amd.
2017 Code)
3-1-8: REVOCATION, DENIAL, SUSPENSION HEARING:
If the City Clerk or City Council forbids the issuance of any license or seeks to revoke or suspend any license, they shall first give the applicant or licensee,
as the case may be, notice of their intended action and specify a time and place of hearing at which the applicant or licensee may show cause and be
heard in behalf of the granting or continuance of said license by the City Council. Following hearing, the application or license may be denied, revoked,
suspended for a period of time, continued with conditions or unconditionally continued. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
3-1-9: NOTICE OF DENIAL, REVOCATION, SUSPENSION:
The holder of any license shall be served with notice of time and place of hearing on the denial, suspension or revocation of said license in the manner of
service of original notices. Such notice shall clearly state the grounds upon which suspension, denial or revocation is sought. (1985 Code)
Chapter 2
AMUSEMENTS
3-2-1: DEFINITION:
For use within this chapter, the following term is hereby defined:
OPEN TO THE PUBLIC: A place in which a shooting gallery, throwing gallery, bowling lanes, billiard or pool tables, game tables and/or coin-operated
game tables are located and may be played, conducted for, engaged in or performed by the general public, and to which the general public is admitted or
is in attendance. It does not include places that the general public is not free to enter into or which admission is restricted to members of a club, fraternal
organization, religious or educational group. (Ord. 1218, 5-7-1973)
3-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any public shooting gallery, throwing gallery, bowling lanes, billiard or pool halls, or businesses which have
game tables and/or any coin-operated games upon the premises without first applying for and securing a license from the City Clerk as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 1218, 5-7-1973; amd. 1985 Code)
3-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 50/358
The application for every such license shall be in writing, and shall state the name of the owner or owners and, if a corporation, the names of the officers
and directors of the corporation proposing to operate the same; the name and address of the manager; the address of the location where the business is
to be operated and the hours which the same will be open, together with any other information which may be required by the City Clerk and the Chief of
Police in determining the fitness of the applicant to operate such business. (Ord. 1218, 5-7-1973; amd. 1985 Code)
3-2-4: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The license to have game tables, coin-operated games, billiard or pool tables or throwing or shooting galleries shall be displayed in a prominent place and
ready for inspection by the local authority or the general public. (1985 Code)
3-2-5: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No person or business licensed as herein described in this chapter, while operating under an "alcoholic beverage" license, shall operate or permit his
business to be operated after two o'clock (2:00) A.M. or before six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any day, except that on Sunday, the hours of operation shall not
be after two o'clock (2:00) A.M. or before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 93-27, 9-7-1993)
3-2-6: FEES AND DURATION OF LICENSE:
A. An applicant may apply for an annual license. The annual license shall be valid until March 31 of each year, at which time it shall expire.
B. The fees for licenses shall be:
1. For every throwing gallery or shooting gallery, twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year.
2. For each business establishment wherein is played the game of bowling, tenpins or games of similar character, there shall be paid a license fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. (Ord. 1218, 5-7-1973)
3. For each licensee who has five (5) or less billiard tables, pool tables, pinball machines, video or electronic games, or other like table or device, there
shall be a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). For each licensee who has six (6) or more tables as above described, the license fee shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1218, 5-7-1973; amd. 1985 Code)
Chapter 3
BEER, WINE AND LIQUOR REGULATIONS
3-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the administration of licenses and permits and for local regulations and procedures for the conduct of the sale
and consumption of beer, wine, and liquor, and to ensure the protection of the safety, health, tranquility and general welfare of this community, as set out in
chapter 123, Code of Iowa. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Where words and phrases used in this chapter are defined by State law, Iowa Code section 123.3 and any revisions thereto, such definitions shall apply to
their use in this chapter and are hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-3: ELIGIBILITY FOR LIQUOR CONTROL LICENSE, WINE OR BEER PERMIT:
Liquor control license regulations and action by local authorities and the Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Division (IABD) on applications for liquor control
licenses are established by Iowa Code sections 123.30, 123.32 and 123.75 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-4: PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF LIQUOR CONTROL LICENSE, WINE OR BEER PERMIT:
A. The City shall accept applications for regular IABD licenses, except Class E liquor licenses as long as they are also a holder of a BE license, only when
the following conditions are met: (Ord. 94-5, 3-1-1994)
1. All required State forms and the City's investigative form, said form to be submitted to the Chief of Police at least ten (10) days prior to the
submission of the application for City Council approval, are properly completed and in order.
2. The appropriate licensing fee established by the State of Iowa has been paid.
3. Written consent has been given by applicant that members of the Fire, Police, and Health Departments and the building inspector may enter upon
the premises without warrant to inspect for violations of the provisions of State law and this chapter.
4. No licensee shall have or maintain any interior access to residential or sleeping quarters unless permission is granted by the Administrator of the
IABD in the form of a living quarters permit.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 51/358
5. The premises of a Class B beer permit and classes of liquor licenses or wine permits where consumption on the premises is allowed shall, at the
time of the application, and continue to be equipped with sufficient tables and seats to accommodate twenty five (25) persons at one time.
6. The premises of a licensee must be located within a district now or hereafter zoned for business or commercial purposes and conform to the zoning
requirements of this City. However, a premises which is not in complete compliance with all regulations may be conditionally approved under
subsection A3 of this section and the following subsections.
B. The City Clerk shall coordinate an investigation of each application to determine the appropriate City recommendation to the IABD. The City Clerk shall
provide a copy of the completed local authority investigative form to the appropriate City department for investigation and report. Reports from such
departments shall be included in each staff recommendation to the City Council.
C. The City Clerk may make an unfavorable or conditionally favorable recommendation to the City Council on any application, if:
1. The applicant has a record of violations of State alcoholic liquor laws;
2. The applicant has a record of use of controlled substances or excessive use of alcoholic beverages;
3. The applicant has a record of violations of criminal law or ordinances connected in time, place and manner with a liquor establishment or which
demonstrate a disregard for law;
4. The applicant has maintained, or allowed to exist, an establishment which creates or is a public nuisance, or other violation of this Code, or Federal
or State law which causes, permits or suffers disorderly or violent acts, (litter, noise, vandalism, vehicular or pedestrian traffic congestion), or other
locational problems, in the proximity of such establishment;
5. The applicant has not maintained the premises in accordance with the Building Code, Fire and Life Safety Code of the City and the State;
6. The applicant seeks licensing of premises which would not be consistent with City land use designations;
7. The applicant has demonstrated an unwillingness or inability to cooperate with the City or neighbors to resolve "driving under the influence of liquor"
concerns or community disputes related to a licensed establishment; or
8. There is any other specific reason consistent with the purposes of these provisions which the City Clerk concludes warrants an adverse
recommendation to the City Council based upon public health, safety, welfare, convenience or necessity.
D. All regular IABD license original applications and renewals shall be included on a Council agenda. If the City Clerk makes an unfavorable or
conditionally favorable recommendation, or if a City Council member requests, a public hearing shall be held to allow all interested parties a reasonable
opportunity to be heard by the City Council.
E. Before the City Council recommends denial of a liquor license, wine or beer permit application, notice of the public hearing must be given to the
applicant either personally or by certified mail postmarked not later than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall contain:
1. The date, time and place of the hearing;
2. A copy of the recommendation of the City Clerk, together with all supporting reports and documents; and
3. A statement that information about procedures and rights of parties may be obtained from the Office of the City Clerk.
F. If a public hearing is scheduled, the City Clerk shall publish, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, a notice specifying the time, date and
location of the hearing and business name and address of applicant. The notice shall inform the public that testimony may be given for or against the
application.
1. When a public hearing, before the City Council, is held:
a. The applicant and the City Clerk or other designated City official shall have the right to present written and oral evidence and shall have the right to
rebut opposing evidence;
b. The hearing shall be limited to production of evidence relevant to the recommendation of the City Clerk, unless the City Council decides to hear
additional evidence;
c. After consideration of all relevant evidence, the City Council shall make its recommendation. The recommendation shall be based on substantial
evidence relative to the criteria contained in this section and shall be final. In the case of an adverse recommendation, the City Clerk shall make
findings of fact which shall be forwarded to the IABD along with the City Council's recommendation against the application.
G. If the City Council finds that an applicant does not meet the criteria established by this section, the Council may make a favorable recommendation with
a letter of warning. The City Clerk shall deliver to the applicant, in person or by certified mail, a summary of the reports relating to the application, and a
notice to correct the problems cited. A copy of this notice and summary shall be sent to IABD. During the following license period, the City Clerk, or a
designated City official, shall monitor the progress of the applicant in correcting such problems and report to the City Council. At the time of the next
license renewal, the applicant shall have the burden of proof to establish that the license should receive a favorable recommendation for renewal. If the
City Council finds that the applicant has not made sufficient progress in correcting the conditions which resulted in the letter of warning, the Council
may then make an unfavorable recommendation to IABD without further public hearing.
H. If the City Council makes an unfavorable recommendation on any license application, the Council shall not consider a new application from the same
applicant while an administrative or court appeal relating to such license is pending. The applicant may resubmit an application to the Council in less
than six (6) months from the date of an unfavorable recommendation by the Council only if the conditions which caused such recommendation have
been remedied. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 52/358
3-3-5: BEER AND WINE PERMITS; CLASSES:
Beer and wine permits shall be classed as established by Iowa Code section 123.124 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017
Code)
3-3-6: LIQUOR LICENSES; CLASSES:
Liquor control licenses shall be classed as established by Iowa Code section 123.30 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-7: CLASS B WINE PERMITS:
Class B wine permits, classes, and authority are established by Iowa Code section 123.173 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd.
2017 Code)
3-3-8: APPLICATION; CONTENTS; BOND:
Application contents and actions by local authorities on application are established by Iowa Code sections 123.31 and 123.32 and any revisions thereto.
(Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-9: LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES:
Fees shall be submitted with the respective application as set by statute or administrative rules. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991)
3-3-10: PROHIBITED INTEREST:
Limitations on business interests are established by Iowa Code section 123.45 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-11: SEPARATE LOCATIONS; CLASS B OR C BEER OR CLASS B WINE PERMITS:
Separate locations for Class B or C permits is established by Iowa Code sections 123.140 and 123.178 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-
1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-12: CIVIL LIABILITY:
Civil liability is established by Iowa Code section 123.92 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-13: NATURE OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; SURRENDER AND TRANSFER:
Nature of permit or license surrender, and transfer regulations are established by Iowa Code section 123.38 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-
1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-14: ACTION BY COUNCIL:
The City Council shall approve or disapprove the application. Action taken by the City Council shall be endorsed on the application. (Ord. 94-5, 3-1-1994;
amd. 2017 Code)
However, if a holder of a Class E liquor license also holds a BE license (which is required to have Council approval), it will not be necessary for the Class
E liquor license to be approved by Council. In accordance with the IABD, a renewal of a Class E liquor license can be done by telephone; provided, that
the applicant has met all the conditions for simplified renewal required by the IABD of the Class E liquor license. (Ord. 94-5, 3-1-1994)
3-3-15: TERMS OF LICENSES AND PERMITS:
Terms of licenses and permits are established by Iowa Code sections 123.34 and 123.35 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017
Code)
3-3-16: PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS:
Miscellaneous prohibitions are established by Iowa Code section 123.49 and any revisions thereto, except as specifically modified under local authority, as
follows: (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 53/358
A. Permit or allow any live person to appear in any licensed premises in a state of nudity, as herein defined, to provide entertainment, to provide service, to
act as a hostess, manager or owner, or to serve as an employee in any capacity; or to permit or allow any live person to remain in or upon any licensed
premises in a state of nudity, as herein defined.
For the purposes of this subsection, the term "nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks, or the human
female breast including the nipple or any portion below the nipple, with less than full opaque covering. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991)
3-3-17: ADVERTISEMENTS FOR ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, WINE OR BEER:
Advertisement provisions for alcoholic liquor, wine or beer are established by Iowa Code section 123.51 and any revisions thereto, except as specifically
modified. All signs formerly erected shall be removed by the owner of the premises. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-18: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits is established by Iowa Code sections 123.32 and 123.39 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-
1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-19: EFFECT OF REVOCATION:
Effect of revocation is established by Iowa Code sections 123.32 and 123.40 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-20: APPEAL AND HEARING:
Appeal and hearing guidelines are established by Iowa Code section 123.32 and any revisions thereto. The City's appeal and hearing guidelines related to
licenses and permits are established under chapter 1 of this title and section 3-3-22 of this chapter. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-21: PENALTIES:
Penalties are established by Iowa Code sections 123.39, 123.47 and 123.50 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-22: HEARING ON SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The City Council shall conduct its hearing on suspension or revocation in the following manner:
A. The licensee or permit holder, and the surety on the licensee's or permittee's bond, shall be served with written notice containing a copy of the
complaint against the licensee or permittee, the chapter provision(s) or State Statute(s) allegedly violated, and the date, time, and place for a hearing
on the matter.
B. The City Council shall conduct a hearing, at which both the licensee or permit holder and the complainant(s) shall be present, the purpose of which is to
determine the truth of the facts alleged on the complaint. Should the licensee or permit holder or their authorized representative fail to appear without
good cause, the Council may proceed to a determination on the merits of the complaint.
C. The licensee or permit holder shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to testify and present witnesses in his or her own behalf, and to crossexamine
adverse witnesses.
D. The City Council shall admit only reliable and substantial evidence into the revocation or suspension proceeding, and shall give all admitted evidence its
natural probative value.
E. In the event that criminal charges have been brought against the licensee or permit holder on the same facts and circumstances as are the basis for the
revocation or suspension complaint, the Council shall await a judgment in the criminal action before conducting the revocation or temporary suspension
hearing required by this section. Neither a conviction nor an acquittal in the criminal action shall be conclusive for purposes of the revocation or
suspension proceeding held under this section. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991)
F. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall revoke or suspend a license or permit under this section only when,
upon review of the entire record, it finds evidence of a substantial violation of this chapter or State law. Iowa Code sections 123.32, 123.39 and 123.40
and any revisions thereto establish hearing, suspension, and revocation regulations. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
ARTICLE A. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL UNDER LEGAL AGE
3-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use within this article, the following words and terms are defined:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 54/358
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE, WINE OR BEER: As set out in section 123.3 of the Code of Iowa.
CONSUME: The ingestion of an alcoholic liquor, alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer and the physical condition of having ingested the alcoholic liquor, wine,
or beer. (Ord. 02-01, 1-15-2002)
3-3A-2: MINOR CONSUMPTION:
It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to:
A. Consume any alcoholic liquor, alcoholic beverage, wine or beer.
B. Appear in public after having consumed any alcoholic liquor, alcoholic beverage, wine or beer. (Ord. 02-01, 1-15-2002)
C. Purchase, attempt to purchase, or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer in their possession or control as established by Iowa Code
section 123.47 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 02-01, 1-15-2002; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3A-3: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE OF VIOLATION:
It is an affirmative defense to a violation of section 3-3A-2 of this article that the person under legal age consumed the alcoholic liquor, alcoholic beverage,
wine or beer in the household of the person's parent or guardian and with the knowledge, presence and consent of the person's parent or guardian at or
during a legally protected religious observance, or situations where persons under legal age are lawfully in possession of alcoholic beverages for lawful
sales to others during the course and scope of employment. The exceptions outlined in this section shall not apply under circumstances in which the
underage person leaves the home, religious gathering, or place of employment. (Ord. 02-01, 1-15-2002; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3A-4: PENALTIES:
A. A violation of section 3-3A-2 of this article may be prosecuted either in the jurisdiction where the violation occurs or the jurisdiction where evidence of
consumption is observed. (Ord. 02-01, 1-15-2002)
B. A violation of this article is a simple misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of at least two hundred dollars ($200.00) but not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail not exceeding thirty (30) days. (Ord. 02-01, 1-15-2002; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 4
CIGARETTES
3-4-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
As set forth in chapter 453A, Code of Iowa, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes, cigarette papers, wrappers or tubes at retail without first
having obtained a permit. Permit forms are available online from the Iowa Alcoholic Beverage Division website or at the City Clerk's Office. Tobacco
establishments must submit the completed form to the City Clerk. The City Clerk has authority to issue tobacco permits. (1953 Code § 82-1; amd. 1985
Code; 2017 Code)
3-4-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The application for a retailer's cigarette permit shall be in writing upon forms provided by the Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Division. (Ord. 1483, 2-5-1979;
amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-3: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
Expiration dates for cigarette permits is established by Iowa Code section 453A.13 and any revisions thereto. (1953 Code § 82-3; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-4: PERMIT FEE:
Permit fees are established by Iowa Code section 453A.13 and any revisions thereto. (1953 Code § 82-4; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-5: REFUND:
Refund provisions are established by Iowa Code section 453A.13 and any revisions thereto. (1953 Code § 82-5; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-6: PERMITS NOT TRANSFERABLE:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 55/358
Nontransfer of permits is established by Iowa Code section 453A.13 and any revisions thereto. (1953 Code § 82-6; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-7: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS:
Permit required for each place of business is established by Iowa Code section 453A.13 and any revisions thereto. (1953 Code § 82-7; amd. 1985 Code;
2017 Code)
3-4-8: VENDING MACHINES:
Cigarette vending machine regulations are established by Iowa Code chapter 453A and section 453A.36 and any revisions thereto. (1985 Code; amd.
2017 Code)
Chapter 5
JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
JUNK: Any secondhand or used parts of any automobiles, trucks, tractors or any other motor vehicles, machinery or any other equipment; and any used or
obsolete automobiles or trucks not currently licensed, except that this shall not preclude the legal storage of such unlicensed vehicle within a proper
enclosure or building by virtue of the surrender of the license plates to the County Treasurer; and scrap iron or other metals, bottles, glass, rags, rubber,
paper and all other articles usually or customarily bought or sold by junk dealers.
JUNK BUSINESS: The operating of the business of a junk dealer.
JUNK DEALER: Any person who conducts or operates a business of buying or selling any secondhand parts of automobiles, trucks, tractors or any other
motor vehicles, machinery or equipment of any kind or nature whatsoever, or the wrecking and dismantling of any used, unlicensed automobiles or trucks,
or the wrecking and dismantling of any used tractors, machinery or mechanical equipment of any kind, and/or the purchase and sale or storage of any
scrap iron, metals, bottles, rags, rubber, paper, glass or any other materials or things usually or customarily bought or sold by persons engaged in the junk
business.
JUNKYARD: A place where junk, waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled, or
handled, including, but not limited to, auto and motor vehicle wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and yards for use of salvaged
house wrecking, structural steel materials, and equipment. (Ord. 1052, 5-6-1968; amd. 2017 Code)
3-5-2: NEW JUNK BUSINESSES:
It shall be illegal to establish a junk business or junkyard in any part of the City after July 1, 2010. Those junk businesses or junkyards legally established
prior to July 1, 2010, that have been in continuous operation up to the present may continue operation, subject to the requirements of this chapter,
including licensing, and the requirements of the zoning ordinance, title 12, chapter 6 of this Code related to nonconforming uses. (2017 Code)
3-5-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a junk business or junkyard meeting the requirements of this chapter without first procuring from the City a
license therefor and paying a license fee as hereinafter provided. Said license shall be issued upon written application of such person desiring to conduct
such business. (1953 Code § 73-2; amd. 2017 Code)
3-5-4: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee to be paid by the junk dealer shall be an annual fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council, payable on or before March
31 of each year, application therefor to be filed with the City Clerk; and such license fee must be paid in full, prior to the issuance of any license to such
junk dealer. (1953 Code § 73-3; amd. 2017 Code)
3-5-5: FENCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any junk dealer to operate or conduct his business upon any premises or in any building unless said premises are completely
enclosed with a fence at least eight feet (8') in height, constructed of such material that will completely obscure said premises from the view of the public,
which conforms to the requirements of section 12-16-4 of this Code, to be approved by the building official, and to be maintained and painted in good
condition so as to avoid an unsightly appearance. (Ord. 1125, 9-8-1970; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
3-5-6: OPERATION OF BUSINESS RESTRICTED:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 56/358
A. Junk To Be Kept Within Fence: It shall be unlawful for any person to display, advertise, buy or sell any junk except within the enclosure of the lot, yard,
building or other premises used for said junk business. (1953 Code § 73-5)
B. Use Of Street And Private Property: It shall be unlawful for any secondhand or used parts of automobiles, trucks, tractors or any other motor vehicles,
machinery or equipment, obsolete, unlicensed automobiles or trucks, scrap iron or other metals, bottles, glass, rags, rubber, paper and any other junk
to remain for a period longer than one (1) hour upon any part of the public street in front of or adjacent to the place of business of any junk dealer, or
upon any private property not enclosed with a fence as defined in section 3-5-5 of this chapter, except that any such use of a public street or private
property shall not be prohibited for a currently licensed automobile, truck or other motor vehicle. For the purposes of this chapter, the word "street" shall
include the driveway, parking and sidewalk of any street, and shall include the entire width of the street from property line to property line, and shall
include avenues, alleys and all public thoroughfares and grounds. (Ord. 1125, 9-8-1970)
3-5-7: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
In case any police or other officer of the City shall find any junk dealer violating the provisions of this chapter, he shall give such junk dealer a written notice
to appear before the City Council at one (1) of its regular meetings to show cause why the Council shall not revoke the license of such junk dealer. (1953
Code § 73-7)
Chapter 6
AUCTIONEERS AND AUCTION SALES
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms as used in this chapter shall be defined and construed to mean:
AUCTION HOUSE: Any place of business where merchandise, except new merchandise unless it is new merchandise which has been assessed Personal
Property Tax or is replacement stock of merchandise inventory which was assessed a Personal Property Tax in Cerro Gordo County, is regularly and
periodically sold at auction as a permanent and principal business to be conducted at such establishment.
AUCTION SALE: The offering for sale or the selling of personal property to the highest bidder or the offering for sale or selling of personal property at a
high price and then offering the same property at successively lower prices until a buyer is secured, and conducted in the manner set forth in section
554.2328, Code of Iowa.
AUCTIONEER: Any person offering for sale or selling merchandise at an auction sale.
NEW MERCHANDISE: All merchandise or personal property not previously sold at retail. (Ord. 756, 12-17-1956; amd. 1985 Code)
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or cause or permit to be sold at any auction sale any merchandise unless such sale is conducted by an individual
who has applied for and obtained an auctioneer's license from the City or unless such sale is made at a regularly licensed auction house. (Ord. 756, 12-
17-1956; amd. 1985 Code)
3-6-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The City Clerk is hereby authorized to grant or renew an auctioneer's license for a period not exceeding one (1) year and expiring March 31 of the
following year, to any individual applying therefor. The application for such license shall be filed with the City Clerk. The application shall contain the
following information: (Ord. 756, 12-17-1957; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
A. Proper legal name of applicant, date of birth, and phone number(s).
B. Permanent residence and business address of applicant.
C. A clear photocopy of a government issued photo identification card.
D. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any Municipal ordinance and, if
so, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
E. Experience in the field of auctioneering and/or special training in the auctioneering field.
Upon such application being filed with the Clerk, the Clerk shall immediately refer the same to the Chief of Police who shall cause to be made such
investigation of the applicant's moral character and business responsibility as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. (Ord. 756, 12-17-
1957; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
3-6-4: LICENSE FEES:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 57/358
After such application for an auctioneer's license shall have been received, and before any such license shall be issued, the applicant shall pay to the City
a license fee in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and said license shall expire on March 31 following the issuance thereof. (Ord. 1100, 2-2-1970;
amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
3-6-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
The following acts, omissions and practices in connection with auction sales are hereby prohibited:
A. The use of deceit, fraud and misrepresentation in the sale or offering for sale of any property.
B. The substitution of another article for that bid upon by the prospective purchaser. (Ord. 756, 12-17-1957)
C. The use of false bidders to increase bidding prices without the bidder actually intending to purchase the item. (Ord. 756, 12-17-1957; amd. 2017 Code)
D. The use of any variety of mechanical or excessive vocal sound to attract attention in violation of title 8, chapter 6 of this Code.
E. The use of any false or misleading advertising matter.
F. A sale by a person other than a licensed auctioneer named in the application.
G. Failure to exhibit an auctioneer's license to a police officer on demand at the place where the auction is being conducted.
H. Offering property for sale which has once been struck off to the highest bidder.
I. No auction shall be conducted in a manner which will cause streets or sidewalks to be blocked. (Ord. 756, 12-17-1957; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
3-6-6: AUCTION HOUSE; LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct an auction house without having first obtained a license therefor. The application for an auction
house license shall give the name or names and addresses of the owners of the business and the names and addresses of persons who are to conduct
such auctions, the place of business where the business is to be located, and such other information as the City Clerk may require. A license fee of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid for an auction house license, and all such licenses shall expire on March 31 following the date of issuance. A person
holding an auction house license shall not be subject to the provisions of section 3-6-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 756, 12-17-1957)
3-6-7: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not extend to the sale at public auction of livestock, farm machinery or farm produce or other items commonly sold at
farm sales or to sales conducted by charitable or nonprofit organizations which have met the criteria of chapter 504A of the Code of Iowa and Federal
Internal Revenue Service requirements, or to the sales of property made by sheriffs, constables, coroners, marshals, executors, guardians or assignees of
involved debtors or bankrupts or by any other person required by law to sell personal property. This chapter shall not apply to any auction sale held and
conducted in connection with a recognized auctioneer's school, conducted in Mason City, for the training of auctioneers or prospective auctioneers,
provided no more than four (4) such school sales shall be permitted during any calendar year. (Ord. 756, 12-17-1957; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 7
CLOSE OUT AND GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms as used in this chapter shall be defined and construed to mean:
ADVERTISE: Any and all methods chosen to convey notice directly or indirectly to the public that any of the sales mentioned herein are being offered, or
are intended to be offered. It includes, but is not limited to, the following methods of advertising: oral, written, printed documents or publications, live or
recorded, electronic, and over the internet.
CLOSE OUT OR GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE: Any sale in which the public is led to believe that the sale will include goods damaged by fire,
smoke, water, or other means regardless of whether the business intends to cease operation; that goods offered are offered to dispose of such inventory
prior to the close or cessation of business; or any of the following types of sales: adjuster, adjustment, assignee, bankrupt, benefit of creditors, benefit of
trustee, loss of lease, forced out of business, quitting business, or liquidation. It shall also include sales by a person or business which is closing one (1) of
multiple sales locations within the City.
GOODS: Any goods, wares, securities, services or merchandise, both tangibles and intangibles, or other property capable of being the object of a sale
regulated hereunder.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 58/358
LICENSE: A formal written permission issued by the City Clerk pursuant to this chapter to any person to carry on any sale as defined herein. (Ord. 1329,
8-14-1975; amd. 2017 Code)
3-7-2: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Each written application for a license to advertise and conduct a sale pursuant to this chapter, made to the City Clerk, shall contain the following
information: (Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975)
A. The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale.
B. The location and address of the place where such sale is to be held.
C. The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of termination of such occupancy.
D. The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted. (Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
3-7-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall hold a close out or going out of business sale without first obtaining a license. (Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975; amd. 2017 Code)
3-7-4: LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
All license applications under this chapter shall be made in writing to the City Clerk on a form obtained from said Clerk. Upon receipt of an application for a
license, and payment of the prescribed fee, the City Clerk may issue a license. (Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975; amd. 2017 Code)
3-7-5: LICENSE FEES:
At the time of filing said application, the applicant shall pay to the City a license fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for inventory in excess of fifteen
thousand dollars ($15,000.00); and a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for inventory in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but less than fifteen
thousand dollars ($15,000.00). If the merchant holding the sale is not a resident merchant, the fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) and fifty dollars
($50.00), respectively. (Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975; amd. 1985 Code)
3-7-6: PERIOD OF LICENSE:
A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975)
3-7-7: EXTENSION OF LICENSE PERIOD:
Within the last ten (10) days of the period of any previous license, an application for extension of said license may be made to the City Clerk upon payment
of a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each day the license period is extended over the original thirty (30) days; provided, that no such single period of
extension shall exceed the period of the original license. In no event shall the license period plus the maximum extension period exceed sixty (60) days.
(Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975; amd. 2017 Code)
3-7-8: DUTIES OF LICENSEE:
A licensee hereunder shall:
A. Comply with all applicable local, State, and Federal laws.
B. Not use deceit, fraud, or misrepresentation in either such sale or advertising for such sale.
C. Have a valid City close out or going out of business license available for inspection on scene.
D. Clearly separate all goods listed as objects of the sale from any other goods present and available for sale not so listed, by properly identifying goods
for sale, by tags attached thereto or some other appropriate means reasonably calculated to apprise the public of the status of all goods. (Ord. 1329, 8-
14-1975; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
3-7-9: EXCEPTIONS:
Such sales as described in this chapter shall not be deemed to include sales by the Sheriff, by an executor or guardian, or by any party pursuant to a court
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 59/358
order.
The North Iowa Events Center property, with prior approval by the North Iowa Events Center management, or the North Iowa Fair Association doing
business as the North Iowa Events Center, are exempted from City close out or going out of business licensing requirements so long as they have prior
authorization from the proper regulating body that oversees the property and respective event(s). This does not waive civil liability responsibility from the
respective event organizer or the property owner. (Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 8
PAWNBROKERS
3-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for administration of licenses and permits and for local regulation and procedures for the conduct of a
pawnbroker's business for the protection of the safety, morals and general welfare of this community. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
PAWNBROKER: Any person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property or other thing of value, or who deals in the purchasing of
personal property or other things of value, on condition of selling the same back at a stipulated price, or who receives actual possession of personal
property as security for loans with or without a bill of sale is hereby defined as and declared to be a pawnbroker.
PERSON OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER: Any person who meets all of the following requirements:
A. He has financial standing and good reputation as will satisfy the City Council that he will comply with all Iowa laws and ordinances of this City
applicable to his operation.
B. He does not possess a Federal gambling stamp.
C. He has not had a pawnbroker's license under this chapter revoked within the last two (2) years.
D. He is a citizen of the United States and a resident of Iowa, or licensed to do business in Iowa, in the case of a corporation.
E. He has not been convicted of a felony. However, if his conviction of a felony occurred more than five (5) years before the application for a license or
permit, and if his rights of citizenship have been restored by the Governor, the Council may determine that he is a person of good moral character
notwithstanding such conviction.
F. If a person is a corporation or partnership, the requirement of this subsection shall apply to each of the officers, directors or partners and to any
person who directly or indirectly owns or controls ten percent (10%) or more of any class of stock of such corporation or has an interest of ten
percent (10%) or more in the ownership or profit of such business.
G. For purposes of this provision, an individual and his spouse shall be regarded as one (1) person. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-3: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEE:
Before engaging in business, a pawnbroker shall apply for and obtain a license from the City and shall pay therefor a yearly license fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00), said license shall expire on March 31 following the date of its issuance; provided, that if said license be issued after October 1 of any
year, the said license fee shall be the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the remainder of the year. No refund shall be allowed for any premature surrender or
revocation of any such license. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-4: ELIGIBILITY FOR PAWNBROKER'S LICENSE:
Upon meeting any requirements imposed by State law and the ordinances of this City, a person who is of good moral character, as defined by State law
and this chapter, may apply for a pawnbroker's license. In the case of a corporation or partnership, the officers of the corporation or the partners of a
partnership shall be persons of good moral character as defined by State law and this chapter. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-5: CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL OF LICENSE; PREMISES:
An applicant for a pawnbroker's license, as a further condition for approval, must give consent in writing on the application that members of the Fire, Police
and Health Departments and the building official may enter upon the premises without warrant to inspect for violations of the provisions of State law or the
ordinances of this City.
A. No pawnbroker's license shall be approved for any premises which do not conform to all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions and health and fire
regulations.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 60/358
B. The premises for which a pawnbroker's license is sought must be located within the district now or hereafter zoned for business purposes and conform
to the zoning requirements of the City.
C. No pawnbroker's shop shall be located within one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') of an active or operating public or private educational institution.
D. All licenses provided for in this chapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises of the holder of the permit and shall at all times be
subject to inspection.
E. No pawnbroker's shop shall be operated in conjunction with or share a common exterior access with any arcade, coin-operated amusement center or
other establishment housing or using coin-operated amusement devices open or available to minors.
F. No coin-operated video or amusement games of any type shall be operated on the premises of a licensed pawnshop. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
G. No alcoholic liquor, alcoholic beverage or intoxicating liquor, as defined in Iowa Code, shall be sold, consumed or kept on the premises of the holder of
a pawnbroker's license and no pawnshop shall be established or maintained upon or within any premises or building in which it shares a common
access or entrance with any establishment selling or serving alcoholic beverages or holding a liquor control license or beer permit. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-
1983; amd. 2017 Code)
3-8-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The application for a pawnbroker's license shall be in writing on a form provided by the City Clerk and subscribed and sworn to by one (1) of the owners,
setting forth the name of each person who is an owner of said business or, if a corporation, the names of the officers and directors of the corporation, and
the principal place of business thereof, stating the name and address of the manager, the address of the business location, and such other information as
may be required in order to investigate the good character of the applicant. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-7: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of an original application for a pawnbroker's license by the City Clerk, it shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police who shall conduct an
investigation and shall submit a written report on the application and a recommendation to the Mayor as to the approval of the license. It shall be the duty
of the health inspector, the building official and the Fire Chief/Inspector to inspect the premises to determine if they conform to the requirements of the City,
and no license shall be approved until or unless an approving report has been filed with the Mayor by such officers. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-8: SIMPLIFIED APPLICATION FOR RENEWAL:
Upon receipt of an application for the renewal of a pawnbroker's license, it shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police only, who shall conduct an
investigation and shall submit a written report on the application as to the truth of the facts answered in the application and a recommendation to the
Mayor as to approval of the license or permit. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-9: BOND:
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued until a bond, for the period said license is in effect, shall first be filed, which said bond shall be in the penal sum of
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), conditioned that said business will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Code and the laws of the State
of Iowa, and that such pawnbroker will account for and deliver to any person legally entitled thereto any goods, wares or merchandise or other things of
value which may have come into his hands in such business as pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof, he will pay money to the person entitled thereto for the
reasonable value thereof. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-10: NATURE OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
A pawnbroker's license shall be a purely personal privilege and shall be revocable for cause. It shall not constitute property nor be subject to attachment
and execution nor be alienable or assignable, and in any case, it shall cease upon the death of the licensee. However, the Mayor, in his discretion, may
allow the executor or administrator of a licensee to operate the business of the decedent for a reasonable time not to exceed the expiration date of the
license. Every license shall be issued in the name of the applicant setting forth the location on which the business is located and no person holding a
license shall allow any other person to use the same or operate the business on any other location. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-11: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A pawnbroker's license may be suspended for a period up to one (1) year, or revoked by the Mayor, without refund, following notice to the licensee and
hearing by the City Council, for good cause, upon finding of any of the following causes:
A. Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for such license.
B. Any change in the ownership or interest in the business operated under a pawnbroker's license, which change was not previously reported to and
approved by the Mayor.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 61/358
C. Any event which would have resulted in disqualification from receiving such license or permit when originally issued.
D. The failure or refusal on the part of the licensee to render any report or permit any inspection required by this chapter.
E. A finding by the City Council, after hearing, that such business is being managed, conducted or maintained in a manner that is detrimental to the public
health, morals or welfare. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-12: RECORDS KEPT:
Every pawnbroker shall keep a book in which shall be plainly written, at the time of each loan or purchase, an accurate account or description in the
English language of the goods, articles or things pawned, pledged or purchased; the amount of money loaned or paid therefor; the date received; the
name, residence and a brief description of the person pawning, pledging or selling the same; which book, plus the pawned or purchased articles, shall at
all reasonable times be open to the inspection of any law enforcement officer. Every pawnbroker purchasing or receiving on deposit for loan any article or
personal property or other thing of value shall give to the person selling or depositing the same a plainly written or printed ticket or receipt therefor,
showing the terms of said sale or loan, and a copy of the entrance in the book required herein to be kept. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-13: REPORT TO POLICE:
It shall be the duty of each pawnbroker to make out and deliver to the Chief of Police each day before the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon a legible and
correct copy of each transaction transacted during the preceding day, as in the pawnbroker's book required herein to be kept. Provided, however, that no
pawnbroker shall be required to furnish such information with reference to property purchased from merchants, manufacturers or bona fide wholesale
dealers having an established place of business when such property or goods are accompanied by a bill of sale or invoice, which must be shown to any
law enforcement officer upon demand. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-14: PROHIBITED TRANSACTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to purchase or receive any property, goods or other thing of value from any minor without the written consent of the
parents or the guardian of said minor, or from any person who, at the time of making the transaction, is under the influence of intoxicating drugs or liquors,
or from any feeble minded person or person of unsound mind. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-15: TIME TO REDEEM:
No pawnbroker shall sell or dispose of any pawned or pledged article until the same shall remain in his possession for thirty (30) days after the pledge or
deposit thereof, and the same may be redeemed by the depositor or pledgor at any time within said thirty (30) days. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-16: PROPERTY TO BE HELD; REPORT TO CHIEF OF POLICE:
No personal property or other thing of value received on deposit or pledged by any pawnbroker shall be permitted to be redeemed for the period of forty
eight (48) hours after the delivery to the Chief of Police of the statement of transactions herein referred to. Whenever the Chief of Police or any member of
the Police Department shall notify any such pawnbroker not to sell any item of property so received, nor to permit the same to be redeemed, such property
shall not be sold or redeemed and must be retained in the possession of the pawnbroker for at least thirty (30) days after the receipt of such notice or until
such article has been released in writing by the police officer giving the notice. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-17: UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE WITHOUT LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a pawnbroker or to maintain any sign usually known as a pawnbroker's sign, such as three
(3) balls, or in any manner to advertise to loan money on pledge or deposit of personal property or other thing of value without first having applied for and
obtained a pawnbroker's license and without having complied with the regulations regarding signs contained in title 10, chapter 2, article G and title 12,
chapter 20 of this Code. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-18: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to imprisonment in the
County Jail for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days or a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
Chapter 9
PEDDLERS, VENDORS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, SOLICITORS
3-9-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any peddler/vendor, transient merchant or solicitor to engage in business, sell or take orders for sale of merchandise, without first
securing a proper license to so engage as herein required.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 62/358
Exemption: Established merchants, organizations, businesses, vendors or peddlers participating in organized celebrations, promotions, sales or other
events approved by the City Council; authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations which have a place of business in Cerro Gordo
County, Iowa, operating under the provisions of chapter 504A of the Code of Iowa or authorized and organized under statutes or regulations of the United
States government, or approved by the Internal Revenue Service; route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit additional business or make special
sales (i.e., Schwan's, Avon); and nonprofit clubs and lodges when not ordinarily conducted as a business that do not meet the requirements of chapter
504A of the Iowa Code and are located in Cerro Gordo County, Iowa. Iowa Code section 9C.4 has additional exemptions for transient merchants only (not
vendors or solicitors). (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-14 - MOBILE VENDORS . Go to new ordinance.
3-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
MOBILE VENDOR: Operator of a nonmotorized vending pushcart.
PEDDLER/VENDOR: Any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from
house to house or upon the public street.
SOLICITOR: Any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any order for
goods, services, subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a future date.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Iowa Code section 9C.1 and any revisions thereto defines the term transient merchant and lists State requirements for
applicants. This section of the Iowa Code also lists specific exemptions that do not require a transient merchant license. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
3-9-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Except as provided in this chapter, before any transient merchant permit under this chapter shall be issued, each applicant for a transient merchant license
shall file with the City Clerk proof of a valid State issued transient vendor permit, and an acknowledgment from the Iowa Secretary of State that the bond
required1 of all transient merchants operating anywhere within the State of Iowa has been filed and will remain valid through the time the merchant is
operating within the City.
Applicants for a peddler/vendor, transient merchant or solicitor's license shall file with the City Clerk an application in writing, signed by the applicant, upon
a form furnished by the City Clerk. Said application shall state their legal name, date of birth, permanent and local place of residence, phone number(s), a
brief physical description of the applicant, a picture or drawing of the vehicle or cart to be used, if any, and the license plate number, the place from which
the business will be conducted, if any, the nature of the business, and a brief description of the commodities or articles proposed to be sold, or the services
to be rendered. Said application shall also contain a brief statement as to the method by which the applicant will conduct his business and a place for the
applicant to indicate whether or not the applicant has an Iowa retailer's sales tax permit and, if so, the applicant's sales tax permit number. Said application
shall also state the period of time for which a license is desired, not to exceed one (1) year for a peddler/vendor's or solicitor's license and not to exceed
sixty (60) days for a transient merchant's license. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-14 - MOBILE VENDORS . Go to new ordinance.
3-9-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. Licensee shall maintain a distance of seventy five feet (75') from the entrance of any business which is selling the same type of product as the
peddler/vendor. Mobile vendors may be prohibited in areas where sidewalks are not wide enough to accommodate both pedestrians and the vendor.
B. There shall be maintained a distance of not less than twenty feet (20') between vendors.
C. The vendor's operation shall not impede the free flow of pedestrian traffic along sidewalks or plaza right-of-way, nor shall they interfere with pedestrian
movement into or out of retail establishments. (1985 Code)
D. No pushcart shall have dimensions exceeding four feet (4') in width, eight feet (8') in length, and eight feet (8') in height. All pushcarts must be
aesthetically pleasing in appearance, and shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. Each pushcart shall be capable of being moved and kept
under control by one (1) person traveling on foot. The City Administrator may grant a special license to a handicapped person to operate a pushcart
propelled by an electric motor; provided, that the applicant meets all other conditions for a license. During transit of the pushcart (whether it be towed
by vehicle, carried by trailer, or pushed by hand) the pushcart operator shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle as
provided by law except as to the provisions which by their very nature can have no application.
E. The applicant shall have obtained all necessary permits required by the State of Iowa Department of Health or other applicable regulatory agency.
Before a license under this chapter is issued to a peddler who is engaged in selling food items as a mobile food unit, an applicant shall provide to the
City Clerk evidence that the applicant possesses a State of Iowa mobile food license as required by section 137F.4 of the Code of Iowa. Each pushcart
operator and vendor shall meet USDA-FDA Food Service Sanitation Ordinance standards and Iowa Department of Agriculture Food Service Sanitation
Code for food storage, preparation and dispensing.
F. The construction of an addition to an existing store front for permanent, temporary or seasonal use of abutting public right-of-way shall require an
encroachment permit as specified in title 5, chapter 1, article C of this Code.
G. All peddlers and solicitors are only permitted to go door-to-door between sunrise and sunset.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 63/358
H. No person, firm, corporation or other organization shall sell, display, or otherwise offer for sale any merchandise or other materials on any sidewalk,
street, public right-of-way, or other public property without first obtaining approval by the City Council or by a duly authorized representative. Application
for such license shall be made in writing to the City Clerk. The Clerk shall refer such application to the appropriate City departments for review and
report. Said application along with the appropriate department reports shall then be forwarded to the City Council or to a duly authorized representative
for action to approve or disapprove. Persons, firms, corporations or other organizations having valid contracts with the City authorizing activities
hereinbefore described are excepted from the terms of this subsection for the activities specifically authorized in the contract.
The City Council reserves the right to require the relocation of any licensed pushcart or transient merchant to a new location in the event public safety
or congestion so requires, based on the discretion of the Council. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
3-9-5: INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The applicant shall complete the application form as required and shall submit two (2) copies to the Chief of the Police Department who shall cause such
investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good and in connection
therewith may, in his discretion, require the photographing and fingerprinting of any such applicant.
A. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on
such application his disapproval and his reasons therefor and return the said application to the City Clerk who shall notify the applicant that his
application is disapproved and that no license will be issued.
B. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of Police shall
endorse on such application his approval and return the same to the City Clerk who shall thereafter issue the license subject to the terms and
conditions of this chapter. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the City and show the name and address of the licensee, the class of
license issued, the kind of goods or services to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as
the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used under such license. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
3-9-6: IDENTIFICATION CARD:
The City Clerk, at the time of issuing the license, shall issue to each licensee an identification card which shall identify the type of license issued, the
period for which the license is issued and the number of the license; in addition, the name and address of the licensee and the name of the business firm
the licensee represents. Such identification card shall, during all times the licensee is engaged in the activity for which the license is issued, be carried by
the licensee and displayed to any person requesting identification. (1985 Code)
3-9-7: LICENSE FEES:
The following license fees shall be paid by the applicant at the time the City Clerk issues the license:
Peddler/vendor $15.00 per year
Solicitor $15.00 per year
Transient merchant $25.00 for the first day, $5.00 per day for each additional day up to 60 days only
(1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
3-9-8: NUISANCE:
The practice of peddlers/vendors, solicitors, or transient merchants, whether licensed or not as required by this chapter, of going in and upon private
residences and property without having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of said private residences and
property, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and/or disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and is punishable as such nuisance as a simple misdemeanor.
No vendor vending from a motor vehicle shall conduct his/her business in such a way as would restrict or interfere with the ingress or egress of the
abutting property owner or tenant, or create or become a public nuisance, increase traffic congestion or delay, or constitute a hazard to traffic, life, or
property, or an obstruction to adequate access to fire, police, sanitation, or emergency vehicles. Furthermore, no vehicle shall remain in any one (1) place
for a period longer than necessary to make a sale after having been approached or stopped for that purpose. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
3-9-9: LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the application.
(2017 Code)
3-9-10: TIME RESTRICTION:
All licenses shall provide that said licenses are in force and effect only between the following hours: Monday through Saturday, nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., and Sunday, one o'clock (1:00) P.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 64/358
3-9-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Reasons: The Clerk may revoke a license issued under this chapter for the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent Statements: The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
2. Violation Of Law: The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3. Endangered Public Welfare, Health Or Safety: The licensee has conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety,
order or morals.
B. Notice Of Revocation; Right To Appeal: The Clerk shall cause notice of the license revocation to be served in person by the Police Department or by
mail to the licensee's local address, which notice shall specify the reason(s) for such action. The licensee may appeal the revocation of the license to
the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting by filing with the Clerk a written request for an appeal to the City Council. The City Council may
affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Clerk to revoke such license. If a license is revoked, no refund of any license fee paid shall be made. Upon
the revocation of a license, the licensee is not eligible for the issuance of a new license under this chapter for a period of one (1) year from the date the
license revocation is served in person or deposited in the U.S. mail. (2017 Code)
3-9-12: LICENSE EXEMPTIONS:
The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Government Officers: Officers and employees of the United States, the State of Iowa, or any subdivision or agency thereof, while in the performance of
their official duties.
B. Public Utilities: Representatives of any public utility lawfully doing business in the City, while acting in such capacity.
C. Route Salespersons: Newsboys and route salespersons who call routinely on customers on a regular basis or on an established route.
D. Charitable Organizations: Any organization which is acting under the authority of chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa and which has obtained tax exempt
status under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
E. Resale Or Institutional Use: Persons customarily calling on businesses or institutions for the purpose of selling products for resale or institutional use.
F. Nationally Recognized Nonprofit Organizations: Members of any Boy Scout, Girl Scout, Campfire, 4-H Club, FFA and similar nationally recognized
nonprofit organizations, if the sales are to benefit the organization in its recognized operation and/or programs.
G. Community Improvement Or Benefit: Persons making door to door sales for the purpose of a community improvement or benefit, approved by the City
Council, on behalf of nonprofit, tax exempt organizations.
H. School Students: Students representing local K-12 schools conducting projects sponsored by organizations and recognized by such schools.
I. Youth Sports Organizations: Local area youth sports organizations. (2017 Code)
3-9-13: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or
any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2017 Code)
Chapter 10
VEHICLES FOR HIRE, TAXICABS, LIMOUSINES
3-10-1: LICENSING REQUIRED:
A. License: No person shall operate or maintain or use any vehicle for hire without holding a minimum of a valid chauffeur's license for a passenger vehicle
less than a sixteen (16) passenger design under the laws of the State of Iowa.
B. Inspection: No person shall operate, or maintain or use any vehicle for hire without first having the vehicle pass an inspection by the Chief of Police or
his designee and obtaining a license therefor. No license shall be transferable for use on any other vehicle other than the vehicle for hire originally
licensed unless authorized by the City Clerk and only after that vehicle has passed an inspection. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 65/358
C. Exceptions:
1. An outside or non-resident vehicle for hire company and its driver/operator not permitted by the City may only drop off passengers within the City
limits. The outside/non-resident vehicle for hire company and driver/operator shall not pick up a passenger without first complying with the
requirements of this chapter.
2. Vehicles and drivers/operators legally contracted by a business or company to transport employees or other passengers as needed.
3. Vehicles and drivers/operators used to transport patients to and from medical appointments or care facilities while being compensated either in part
or in full by Medicare, Medicaid, Tricare, or any other like medical provider or insurance company. (2017 Code)
3-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
LIMOUSINE: A vehicle which carries passengers for a fare determined on the basis of time or a flat fee.
TAXICAB: A vehicle which carries passengers for a flat rate or fare determined by a taximeter as required under section 3-10-15 of this chapter.
VEHICLE FOR HIRE: Any vehicle which carries passengers for compensation including, but not limited to, limousines and taxicabs. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-
2010)
3-10-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for license shall be in writing made by the owner thereof to the City Clerk and shall contain the name and address of the owner, the make,
model, year of manufacture, engine and factory numbers and Iowa State motor vehicle license number of each motor vehicle proposed to be licensed.
(Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-4: BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION NEEDED OF DRIVERS:
The City Clerk, upon receiving an application for a license, shall have the Chief of Police or his/her designee investigate the statements contained therein
and shall investigate the reputation and character of the applicant to determine whether or not they are a proper person to engage in business as
proposed. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
No person shall operate, or maintain or use any vehicle for hire without first paying the required initial background investigation fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) payable to the Police Department, or the ten dollar ($10.00) renewal fee payable to the City Clerk for annual drivers before being authorized by
the Chief of Police or his/her designee. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
3-10-5: INSPECTION OF VEHICLES:
Upon application for a license, each vehicle for hire shall be thoroughly inspected by the Chief of Police or his/her designee to determine whether said
vehicle is in a thoroughly safe and sanitary condition for the transportation of passengers. This inspection shall be done on an annual basis, or more often
if necessary. If an inspection reveals such vehicle to be unfit for use in public transportation, or if such vehicle does not comply with the provisions of this
chapter, no license shall be issued therefor.
The inspection also includes additional spot or surprise checks, if needed. If a spot or surprise inspection reveals such vehicle is unfit for use in public
transportation the license will be suspended until the vehicle is made fit for use in public transportation. An inspection is also required after the vehicle has
been involved in a motor vehicle collision or has sustained something other than minor or superficial damage to ensure the vehicle is still safe for public
transportation.
If, after an inspection, any vehicle for hire is determined by the Chief of Police or his/her designee to be in unsafe condition, then the vehicle shall
immediately be removed from service by the driver and the licensee. The vehicle for hire shall not be operated thereafter until the unsafe condition has
been remedied and the Chief of Police or his/her designee has reinspected such vehicle and authorized its return to service. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-6: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
No license for any vehicle for hire shall be issued until there has been filed with the City Clerk a certificate of insurance showing issuance of a liability
insurance policy covering specifically a "vehicle for hire" for the period of said license, with minimum limits of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
for a single personal injury or death, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for multiple injuries or deaths, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
for property damage. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-7: LICENSE FEES:
The license fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) payable to the City Clerk for each vehicle for hire license, and shall expire on March 31 following the
date of issuance. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
3-10-8: MISREPRESENTATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to give any fictitious information or to practice any fraud, misrepresentation or subterfuge in any application for a license
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 66/358
or in order to secure any license provided for by this chapter. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-9: RATES POSTED:
The owner and operator of each vehicle for hire shall keep the rates of fares charged clearly posted at all times somewhere in plain view of the passengers
of the vehicle. The posted rates shall not obstruct the view of the windshield or either window immediately to the left or right of the driver's seat. (Ord. 10-
21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-10: PREPAYMENT OF FARE:
Every driver of a vehicle for hire shall have the right to demand prepayment of a legal fare in advance and may refuse employment unless so prepaid.
(Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-11: RECEIPTS DELIVERED:
Upon request of any passenger, the operator of any vehicle for hire shall give such passenger a receipt showing the amount of fare paid, the name of the
operator, number of the vehicle and time and distance of journey; said receipt to be signed and dated by the operator. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-12: FALSE ORDER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make a false telephone call or order of any kind or nature for any vehicle for hire service whatsoever. (Ord. 10-21, 12-
7-2010)
3-10-13: DUTY OF PASSENGER TO PAY FARE OR CHARGE:
Anyone inside a vehicle for hire is presumed to be receiving a service, based on compensation, from the driver/operator, and it shall be unlawful for any
person who receives a vehicle for hire service in Mason City, Iowa, to fail or refuse to pay any lawful fare or charge due to a vehicle for hire driver. (Ord.
10-21, 12-7-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
3-10-14: VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION:
Each vehicle for hire shall display a license tag furnished by the Chief of Police or his/her designee on the lower passenger's side of the windshield.
Each vehicle for hire shall display on each side of said vehicle the name of the company it represents in plainly distinguishable letters that are at least four
inches (4") high. These letters must be permanently painted or otherwise permanently affixed. Magnetic lettering will only be allowed on a temporary basis,
not to exceed one (1) month from time of inspection, and only under the authority of the Chief of Police or his/her designee. Taxicabs may also have a
permanently mounted yellow or amber lighting display upon the roof of each vehicle with appropriate wording indicating it is a vehicle for hire and legibly
affixed thereto. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
3-10-15: TAXIMETER OPTION:
A. Inspection And Sealing:
1. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, or his designated representative, to inspect each taximeter at least once each year and more often as he
may deem proper and to cause the same to be sealed. All taximeters shall be so adjusted as to register within five percent (5%) the current charge
for the distance traveled.
2. The expense to have the taximeter inspected, calibrated, recalibrated and/or certified annually will be the responsibility of the vehicle for hire
owner/operator. A copy of the taximeter's maintenance records and certification shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police or his/her designee and
placed with the annual inspection report. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
B. Installation: The taximeters shall be installed in such a position within the taxicab so as to be within the plain view of the passengers and the dial
thereon shall be equipped with a flag or other device indicating whether or not said cab is in service.
C. Charges Based On Taximeters: The charges for the use of the taxicabs shall be based upon the charge shown on the taximeter, except charges for
taxicabs hired on an hourly basis.
D. Use Of Taximeters Required: It shall be unlawful for any driver of any taxicab, while carrying passengers, to display the flag attached to the taximeter in
such a position as to denote that such vehicle is not employed or to throw the flag of the taximeter in recording position while such vehicle is not
actually employed, or to fail to throw the flag of such taximeter in a nonrecording position at the termination of each and every service. (Ord. 10-21, 12-
7-2010)
3-10-16: OPERATION OF VEHICLE FOR HIRE:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 67/358
A. Passengers: A "passenger" is a person within a vehicle for hire who is not the driver/operator. Any passenger is automatically presumed to be receiving
a service based on compensation.
B. Termination Or Refusal Of Transportation: A driver of a vehicle for hire may terminate the transportation of a passenger or refuse to transport a potential
passenger if the driver reasonably believes the driver's life, safety or property is in danger.
C. Tobacco Use Prohibited: Use of tobacco within a vehicle for hire is prohibited under Iowa Code chapter 142D.
D. Use Of Cellphone, Text Messaging Device, Sound System, Or Radio By Driver: No driver, while the vehicle for hire is occupied by a passenger, shall
play a sound system or radio if the passenger or passengers request that the driver not do so. Additionally, no driver shall use a cellphone or text
messaging device while the vehicle for hire is in motion or is occupied by a passenger unless a hands free device is available.
E. Receiving And Discharging Passengers: No driver shall stop a vehicle for hire, or any portion thereof, on the traveled portion of any highway, street, or
other place open to use by the public for vehicular travel, to receive or discharge any passenger or their belongings, except where motor vehicle
parking, where stopping is specifically permitted by law or where it is otherwise safe to do so. When so permitted, the driver shall park or stop the
vehicle for hire in the manner permitted by law. No driver shall load or unload passengers or their belongings in a manner that impedes or interferes
with the orderly flow of vehicular traffic.
F. How Passengers Of Vehicle Are To Enter Or Leave Vehicle For Hire: A driver should not permit any potential passenger to enter a vehicle for hire, or
permit a passenger to exit a vehicle for hire, from the left side, except when the vehicle for hire is at the left curb of a one-way street or when the
vehicle for hire is parked or standing perpendicular to the curb at a location where such parking or standing is permitted.
G. Restriction On Number Of Passengers In Any Vehicle For Hire: A driver shall not permit more persons to enter a vehicle for hire in excess of the seating
capacity thereof, as rated by the vehicle for hire's manufacturer, including the driver.
H. Acceptance Of Additional Persons: Whenever any vehicle for hire is occupied by a passenger, the driver shall not permit any other person to occupy
such vehicle for hire, unless the passenger, having been requested by the driver, gives affirmative permission to the driver to do so.
I. Deception Of Passengers: A driver shall not deceive any passenger, or potential passenger, as to the destination, route, rate of fare, or any other
provision of this chapter.
J. Trips To Be Made By Most Direct Route: A passenger may request that a driver take a passenger specified route to the passenger's destination. If a
passenger does not specify a route, then a driver shall take the most direct route from the point of pick up to the destination. A driver may suggest, and
a passenger may approve, a less direct route.
K. Compliance With Lawful Requests Of Passengers: All drivers shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of passengers.
L. Lost Personal Property: All personal property found in a vehicle for hire at the end of a trip shall be immediately returned by the driver or license holder
to the passenger who left the item(s) in the vehicle for hire, if the identity of the passenger is known or can be reasonably ascertained. Otherwise, the
personal property shall be deposited by the driver with the license holder at the conclusion of the driver's tour of duty.
M. Alcohol And Controlled Substances: No driver shall ingest or be under the influence of alcoholic beverages, controlled substances or other habit
forming drugs while operating a vehicle for hire. No driver shall transport in a vehicle for hire alcoholic beverages or controlled substances other than
those carried in possession of a paying passenger.
N. Solicitation: No driver shall solicit potential passengers by word, signal or otherwise.
O. Use Of Vehicle For Hire For Unlawful Purposes: No driver or vehicle owner or license holder shall use, or permit to be used any vehicle for hire for any
unlawful purpose.
P. Drivers To Be Clean And Neat: Every driver of a vehicle for hire while on duty shall be clean and neat in dress and in person.
Q. Safety Equipment Required: All vehicles for hire shall be equipped with three (3) DOT traffic triangles, a fire extinguisher and a first aid kit.
R. Compliance With Laws And Ordinances: Every vehicle for hire shall be operated in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local laws,
ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
3-10-17: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the City Attorney or his/her designee, the Chief of Police or his/her designee or by any other law
enforcement officer. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-18: PENALTIES:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 68/358
A. Any vehicle owner or driver who violates any provision of this chapter, or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, shall be guilty of a simple
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, and not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent offense.
B. Any person, other than a vehicle owner or driver, who violates any provision of this chapter, or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, shall be
guilty of a simple misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, and not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent offense. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-19: EFFECT OF ENACTMENT OF THIS CHAPTER:
Every license in effect on the date of the enactment of this chapter shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
Chapter 11
SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
Iowa Administrative Rules chapter 277 (2013) and Iowa Code supplement (2013) and any subsequent revisions thereto establish definitions related to
alarm systems, alarm contractors and alarm installers. (Ord. 13-29, 9-17-2013)
3-11-2: STATE CERTIFICATION OF CONTRACTORS AND INSTALLERS REQUIRED:
Iowa Administrative Rules chapter 277 (2013) and Iowa Code supplement (2013) and any subsequent revisions thereto establish State requirements for
alarm system contractors and installers. Inquiries regarding the Alarm System Contractor and Installer Certification Program may be addressed to:
Alarm System Contractor and Installer Certification Program
Fire Marshal Division
Iowa Department of Public Safety
215 East 7th Street
Des Moines, IA 50319
Inquiries may be addressed by electronic mail to alarminfo@dps.state.ia.us, or by telephone to (515)725-6145. (Ord. 13-29, 9-17-2013)
Chapter 12
SIDEWALK CONTRACTORS
3-12-1: QUALIFICATIONS; LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, repair sidewalks or do any concrete work upon a portion of public property without first having obtained a
sidewalk contractor's license as provided in this chapter; provided, however, that no license shall be required of employees of the City in the exercise of
their respective duties nor to persons acting under direct contract with the City. It shall be unlawful for any person other than employees of the licensee to
operate under his license. (Ord. 1098, 2-2-1970; amd. 1985 Code)
3-12-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for said sidewalk contractor's license shall be filed with the City Clerk, which application shall describe the qualifications and experience of
the applicant in sidewalk construction. (Ord. 1098, 2-2-1970; amd. 1985 Code)
3-12-3: REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE:
A. Bond: The application shall be accompanied by a bond, for the period said license is in effect, in the penal sum of not less than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), conditioned that the applicant shall indemnify the City against any damages which may occur or injury which may result because of the
want of reasonable care or lack of reasonable skill in the performance of such work, and further conditioned that all walks constructed by the applicant
shall be in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor, and the provisions of this Code. Said bond shall also be conditioned to maintain the
sidewalks for a period of three (3) years after completion.
B. Insurance: The applicant shall file with the Clerk evidence of public liability insurance acceptable to the City, to be in full force and effect for the period of
said license, with minimum limits of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for property damage, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for a single
personal injury or death, and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for multiple injuries or deaths, which insurance shall indemnify and hold harmless the
City from the same risks as hereinbefore provided for corporate surety bonds.
C. Fees: The fee for each sidewalk contractor's license shall be the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1098, 2-2-1970; amd. 1985 Code; Ord.
92-14, 8-4-1992; 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 69/358
D. Term Of License: Licenses, bonds and insurance shall be good for the period expiring March 31 following the issuance thereof.
Upon being satisfied that the application, bond and insurance comply with the provisions of this chapter, the Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant.
(Ord. 1098, 2-2-1970; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 92-14, 8-4-1992)
3-12-4: GRADE APPLICATION REQUIRED:
No construction shall be allowed within the corporate limits of any Municipally owned property, sidewalks or alleys by any sidewalk contractor or any other
person without first obtaining a grade application for doing such work from the Engineering Department. (Ord. 92-19, 11-3-1992; amd. 2017 Code)
3-12-5: INSPECTION:
All concrete construction shall be inspected by the Engineering Department. All work shall conform to the established grade therefor provided by the City
Engineer and shall follow all requirements set forth in title 5, chapter 1, articles A, B and C of this Code. (1985 Code; amd. Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017
Code)
3-12-6: PERMITS REQUIRED:
No construction shall be allowed within the corporate limits of any Municipally owned property, sidewalks or alleys by any City licensed sidewalk contractor
or any other person without first obtaining a permit.
A. Fees: The permit fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for new installation and twenty dollars ($20.00) for replacement and payable at time said permit is
issued; and the same shall be issued in duplicate, one (1) copy being given to the applicant and one (1) filed in the Office of the City Engineer. Permit
shall show the name of the applicant, the exact location of the concrete construction, and such other information as the City Engineer may require.
B. Owner's Permit: In cases where the owner of property or properties desires personally to do sidewalk work upon public rights-of-way immediately
adjacent to and abutting premises of which the owner has been established as the legal deed holder or contractor purchaser, said owner may appear
before the City Engineer, or his designated representative, and upon establishing that he is competent to do the specific work for which permit is
desired, and upon obtaining the permit and grade for said work to be done, said owner may then commence work. All work completed by the owner
shall be inspected as provided in section 3-12-5 of this chapter.
C. Term Of Permit: Permit is valid for thirty (30) days from the date of issuance for all sidewalk work. Sidewalk not replaced within thirty (30) days of
issuance may be replaced, without notice to the contractor or homeowner, by a City appointed sidewalk contractor. Extensions past the thirty (30) days
from the date of issuance shall only be granted by the City Engineer. The replacement of sidewalk removed in the course of underground utility work
shall be replaced by the permit holder within thirty (30) days of completion of the underground work. (Ord. 92-19, 11-3-1992; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 13
EXCAVATING CONTRACTORS
3-13-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig, blast, excavate in, or break up any street, alley or public ground without first having obtained an excavator's
license as provided in this chapter; provided, however, that no license shall be required of officers of the City in the exercise of their respective duties nor
to persons acting under direct contract with the City. It shall be unlawful for any person other than employees of the licensee to operate under his license.
(1953 Code § 81-1)
3-13-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for an excavator's license shall be made in writing to the City Clerk. Said application shall give the name, age, residence and experience of the
applicant and such other information as may reasonably be required by the Clerk. (1953 Code § 81-2)
3-13-3: REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE:
A. Fee: The application for an excavator's license shall be accompanied by the license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
B. Bond: Each application for an excavator's license shall be accompanied by a bond, for the period said license is in effect, in the penal sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) conditioned that the excavator will replace any street surfaces or installations of public utilities in streets in as good
condition as they were before the excavation, that he will hold the City harmless on account of claims by any person as a result of such excavation or
blasting activities and that he will pay any and all damages for which he is legally liable as a result of such excavation and blasting activities. (Ord.
1099, 2-2-1970; amd. 2017 Code)
C. Insurance: The applicant shall file with the Clerk evidence of public liability insurance acceptable to the City to be in full force and effect for the period of
said license, with minimum limits of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for property damage, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for a single
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 70/358
personal injury or death, and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for multiple injuries or deaths, which insurance shall indemnify and hold harmless the
City from the same risks as hereinbefore provided for corporate surety bonds. Said liability insurance shall contain coverage for all blasting and
excavating operations performed by the licensee. (Ord. 1099, 2-2-1970; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
D. Term Of License: All excavators' licenses shall expire on March 31 following the date of their issuance. (Ord. 1099, 2-2-1970)
3-13-4: PERMIT REQUIRED1:
A. Excavations: No excavation within the limits of any street, alley or Municipally owned property by any excavator, contractor or any other person shall be
opened without first securing a permit for doing such work, from the Engineering Department. The permit shall be issued in duplicate, one (1) copy
being given to the applicant and one (1) filed in the Office of the City Engineer. Permit shall show the name of the applicant, the exact location of the
concrete construction, and such other information as the Engineering Department may require. (Ord. 92-19, 11-3-1992; amd. 2017 Code)
B. Connections: It shall be unlawful for any person to cut the surface of any street for the purpose of making connections with or repairs to any gas, water,
sewer or underground electrical construction located beneath such street without first securing a permit therefor from the Engineering Department.
(1953 Code § 62-1; amd. Ord. 92-19, 11-3-1992; 2017 Code)
C. Repairing Cut In Street: The person cutting or opening any street shall replace the surfacing, whether concrete pavement or otherwise, under the
supervision of and in accordance with the plans and specifications of the Engineering Department and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The work of connecting to or repairing any gas, water, sewer or underground electrical construction shall also be done in accordance with plans and
specifications and under the supervision and control of the Engineering Department. (1953 Code § 62-3; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 92-19, 11-3-1992;
2017 Code)
D. Fees:
1. Permit And Inspection Fees:
a. Sanitary Sewer: A permit and inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential, seventy five dollars ($75.00) for commercial and one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) for industrial property for each sanitary sewer service, new installation or repair, and thirty dollars ($30.00) for each sanitary
sewer disconnection.
b. Private Wastewater Disposal System: A permit and inspection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
c. Storm Sewer Collection System: Permit and inspection fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential, seventy five dollars ($75.00) for
commercial, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for industrial property for each water service, new installation or repair, and thirty dollars ($30.00)
for each storm sewer disconnection. Permit and inspection fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each sump pump connection.
d. Water Distribution System: The permit and inspection fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each water service, new installation or repair, and thirty
dollars ($30.00) for each water service disconnection.
e. Driveway Approach: The permit and inspection fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for each driveway approach and twenty dollars ($20.00) for curb
sawing, grinding or drilling.
f. Sidewalk: Permit and inspection fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each new sidewalk installation and twenty dollars ($20.00) for sidewalk
replacement.
All permits are payable at the time said permit is issued; and the same shall be issued in duplicate, one (1) copy being given to the applicant and
one (1) filed in the Engineering Department. (Ord. 92-19, 11-3-1992; amd. 2017 Code)
2. Street Cutting Permit Fee: When the surface of any street has been paved with permanent concrete pavement or other permanent type of pavement
within five (5) years of the date of application for permit to cut such street, no such permit shall be issued until the applicant shall have paid a permit
fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). This shall apply to all new services. (Ord. 97-7, 3-4-1997)
E. Test Well Drilling: Permit fees for test well drilling shall be five dollars ($5.00). (Ord. 92-19, 11-3-1992)
3-13-5: INSPECTIONS:
All sewer and water service connections shall be inspected by the Office of the City Engineer, and no such service shall be filled in or used until after
inspection and approval of the City Engineer. For inspection, the excavator shall have the main connection entirely exposed and the full line of the service
shall be exposed at intervals of ten feet (10'). (1953 Code § 81-7; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
3-13-6: OWNER'S PERMIT:
In cases where the owner of property or properties desires personally to do sidewalk work upon a public right-of-way immediately adjacent to and abutting
premises of which the owner has been established as the legal deed holder or contract purchaser, said owner may appear before the City Engineer and
upon establishing that he is competent to do the specific work for which permit is desired, and upon obtaining the permit and grade for said work to be
done, said owner may then commence work. All work completed by the owner shall be inspected as provided in section 3-13-5 of this chapter. (1985
Code; amd. Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 71/358
Chapter 14
TREE TRIMMING CONTRACTORS
3-14-1: DEFINITION:
"Tree trimming contractors" shall mean any person who, for compensation, cuts or trims any tree or limbs or branches of any tree, who cuts or removes
the roots of any tree or who treats diseases of any tree. (Ord. 1592, 2-17-1981; amd. 1985 Code)
3-14-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every tree trimmer shall, annually before engaging in work on any tree on or overhanging any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public property or on
any tree whose height is greater than the distance from the base of such tree to any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public property, obtain a license
therefor from the City Clerk. Said license shall expire on March 31 of each year. (Ord. 1592, 2-17-1981; amd. 1985 Code)
3-14-3: LICENSE FEE; INSURANCE:
A. Fee: Application for such licenses shall be made upon forms provided by the Clerk and each applicant shall pay an annual license fee of thirty five
dollars ($35.00) at the time of making such application.
B. Insurance: The applicant shall file with the Clerk evidence of public liability insurance acceptable to the City to be in full force and effect for the period of
said license, with minimum limits of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for
a single personal injury or death, and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for multiple injuries or deaths, which insurance shall indemnify and
hold harmless the City, on account of any and all damage or injury, including death, to real or personal property, whether public or private, which arises
out of or is connected with or caused by such tree trimming contractor or his agents in the performance of his business. (Ord. 93-3, 1-19-1993; amd.
2017 Code)
Chapter 15
PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION FOR SPECULATIVE SHELL BUILDINGS
3-15-1: INTENT:
The City Council declares it to be the intention of this chapter to provide for a property tax exemption for "speculative shell buildings" as provided by
section 427.1(27) of the Code of Iowa. (Ord. 02-03, 2-5-2002; amd. 2017 Code)
3-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the terms used in this chapter:
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION: A. An organization, which meets the membership requirements set forth below, formed within a City or
County or multicommunity group for one (1) or more of the following purposes:
1. To promote, stimulate, develop, and advance the business prosperity and economic welfare of the community, area, or region and its citizens.
2. To encourage and assist the location of new business and industry.
3. To rehabilitate and assist existing business and industry.
4. To stimulate and assist in the expansion of business activity.
B. For purposes of this definition, a "community development organization" must have at least fifteen (15) members with representation from the
following:
1. A representative from government at the level or levels corresponding to the community development organization's area of operation.
2. A representative from a private sector lending institution.
3. A representative of a community organization in the area.
4. A representative of business in the area.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 72/358
5. A representative of private citizens in the community, area, or region.
SPECULATIVE SHELL BUILDING: A building or structure owned and constructed or reconstructed by a community development organization, a not for
profit cooperative association under Iowa Code chapter 499, without a tenant or buyer for the purpose of attracting an employer or user which will
complete the building to the employer's or user's specification for manufacturing, processing, or warehousing the employer's or user's product line. (Ord.
02-03, 2-5-2002)
3-15-3: TAX ABATEMENT FOR BUILDINGS OF CERTAIN ORGANIZATIONS:
New construction of shell buildings by community development organizations, not for profit cooperative associations under chapter 499 of the Code of
Iowa for speculative purposes or the portion of the value added to buildings being reconstructed or renovated by community development organizations,
not for profit cooperative associations under Iowa Code chapter 499 in order to become speculative shell buildings may be exempt from taxation pursuant
to Iowa Code section 427.1(27). Such exemption shall be effective for the assessment year in which the building is first assessed for property taxation or
the assessment year in which the reconstruction or renovation first adds value and all subsequent years until the property is leased or sold or until the
exemption is terminated by ordinance of the City Council. Eligibility for an exemption as a speculative shell building shall be determined as of January 1 of
the assessment year. However, an exemption shall not be granted a speculative shell building of a not for profit cooperative association under Iowa Code
chapter 499 if the building is used by the cooperative association, for other than as a speculative shell building. If the shell building or any portion of the
shell building is leased or sold, the portion of the shell building which is leased or sold shall not be entitled to an exemption under this section for
subsequent years. An application shall be filed pursuant to section 427B.4 of the Code of Iowa in the manner required by section 3-15-4 of this chapter for
each project for which an exemption is claimed. (Ord. 02-03, 2-5-2002)
3-15-4: EXCEPTIONS:
A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax
exemption authorized by law. (Ord. 02-03, 2-5-2002)
3-15-5: APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION:
An application shall be filed for each speculative shell building resulting in actual value added for which an exemption is claimed in the manner provided by
section 427B.4 of the Code of Iowa. The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property with the local assessor by February 1 of the
assessment year in which the value added is first assessed for taxation. Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the Director of
Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the Director of
Revenue. (Ord. 02-03, 2-5-2002)
3-15-6: PRIOR APPROVAL:
A person may submit a proposal to the City Council for prior approval for eligibility for a tax exemption. The City Council, by ordinance, may give its prior
approval of a tax exemption for a new construction if the speculative shell building is in conformance with the zoning plans for the City, provided such
ordinance shall not be finally adopted until at least thirty (30) days after a public hearing as required by Iowa Code section 427B.1. Such prior approval
shall not entitle the owner to said exemption until the new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate. However, if the tax
exemption for new construction is not approved, the person may submit an amended proposal to the City Council to approve or reject. (Ord. 02-03, 2-5-
2002)
3-15-7: REPEAL OF ORDINANCE:
This chapter may be repealed by the City Council when in its opinion continuation of the exemption granted ceases to be of benefit to the City, but all
existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration. (Ord. 02-03, 2-5-2002)
Chapter 16
PARTIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY
3-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the terms used in this chapter:
ACTUAL VALUE ADDED: The actual value added as of the first year for which the exemption is received, except that actual value added by improvements
to machinery and equipment means the actual value as determined by the Assessor as of January 1 of each year for which the exemption is received.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: New buildings and structures and includes new buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings
and structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of an existing building or structure which does not constitute complete replacement of an
existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or structure, unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is required due to
economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of specific
products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the building or structure to continue to competitively manufacture or process those products
which determination shall receive prior approval of the City Council upon the recommendation of the Iowa Development Commission.
NEW MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT: New machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to section 427A.1, subsection 1, paragraph e, of
the Iowa Code, unless the machinery or equipment is part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or expand existing operational
status. (Ord. 03-2, 2-18-2003)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 73/358
3-16-2: INTENT:
The City Council declares it to be the intention of this chapter to provide for a partial property tax exemption for actual value added to industrial real estate
by the new construction of industrial real estate and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to
section 427A.1, subsection 1, paragraph e, of the Iowa Code, as set forth in House File 650 of the 68th General Assembly. (Ord. 03-2, 2-18-2003)
3-16-3: AMOUNT OF EXEMPTION:
The amount of actual value added which is eligible to be exempt from taxation shall be as follows:
A. For the first year: Seventy five percent (75%).
B. For the second year: Sixty percent (60%).
C. For the third year: Forty five percent (45%).
D. For the fourth year: Thirty percent (30%).
E. For the fifth year: Fifteen percent (15%).
F. After the fifth year, there shall be no exemption and the granting of the exemption hereunder for new construction constituting complete replacement of
an existing building or structure shall not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed value of the
industrial real estate before the start of the new construction added. (Ord. 03-2, 2-18-2003)
3-16-4: APPLICATION:
An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added for which an exemption is claimed. The application for exemption shall be filed
by the owner of the property with the local Assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which the value added is first assessed for taxation.
Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the
improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the Director of Revenue. (Ord. 03-2, 2-18-2003)
3-16-5: PRIOR APPROVAL:
A person may submit a proposal to the City Council for prior approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. The City Council, by
ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for a new construction if the new construction is in conformance with the zoning plans for the City
and after public hearing as by law provided. Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to said exemption until the new construction has been
completed and found to be qualified real estate. However, if the tax exemption for new construction is not approved, the person may submit an amended
proposal to the City Council to approve or reject. (Ord. 03-2, 2-18-2003)
3-16-6: REPEALER:
This chapter may be repealed by the City Council when in its opinion continuation of the exemption granted ceases to be of benefit to the City but all
existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration. (Ord. 03-2, 2-18-2003)
3-16-7: EXCEPTIONS:
A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax
exemption authorized by law. (Ord. 03-2, 2-18-2003)
Title 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
NUISANCES
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
GARBAGE: Food waste; discarded or useless material.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 74/358
JUNK: Secondhand, worn or discarded articles.
NUISANCE: Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or offensive to the senses, or an obstacle to the free use of property, so as essentially to interfere
with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. The following, although not all inclusive, are declared to be nuisances:
A. The erecting, continuing, or using any building or other places for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious fumes, offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property of individuals or the
public.
B. The causing or suffering any offal, filth, or noisome substance to accumulate or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others.
C. The obstructing or impeding without legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or collection of water.
D. The corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural course
or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
E. The obstructing or encumbering by fences, buildings, or otherwise the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places or
burying grounds.
F. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and lewdness, gambling houses, or houses resorted to for the use of controlled substances or
houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, or breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
G. Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether erected and constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the view
of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use
thereof, especially near intersecting streets.
H. Any object or structure hereafter erected within one thousand feet (1,000') of the limits of any Municipal or regularly established airport or landing
place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation, including takeoff and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or
enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
I. The accumulation of items including, but not limited to, the following: old or scrap rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, tires, waste, used
lumber or salvaged wood; inoperable machinery, electronics, or appliances or parts of such machinery, electronics, or appliances; iron, steel, or other
old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware, except if stored inside a
completely enclosed structure. Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or rear yard is not considered a nuisance.
J. The depositing or storing of "garbage" or "recyclables" (as defined in section 4-2A-1 of this title) whether it is within a totally enclosed structure or not
is prohibited except for the normal accumulation of garbage and recyclables stored for weekly City garbage collection.
K. The emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
L. Dense growth of all weeds, grasses, vines, brush, dead wood, or other vegetation in the City, so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard,
pursuant to article A of this chapter.
M. Trees infected with Dutch elm disease1.
N. Planting cotton bearing cottonwood trees or any other cotton bearing poplar trees is hereby prohibited in the City of Mason City.
O. Effluent from septic tank or drainfield running or ponding on the ground in the open.
P. Any article or substance placed upon a street, alley, sidewalk, public ground, or in any ditch, waterway or gutter so as to obstruct the drainage.
Q. Junk vehicles as set out in title 8, chapter 5 of this Code.
R. All diseased animals.
S. All ponds or pools of stagnant water.
T. Carcasses of animals not disposed of within twenty four (24) hours after death, as set forth in section 167.15, Iowa Code.
U. Pollution of any public well as set out in title 6, chapter 1, article B of this Code, or cistern, stream or body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial
wastes, or other substances.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 75/358
V. Any building or portion thereof in which any of the following listed conditions exist either individually or in combination with each other to the extent of
being injurious to health, indecent, or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as essentially to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property, is a nuisance:
1. Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents,
2. General dilapidation or improper maintenance,
3. Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer,
4. Hazardous or unsanitary premises. Those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage,
offal, rat harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or conditions constitute fire, health or safety hazards,
5. Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors,
6. Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved
protective covering,
7. Broken, rotten, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings.
W. The shoveling, raking, throwing, dumping or depositing of any garbage, refuse, dirt, yard wastes, solid wastes or any other materials into any
stream, river or creek or upon any stream, river or creek banks.
PROPERTY OWNER: The contract purchaser if there is one of record, otherwise the record holder of legal title.
REFUSE: Worthless or useless part of something.
RUBBISH: Useless waste or rejected matter.
TRASH: Something worth little or nothing; junk, rubbish, refuse and garbage. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008; amd. 2017 Code)
4-1-2: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided in this chapter or may
be prosecuted as a Municipal infraction, or both. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008)
4-1-3: OTHER CONDITIONS REGULATED:
The following actions are required and may also be abated in the manner provided in this chapter:
A. The removal of diseased trees or dead wood, but not diseased trees and dead wood outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines upon
the public street.
B. The numbering of buildings2.
C. The connection to public drainage systems from abutting property when necessary for public health or safety.
D. The connection to public sewer systems3 from abutting property, and the installation of sanitary toilet facilities and removal of other toilet facilities on
such property as set out in subsection 6-2-5C of this Code. (Ord. 88-30, 12-5-1988)
4-1-4: NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE OR CONDITION:
Whenever an authorized Municipal officer has probable cause to believe that a nuisance or other condition which is listed in section 4-1-1 of this chapter
exists, he or she may cause to be served upon the property owner as shown by the records of the County Auditor, a written notice to abate the nuisance
within a reasonable time after notice. In the alternative, an authorized Municipal officer may cause to be served upon the property owner a citation for a
Municipal infraction setting forth a specific violation of this chapter. (Ord. 88-30, 12-5-1988; amd. 2017 Code)
4-1-5: CONTENTS OF NOTICE:
A notice to abate shall contain the following:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 76/358
A. A description of the alleged nuisance or other condition.
B. The location of the alleged nuisance or condition.
C. A statement that if the property owner wishes to dispute the determination that a nuisance or other condition as prohibited by this chapter exists, such
property owner or the property owner's representative shall make a written request to the Code Enforcement Division on or before the time prescribed
in the notice which shall be not more than ten (10) days from the date of notice. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008; amd. 2017 Code)
D. A statement that if no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time that the nuisance or other prohibited condition shall conclusively be
presumed to exist.
E. A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance or prohibited condition.
F. The required time within which the owner must complete the abatement.
G. A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time prescribed, the City may abate
the nuisance or other condition and assess the cost against such person and/or property. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008)
4-1-6: METHOD OF SERVICE:
The notice to abate shall be served either by: a) personal delivery; or b) posting the notice in a conspicuous place upon the premises where the nuisance
exists and sending a copy of the notice by regular United States mail. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008)
4-1-7: REQUEST FOR HEARING AND APPEAL:
Any person ordered to abate a nuisance or condition may have a hearing as to whether a nuisance or prohibited condition exists. A request for a hearing
must be made in writing and delivered to the Code Enforcement Division within the time stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a
nuisance or prohibited condition exists and it must be abated as ordered.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Director of Development Services shall render a written decision as to whether a nuisance or prohibited condition
exists. If the Director of Development Services finds that a nuisance or prohibited condition exists, he or she must order it abated within a time reasonable
under the circumstances. An appeal from this decision may be had by immediately filing a written notice with the City Clerk. This appeal will be heard
before the City Council at a time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance or prohibited condition is
found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a time reasonable under the circumstances. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008; amd. 2017 Code)
4-1-8: ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY:
If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may perform any action that
may be required under this chapter without prior notice, and assess the costs as provided herein. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008)
4-1-9: ABATEMENT BY MUNICIPALITY:
If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping an
accurate account of the expense incurred. The expense account shall be fully itemized, verified and filed with the City Clerk who shall pay such expenses
on behalf of the Municipality. (Ord. 88-30, 12-5-1988)
4-1-10: POWERS OF CODE ENFORCEMENT DIVISION:
The Code Enforcement Officers designated by the Development Services Director may enter onto and into open unobstructed property and structures to
investigate, locate, and identify nuisances that said department has cause to believe exist on real estate in the City. The designated employees of the
division shall have full authority to declare a condition to be a public nuisance and issue appropriate notices provided for by this chapter. Thereafter, the
division shall take action as required and permitted by this chapter. Designated division employees shall have all powers and authority necessary to cause
the abatement of the nuisance under Federal, State and local laws. (Ord. 13-06, 3-5-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
4-1-11: COLLECTION OF COSTS:
The Clerk shall mail a statement of the total cost to the person failing to abide by the notice to abate and if the amount shown by the statement has not
been paid within one (1) month, the costs shall be certified to the County Auditor and it shall then be collected with, and in the same manner as, general
property taxes. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008)
4-1-12: INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT:
If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), the City may permit the assessment to be paid in up to
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 77/358
ten (10) annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited property. (Ord.
08-04, 5-20-2008)
4-1-13: MUNICIPAL INFRACTION:
In addition to or in lieu of serving the owner with a notice to abate an alleged nuisance or condition, the authorized Municipal officer having probable cause
to believe that such nuisance or other prohibited condition exists may cause the creation or maintenance of the alleged nuisance or other condition to be
prosecuted as a Municipal infraction in accordance with the provisions of title 1, chapter 4, article A of this Code and may seek in addition to or in lieu of
the civil penalties imposed for Municipal infractions, a court order granting the City appropriate relief to abate or to halt the violation. A wilful failure of a
defendant to pay a civil penalty or a violation of the terms or any other order of court granting appropriate relief is punishable as contempt. (Ord. 08-04, 5-
20-2008; amd. 2017 Code)
ARTICLE A. WEEDS
4-1A-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The dense growth of weeds, vines, brush or any other similar vegetation or grass more than one foot (1') in height, on property located within the City
limits is hereby declared a hazard to public safety and health and a public nuisance. (Ord. 913, 6-3-1963; amd. 1985 Code)
Exception: Public property set aside as a natural area and private property along a controlled corridor.
The Development Services Department encourages the use of native grasses, forbs, shrubs, and trees on riparian areas adjoining streams and rivers.
However, noxious weeds as designated by Iowa Code must be controlled. (Ord. 95-13, 8-15-1995; amd. 2017 Code)
4-1A-2: DUTY TO DESTROY WEEDS:
The property owner, as shown by the records of the County Auditor, shall cut, destroy or otherwise control weeds and other growth which constitutes a
health, safety or fire hazard thereon at the expense of said property owner. (Ord. 1529, 1-21-1980)
4-1A-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The Director of Development Services is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1529, 1-21-1980; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 91-3, 2-5-
1991; 2017 Code)
4-1A-4: NOTICE OF ABATEMENT:
A. In the event a property owner fails to control, destroy or cut weeds or other growth which constitutes a nuisance, the Development Services Department
may serve a notice upon the property owner as determined from the records of the County Auditor by one (1) or more of the following, as necessary:
1. Posting a notice on the front door or main entry to the building;
2. Personal service, if the owner can be served within City limits;
3. United States first class mail, if the owner lives within any zip code that is within or contiguous to the boundaries of Cerro Gordo County;
4. United States certified mail with return receipt, if the owner cannot be served according to any of the above methods.
B. The notice shall direct that said nuisance be abated within five (5) business days after the completed service of notice. Said notice shall set forth those
actions which are required of the property owner. The notice shall state that, if the same owner of the same property receives more than two (2) notices
to abate in a calendar year, then any subsequent founded complaint may be abated by the City without prior notice. (Ord. 1529, 1-21-1980; amd. 1985
Code; 2017 Code)
4-1A-5: CITY ABATEMENT; FEES; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
A. In the event the property owner fails to perform the action required in the notice of abatement within the time prescribed therein, then the City may
perform the required action.
B. Fees for City abatement, when necessary, shall be as set forth by resolution of the City Council, including actual costs of abatement and administrative
costs. Abatement and administrative fees may be increased for multiple violations on the same property under the same ownership in any one (1)
calendar year. If more than six (6) violations occur while the property is under the same ownership in a calendar year, the owner may also be charged
with a Municipal civil infraction, as required in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this Code.
C. Should the owner fail to pay fees charged for violations of this chapter within a specified and reasonable time, the City may assess the costs thereof
against the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax, pursuant to the provisions of section 364.12, Code of Iowa. (Ord. 1529, 1-21-
1980; amd. 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 78/358
Chapter 2
GARBAGE, REFUSE, RECYCLABLES AND YARD WASTE
ARTICLE A. DEFINITIONS, LICENSING AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
GARBAGE: Waste from the storage, preparation, cooking and serving of food and a normal accumulation of combustible material associated with
household operation.
RECYCLABLES: All types of newspapers and inserts, paperboard, corrugated cardboard, clear glass food and beverage containers, tin and aluminum
cans, plastic milk, water, orange juice and windshield washer fluid jugs (#2HDPE) and other items as deemed necessary by the Public Services
Department and the Sanitation Division.
REFUSE: All refuse not classified as garbage including, but not limited to, both combustible and noncombustible material including paper, wood, wood
furniture, bedding, tin cans, metal, furniture, dirt, glass, crockery, ashes, dead animals and solid industrial and commercial waste. Refuse shall in no way
include garbage as defined herein and as also defined in section 4-2C-1 of this chapter, tires, or containers containing toxic liquids such as paint, paint
thinners, etc.
YARD WASTE: All organic debris (e.g., grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs, bark, branches, flowers, etc.) which is produced as part of yard and garden
development and maintenance. This definition does not include tree stumps. (Ord. 90-28, 12-18-1990; amd. Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993)
4-2A-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
A. License: Every mixed solid waste hauler and every recycler, doing business in the City, shall obtain an annual license to do so; however, no license
shall be required by an employee of the City or one under contract with the City for hauling garbage, refuse, recyclables or yard waste. Such license
shall be issued only after payment of the appropriate annual fee and after examination of the equipment and facilities of the licensee, by the sanitary
inspector, to determine if the licensee is properly equipped to handle solid waste and recyclables in a safe, clean and sanitary manner.
1. Solid waste hauler's license shall entitle the licensee to haul garbage, refuse, yard waste and recyclables. Said license fee is fifty dollars ($50.00).
2. Refuse or recyclable hauler's license shall entitle the licensee to haul refuse, yard waste and recyclables as herein defined and shall not include
permission to haul garbage as herein defined and as also defined in section 4-2C-1 of this chapter. The license fee is twenty five dollars ($25.00).
B. Application: The renewal application documentation shall contain the amounts (tonnages) collected during the previous year of solid waste and
recyclable materials from commercial/industrial accounts for delivery to a resource processing center. The license application must also report the
tonnage of recyclable materials collected on a monthly basis. The City Council is authorized to include any other relevant requirements in the licensing
regulations. Monthly reports listing the tonnage of recyclable materials recycled along with garbage tonnage delivered to the landfill shall be submitted
to the City no later than the tenth day of the month.
Each licensed hauler shall haul the recyclables to the designated recycling processing source and yard waste to a designated compost site or land
apply if done according to State regulations.
C. Mandatory Commercial And Industrial Collection Of Corrugated Cardboard: By virtue of its authority to enforce the Code of Iowa and the laws therein,
the City, in order to gain compliance with the Waste Reduction and Recycling Act, hereby requires solid waste, refuse, rubbish and recycling haulers,
licensed by the City, to provide mandatory collection of corrugated cardboard for their commercial/industrial accounts, and residential accounts, if not
serviced by the City, to remove the corrugated cardboard from commercial/industrial premises as defined in this article for sanitary disposal by the
method of recycling as defined herein and to provide, subject to the following conditions: (Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993)
1. Collection for corrugated cardboard shall be not less than once a week.
2. Collection may be made either from streets or alleys, where existing, at the discretion and direction of the City, with all containers provided by the
contractor to be placed within five feet (5') of the commercial/industrial premises to be served.
3. Owners of commercial and industrial premises shall cooperate in the recycling of solid waste by performing the following, which is regarded as
voluntary (other than corrugated cardboard which is regarded as mandatory):
a. All recyclable materials shall be separated from solid waste and shall be grouped together in a recycling bin.
b. Categories or classes of recyclable material shall include:
(1) Glass: Any clear glass food, beverage or similar container which includes, but is not limited to, fruit jars, jam, and jelly and other similar jars. All
such containers shall be cleaned and rinsed before being placed in containers. Lids may be discarded in a recycle bin or regular garbage.
(2) Paper Products: Glossy magazines and catalogs must be bundled securely with heavy string or placed in brown paper sacks. Newsprint must
be stacked neatly, flattened and tied securely with string or placed in brown paper sacks. Corrugated cardboard only will be accepted which
must be clean and flattened, and taped or tied securely.
(3) Plastics: Plastics such as milk jugs, water jugs or orange juice jugs, or other similar containers. All plastic shall be cleaned and rinsed (and
flattened if necessary) before being placed in a container.
(4) Metal Food And Beverage Containers: Metal food and beverage containers must be clean and have labels removed.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 79/358
c. The following are not considered recyclable materials under this article and shall be disposed of with other nonrecyclable materials.
(1) Glass: All Pyrex glass, window glass, light bulbs, mirrors, broken glass and china.
(2) Paper Products: All waxed paper and waxed cardboard.
(3) Plastics: All styrofoam, plastic food wrap such as Saran Wrap or other similar products, rigid plastic such as fast food containers and insulation.
(Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993; amd. 2017 Code)
4-2A-3: VEHICLES FOR HAULING SOLID WASTE, GARBAGE, REFUSE, RECYCLABLES OR YARD WASTE:
It shall be unlawful to haul or transport solid waste, as defined in section 4-2C-1 of this chapter, garbage, refuse, yard waste or recyclables on any public
way unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded or the load securely covered or encased in containers properly equipped so as to prevent any of its
load from dropping, leaking or otherwise escaping from the vehicle.
Yard waste and recyclables must be separated from garbage, refuse or solid waste as set out by the Cerro Gordo County Solid Waste Agency regulations.
(Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993)
4-2A-4: STORAGE:
No storage of solid waste, garbage, refuse, recyclables or yard waste shall be permitted in vehicles parked in residential districts overnight or on
weekends. (Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993)
4-2A-5: HAULING SOLID WASTE, REFUSE, YARD WASTE OR RECYCLABLES:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent the owner from hauling solid waste, refuse, yard waste or recyclables accumulating on premises of the
owner; provided, such materials are disposed of at the designated Cerro Gordo County Solid Waste Agency landfill or a recyclable processing site in
accordance with this chapter. This chapter does not intend to prevent the owner from hauling yard waste to the landfill or to land apply if done according to
State regulations. (Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993)
4-2A-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision, section or paragraph of this article regarding "mandatory commercial and industrial collection - recyclable waste" or
rules, regulations or resolutions promulgated pursuant hereto, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and/or a Municipal infraction and may be prosecuted as a
misdemeanor or a Municipal infraction, or both. Upon conviction, any violator shall be punished pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, "General Penalty", and title 1,
chapter 4, article A, "Municipal Infractions", of this Code. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, should the licensed
hauler continue to violate the terms of this Code, the licensee shall face revocation of said license. (Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993)
ARTICLE B. SANITARY LANDFILLS
4-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
AGENCY: The landfill of North Iowa Agency.
GARBAGE: The solid or semisolid animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods including cans,
bottles and cartons in which it was received, and wrappings in which it may be placed for disposal.
NONRESIDENTIAL PREMISES: All types of premises other than residential premises as herein defined, including, but not in limitation of, all premises
used for residential premises containing more than two-family dwelling units, and all premises used for commercial or industrial purposes, and premises
used for mobile home parks.
OWNER: In addition to the record title holder, includes any person residing in, renting, leasing or occupying any premises and as between such parties the
duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity having proprietary interest in a premises or
other legal entity having responsibility for an act.
RECYCLABLES: All types of newspapers and inserts, paperboard, corrugated cardboard, clear glass food and beverage containers, tin and aluminum
cans, plastic milk, water, orange juice and windshield washer fluid jugs (#2HDPE) and other items as deemed necessary by the Public Services
Department and the Sanitation Division.
REFUSE: All refuse, junk, trash, paper, yard wastes or other substances offensive to sight or smell, or detrimental to the best interests of the community,
except dead animals not killed for food.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES: All single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings.
SOLID WASTE: Unwanted or discarded materials resulting from commercial, industrial, domestic and agricultural operations and normal community
activities. Wastes which are solid or semisolid containing insufficient liquid to be free flowing are considered to be solid wastes, and include in part the
following: garbage, refuse, ashes and other residue of incineration, street refuse or sweepings, dead animals, solid animal waste, abandoned automobiles,
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 80/358
agricultural, commercial and industrial wastes, construction and demolition wastes and certain sewage treatment solid residue.
YARD WASTES: All organic debris (e.g., grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs, bark, branches, flowers, etc.) which is produced as part of yard and garden
development and maintenance. Does not include tree stumps. (Ord. 1134, 12-7-1970; amd. Ord. 1147, 3-1-1971; Ord. 90-28, 12-18-1990; Ord. 93-16, 8-
17-1993; Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
4-2B-2: SANITARY LANDFILL SITES:
By virtue of contract dated on December 7, 1970, between the City and the agency, the sanitary landfill sites now and hereafter operated by the agency
are hereby designated as the public disposal sites for all garbage, refuse and solid wastes collected within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 1134, 12-
7-1970)
4-2B-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The rules and regulations governing the use of the sanitary landfill sites shall be as determined by the agency to be in the best interests of the general
public. The landfill sites shall normally be open to the public on such days and hours as the agency may designate; however, the agency may alter the
days and hours so scheduled to satisfy unusual conditions or emergencies. The agency shall be responsible for the operation of the landfill sites in a
manner which will assure sanitary and safe conditions at all times. Operation of the landfill sites shall comply with all regulations of all local, State, County
or Federal agencies which may have jurisdiction over such operation. (Ord. 1134, 12-7-1970)
4-2B-4: UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE:
No person shall permanently dispose of solid wastes of any kind upon any land within the corporate limits of the City unless such land has been
designated by the agency as a public landfill site; provided, however, that the prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to the deposit of inert
wastes not potentially injurious to health or the public welfare where permission to make such a deposit has been obtained from the owner or responsible
agent, nor to the filling in or grading of property with earth, mud, ashes or similar materials, provided all other applicable local and State laws have been
complied with. (Ord. 1134, 12-7-1970)
4-2B-5: POSTED INSTRUCTIONS:
No person shall deposit any solid waste at any agency landfill site except in compliance with posted instructions or instructions of an attendant in charge.
(Ord. 1134, 12-7-1970)
4-2B-6: EXCLUDED SOLID WASTE MATERIALS:
Certain materials may be excluded from those refuse materials which may be deposited at an agency landfill site. These excluded materials include
recyclable materials as defined in section 4-2B-1 of this article and may include junk automobile bodies and similar bulky objects which may require
special processing prior to disposal; trees and tree limbs, unless they have been cut into pieces not exceeding ten feet (10') in length; burning materials
containing hot or live coals; hazardous materials and other materials which the agency deems necessary to exclude. However, hazardous materials may
be deposited upon the receipt of written permission of a responsible official or attendant of the agency and subject to any special instructions issued with
said permission. Hazardous material shall include: explosive materials, materials contaminated by infection or disease, fly ash or other fine material which
may present a special hazard to landfill, personnel, equipment or to the public. (Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993)
4-2B-7: PAYMENT FOR DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE IN CITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the agency or the City on its behalf, to receive payment of any kind or request payment of any kind for the
disposal of any solid waste at any sanitary landfill site within the City.
The charging of a fee for the collection of any garbage or other solid waste from a customer by a private refuse collector shall not be construed as a
violation of this section since the disposal is considered to be incidental to the total collection and disposal service; provided, however, such collection and
disposal shall be conducted entirely by forces with equipment owned or operated by the private refuse collector. (Ord. 1134, 12-7-1970)
4-2B-8: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
Fees paid to or for the benefit of the agency for the use of the public landfill facilities shall be in accordance with the posted and published schedule of fees
of the agency or the City, as provided in the contract referred to in section 4-2B-2 of this article as follows:
Effective August 2, 1982, a charge in the amount of seventy two cents ($0.72) per month shall be charged by the City and collected from each "residential
premises" or the "owner" of such premises and from each "nonresidential premises" or the "owner" thereof, as said terms are defined in this article. With
respect to residential premises, a separate monthly charge as herein provided shall be made for each separate dwelling unit within a two-family dwelling.
With respect to nonresidential premises which are multiple-family dwellings (i.e., multiple-family dwellings have more than 2 separate family units) and
mobile home parks, a separate monthly charge as herein provided shall be made for each separate family unit within such dwelling and each separate
mobile home site within a mobile home park; provided, however, that the owner of such multiple-family dwelling or mobile home park has made request for
garbage and domestic refuse collection service for such premises by the City in the manner provided for in section 4-2C-9 of this chapter.
The charge herein provided for shall be for the use of the sanitary landfill facilities of the City and such monthly charge shall be billed to the "owner" as
herein defined. (Ord. 1648, 8-2-1982)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 81/358
4-2B-9: PAYMENT OF UNPAID CHARGES:
Bills for landfill charges shall be rendered to public utility consumers by adding to the water and garbage service a statement showing the amount of the
charge or rate for landfill service as herein provided. All landfill charges which are paid in full on or before the fifteenth day after delivery or mailing thereof
shall be eligible for a ten percent (10%) discount, and ten percent (10%) of the gross amount of said bill shall be subtracted therefrom. If any landfill
service bill shall not be paid by the twenty fifth day after the date of delivery or mailing, the property served shall be subject to immediate discontinuance of
service. (Ord. 1641, 7-19-1982; amd. 2017 Code)
4-2B-10: DEPOSITS REQUIRED:
Deposits shall be required for solid waste collection service, at the discretion of the Finance Director as provided for in subsection 6-1A-1D of this Code.
(Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
4-2B-11: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Police Department and all police officers of the City to enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1134, 12-7-1970)
ARTICLE C. SOLID WASTES
4-2C-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
DOMESTIC REFUSE: The types of waste which normally originate in the residential household. It shall typically include, but not be limited to, wastepaper,
rags and clothing. It shall not include dead animals or animal excrement.
GARBAGE: Waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods, including cans, bottles and cartons in which it is received and
wrappings in which it may be placed for disposal.
OWNER: In addition to the record title holder, includes any person residing in, renting, leasing or occupying any premises and as between such parties the
duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
PERSON: An individual, or group or association of individuals; a firm or any member thereof; a corporation or any executive officer, manager, person in
charge or employee thereof.
RECYCLABLES: All types of newspapers and inserts, paperboard, corrugated cardboard, clear glass food and beverage containers, tin and aluminum
cans, plastic milk, water, orange juice and windshield washer fluid jugs (#2HDPE) and other items as deemed necessary by the Public Works Department
and the Sanitation Division.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES: All single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings.
SOLID WASTE: Unwanted or discarded materials resulting from commercial, industrial, domestic and agricultural operations and normal community
activities. Wastes which are solid or semisolid containing insufficient liquid to be free flowing are considered to be solid wastes and include in part the
following: refuse, ashes and other residue of incineration, street refuse or sweepings, dead animals, solid animal waste, agricultural, commercial and
industrial wastes, construction and demolition wastes and certain sewage treatment solid residue.
YARD WASTE: All organic debris (e.g., grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs, bark, branches, flowers, etc.) which is produced as part of yard and garden
development and maintenance; does not include tree stumps. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
4-2C-2: COLLECTION BY CITY:
The City shall collect only garbage, domestic refuse, recyclables and yard waste from all residential premises as hereinabove defined in accordance with
and subject to the provisions of this article.
A. Garbage And Domestic Refuse: Garbage and domestic refuse shall be collected once weekly.
B. Yard Waste:
1. Grass clippings and leaves shall be collected once a week, at the curb, from April 1 through November 30; provided, they are in approved
biodegradable paper bags.
2. Brush and tree limbs shall be collected once a week at the curb. Tree limbs of less than four inches (4") in diameter and brush will be collected,
provided they are placed at the curb, securely tied in bundles not more than four feet (4') in length or eighteen inches (18") in diameter and weigh no
more than fifty (50) pounds. Tree limbs and brush shall not be combined with refuse or garbage for collection. All bundles must be secured with twine
or light string, not wire. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
3. Christmas trees, wreaths and roping will be collected once. All materials must be free of wire and hardware. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996; amd. 2017 Code)
Flocked trees that contain toxic substances or wire will not be picked up. Individuals will be responsible for hauling them to a designated site.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 82/358
C. Recyclables: Recyclables shall be collected once weekly and shall include:
1. Newspapers with inserts, bundled and tied with string or placed in brown paper bags.
2. Clear glass food and beverage containers, rinsed clean with caps and lids removed.
3. Tin and aluminum cans (pop cans, tin soup cans, coffee cans, etc.) rinsed clean with paper labels removed. Aerosol cans cannot be recycled. (Ord.
96-7, 3-5-1996)
4. Plastic milk jugs, water, orange juice and windshield washer fluid jugs (#2HDPE) rinsed clean. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996; amd. 2017 Code)
5. Other items as deemed by the Public Works Department and Sanitation Division.
D. Time Limit: Containers, bags, packages or other solid waste placed at the curb or alley line shall not be placed more than one (1) day in advance of the
scheduled collection day. Yard waste shall be collected once each week from April 1 through November 30 (exception: Christmas trees, wreaths or
ropings). (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
4-2C-3: CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS:
Garbage and domestic refuse containers shall not be more than thirty three (33) gallons nor less than ten (10) gallons in normal capacity except, however,
where only one (1) container is used, in which case such container may be less than ten (10) gallons in capacity. Containers shall be waterproof,
rodentproof and fitted with a tight lid. Containers shall have handles, bails or other suitable lifting devices or features. Containers shall be of a type
originally manufactured for garbage or other solid wastes, with tapered sides for easy emptying. They shall be of lightweight and sturdy construction. The
weight of any individual container along with contents shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds. Galvanized iron and similar metal containers, rubber or fiberglass
containers and plastic containers which do not become brittle in cold weather may be used. Disposal bags manufactured for garbage and solid waste
disposal shall be acceptable. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar salvaged containers shall not be acceptable.
Yard waste containers shall be approved biodegradable paper bags and shall not exceed thirty three (33) gallons or fifty (50) pounds.
All garbage and other domestic refuse shall be placed in suitable containers. Large bulky items that cannot be reduced to fit in approved containers will not
be collected. (Ord. 13-20, 6-4-2013)
4-2C-4: TREATMENT PENDING COLLECTION:
All garbage which may attract flies or rodents shall be drained of all excess liquid, securely wrapped in paper and placed in paper bags or otherwise
packaged before it is placed in containers. All garbage shall be packaged in a manner which facilitates the safe and efficient transfer from private
containers and property to collection vehicles with minimum spillage and nuisance. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
4-2C-5: LOCATION OF CONTAINERS:
The City reserves the right to designate collection from streets or alleys where the same exist. Where alley collections are designated, containers shall be
placed in plain view on the premises adjacent to the alley. Where street collections are designated, containers shall be placed at the curb line. During the
winter season, access to the containers as well as the containers themselves shall be cleared from snow by the owner within a reasonable time after a
snowfall.
Yard waste shall be placed three feet (3') to six feet (6') from garbage or other refuse. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
4-2C-6: ACCUMULATIONS HAZARDOUS TO HEALTH OR PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate, on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste,
refuse, yard waste or recyclables, in containers or not, which constitute a health or sanitation hazard. It shall also be unlawful for any person to permit to
accumulate quantities of solid waste within or close to any building unless the same are stored in containers in such a manner as not to create a health or
fire hazard. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
4-2C-7: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
The accumulation of solid waste, refuse, yard waste or recyclables contrary to the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance as
set out in section 4-2C-6 of this article. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
4-2C-8: PROHIBITED PRACTICE:
Combining yard waste or recyclables with garbage or refuse for removal is prohibited. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
4-2C-9: PREMISES FROM WHICH REFUSE, GARBAGE, RECYCLABLES AND YARD WASTE COLLECTIONS NOT MADE BY
CITY:
No other types of premises, except "residential premises" as defined herein, shall be eligible to have their garbage or refuse collected by the City; except,
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 83/358
however: a) that owners of apartment dwellings having more than two (2) separate family units may request that the City collect the garbage, domestic
refuse, recyclables and yard waste from such premises, and b) owners of mobile home parks may request that the City collect the garbage, domestic
refuse and yard waste from such premises. In the event such apartment dwellings or mobile home parks are furnished with such collection, then each
separate family unit within such apartment dwellings or mobile home parks shall be considered to be a separate residential premises for the purpose of
this chapter and shall be charged a collection charge as hereinafter provided.
The owners of all of the above referred to premises from which collections of refuse, garbage, recyclables or yard waste are not made by the City shall
provide suitable containers for the storage of refuse, garbage, recyclables or yard waste on the premises and shall make private provisions for the removal
of the same. Garbage must be taken from dwellings and other private places not collected by the City at least once each week. Garbage must be taken
from hotels, restaurants, nursing homes and all other places where there are unusual quantities of the same as often as needed. The City Council may, by
rule, make different or additional requirements for the removal of garbage as the general welfare of the City may require, and the Public Works Director
may make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article which he may deem expedient or necessary for the carrying out of the provisions of
this article and for the administration thereof. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
4-2C-10: HAULING SOLID WASTE, DOMESTIC REFUSE, RECYCLABLES OR YARD WASTE:
Nothing in this article is intended to prevent the owner from hauling solid waste, garbage, domestic refuse, yard waste or recyclables accumulating on
premises of the owner, provided such materials are disposed of. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
4-2C-11: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director to enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
4-2C-12: CHARGES:
Effective with the July 1, 2019 billing, eleven dollars sixty five cents ($11.65) per month shall be charged by the City and collected from each single-family
dwelling and each separate dwelling unit within a multiple-family dwelling, or owner of a "residential premises" as defined in section 4-2C-1 of this article
serviced by garbage, domestic refuse, recyclables or yard waste collection service as provided for in this chapter. This charge shall be in payment for
collection of one bag per week and one collection of recyclables or yard waste per week as herein set out in section 4-2C-2 of this article. Such monthly
charge shall be billed to the owner as herein directed.
For each additional bag of garbage or refuse, a one dollar twenty cent ($1.20) sticker shall be attached.
The collection of garbage, refuse, recyclables and yard waste, as provided for in this chapter, and maintenance of the availability of such service, whether
or not the owner or occupant of such residential premises, is hereby declared a benefit to the said premises at least equal to the monthly charges specified
in this article. (Ord. 19-07, 6-18-2019)
4-2C-13: PAYMENTS:
Bills for collection service charges shall be rendered to public utility consumers by adding to the water service bill a statement showing the amount of the
charge or rate for garbage service as herein provided. All collection charges which are paid in full on or before the fifteenth day after delivery or mailing
thereof shall be eligible for a ten percent (10%) discount and ten percent (10%) of the gross amount of said bill shall be subtracted therefrom. If any waste
collection service bill shall not be paid by the twenty fifth day after the date of delivery or mailing, the property served shall be subject to the immediate
discontinuance of service. (Ord. 02-12, 4-16-2002)
4-2C-14: DEPOSITS:
Deposits shall be required for collection service at the discretion of the Finance Director as provided for in subsection 6-1A-1D of this Code. (Ord. 96-7, 3-
5-1996)
Chapter 3
DISCHARGE OF WATER INTO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
4-3-1: PURPOSE:
In adopting this chapter, the City Council finds that the discharge of water from any roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile or swimming pool or
other natural precipitation into the City sanitary sewer collection system will and has on numerous occasions in the past flooded and overloaded the
sanitary sewer collection system to such an extent as to cause damage to residential property and overloaded the water reclamation facility (WRF). Such
damage is caused by the backup of sewage into the living quarters of residential homes creating a potential health hazard and exceeding the capacity of
the WRF. The City Council, therefore, finds it essential to the maintenance of health, minimization of damage to property and to maintain the life and
capacity of the WRF that the provisions of this chapter be strictly enforced to avoid and minimize these problems in the future. (Ord. 06-8, 4-4-2006)
4-3-2: DEFINITION AND METHOD:
No water from any roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile, swimming pool or other natural precipitation shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer
collection system. Dwellings, including new housing construction or houses under construction, and other buildings and structures which require, because
of the infiltration of water into basements, crawl spaces and the like, a sump pump system to discharge water shall have a permanently installed discharge
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 84/358
line which shall not at any time discharge water into the sanitary sewer collection system. A permanent installation shall be one which provides for a year
round discharge connection to the City subdrain/storm sewer system. If there is no subdrain available, the surface discharge point location shall be
approved by the City Engineer. It shall consist of a rigid discharge line, without valving or quick connections for altering the path of discharge and, if
connected to the City subdrain/storm sewer line, include a check valve. (Ord. 06-8, 4-4-2006)
4-3-3: REQUIREMENTS TO DISCONNECT IMPROPER CONNECTIONS:
Any person, firm or corporation having a roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile or swimming pool now connected and/or discharging into the
sanitary sewer system shall disconnect and/or remove the same. Any disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewer shall be closed or repaired in a
manner as approved by the City Engineer or his or her designee. (Ord. 06-8, 4-4-2006)
4-3-4: ACCESS AND ENTRY FOR INSPECTIONS:
Every person owning real estate or contractor/builder who are building a house within the City of Mason City that discharges into the City's sanitary sewer
system or on the ground shall allow an employee of the City or their designated representative to inspect the buildings to confirm that there is no sump
pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system. Any owner of property or contractor/house builder found to violate this chapter shall
make the necessary changes to comply with this chapter and furnish proof of the changes to the City within sixty (60) days from the date the violation was
identified. Inspections shall be made at a reasonable time and only after reasonable effort has been made to notify the property owner of the need for such
inspection. (Ord. 06-8, 4-4-2006)
4-3-5: FUTURE INSPECTIONS:
At any future time, if the City has reason to suspect that an illegal connection may exist in a premises, the owner, after written notice, shall allow City
representatives to inspect the building. (Ord. 06-8, 4-4-2006)
4-3-6: PENALTY:
A. Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided may be punished as set forth below.
B. Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing at least sixty (60) days for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease and correct all violations.
C. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Municipal infraction and shall be subject to a fine in the amount
of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each day in which any such violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City by reason
of such violation. The City will also retain any and all civil remedies including, but not limited to, injunction or abatement actions to remedy a violation.
(Ord. 06-8, 4-4-2006)
Title 5
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
ARTICLE A. SIDEWALKS
5-1A-1: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to submit plans and specifications for permanent sidewalks to the City Council, and the same, upon approval by
the Council, shall be filed with the City Administrator/City Clerk and shall constitute the plans and specifications for all permanent sidewalks thereafter
constructed. It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to recommend changes in such plans and specifications whenever approved building practices
require the same. (1953 Code § 56-2; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997; 2017 Code)
5-1A-2: SIDEWALKS TO CONFORM TO GRADE:
All sidewalks constructed, reconstructed, relaid or repaired shall be in conformity with the plans and specifications therefor on file with the City
Administrator/City Clerk and shall conform to the established grade therefor, and all such work shall be done under the supervision and control of the City
Engineer. The City Engineer shall furnish all design specifications for such walks. (1953 Code § 56-2; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997; 2017 Code)
5-1A-3: MAINTENANCE OBLIGATION OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 85/358
The abutting property owner shall maintain the sidewalk in a safe condition, in a state of good repair, and free from defects. The abutting property owner
may be liable for damages caused by failure to maintain the sidewalk. (2017 Code)
5-1A-4: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION:
All sidewalks must be constructed by licensed sidewalk contractors as set forth in title 3, chapter 12 of this Code, of the type approved by and in
accordance with the specifications of the City Engineer. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1A-5: RESOLUTION AND NOTICE FOR INSTALLATION OF SIDEWALKS:
The City Council may, by resolution, order the construction or the installation of permanent sidewalks in front of or along any piece of property abutting
upon any street or alley in the same manner as set out for any public improvement pursuant to sections 364.12 and 384.38, Code of Iowa. (1953 Code
§ 56-4; amd. 1985 Code)
5-1A-6: SIDEWALK REPAIRS; INSPECTION AND NOTICE:
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to inspect or cause to be inspected all public sidewalks within the City and whenever the same shall become out of
repair, the City Engineer shall cause notice to be given to the owner, as shown by the records of the County Auditor, of the property abutting said public
sidewalk, such notice requiring said property owner to repair, replace or reconstruct said sidewalk, such notice to be given by certified mail in such form as
prescribed in section 364.12, Code of Iowa. (Ord. 1045, 5-6-1968; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
5-1A-7: ASSESSMENT OF COST OF SIDEWALK REPAIRS:
In the event the sidewalk repairs, as specified in the notice provided for in section 5-1A-6 of this article, are not completed within thirty (30) days of the date
of the deposit in the mail, by certified mail, of said notice to the property owner, the City Council may cause, in that event, such repair, replacement or
reconstruction to be done and assess the expense thereof against the property in front of which such repair, replacement or reconstruction is made, and
the same shall be certified to the County Auditor and collected with other taxes as set out in section 364.12, Code of Iowa. (Ord. 1045, 5-6-1968; amd.
1985 Code)
ARTICLE B. DRIVEWAYS; CUTTING CURBS
5-1B-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. No curb shall be cut or changed and no parking or public property shall be used for a driveway without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City
Engineer, provided the application therefor conforms to this article and to all other provisions of this Code, as set out in section 364.12, Code of Iowa.
(1953 Code § 59-1; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
B. The permit fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for new installation, repair or replacement of a driveway approach and twenty dollars ($20.00) for curb
sawing or curb grinding and payable at the time said permit is issued; and the same shall be issued in duplicate, one (1) copy being given to the
applicant and one (1) filed in the Engineering Office. The permit shall show the name of the applicant, the exact location of the construction, and such
other information as the City Engineer may require. (2017 Code)
5-1B-2: FILING OF PLAN REQUIRED:
Before any such permit shall be granted, the applicant therefor shall file with the City Engineer a plat and plan of the area to be improved, which said plan
shall be accurately drawn to scale of not less than one-eighth inch to one foot (1/8" = 1') and with all principal dimensions shown. Such plan shall show the
location of all existing walks, curbs and the relative elevation of the gutters, the top of the curb and the sidewalk, all existing trees, their size and kind, fire
hydrants, water shutoff boxes, storm sewer inlets, street light poles and conduits and any other structures existing on or in the street adjacent to the
property, and shall also show the proposed location of tanks, buildings, air hose, wash racks, oil pits, pump islands and all other equipment which applicant
proposes to install on said property, together with the distance from such equipment to the street line and all proposed improvements to be installed;
provided, however, that no plat or plan shall be required for a private driveway twenty six feet (26') or less in width. (1953 Code § 59-2; amd. 1985 Code;
2017 Code)
5-1B-3: NUMBER AND SIZE OF DRIVEWAY APPROACHES:
There shall not be more than two (2) driveway approaches on any one (1) street frontage of one hundred eighty five feet (185') or less, nor more than
three (3) driveway approaches for any one (1) street frontage of over one hundred eighty five feet (185').
No driveway approach for any commercial or industrial property shall be less than twenty feet (20') nor more than forty five feet (45') in width measured at
the property line, nor more than fifty five feet (55') in width measured at the curb line.
No driveway approach for any residential property shall be more than twenty six feet (26') in width measured at the property line, nor more than thirty six
feet (36') in width measured at the curb line.
A safety zone between driveway approaches shall not be less than ten feet (10') measured at the curb line.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 86/358
A safety zone between a driveway approach and an alley approach shall not be less than ten feet (10') measured at the curb line.
No driveway approach shall be closer than twenty feet (20') to the extended curb lines of any intersecting streets.
In no event shall the curb cut for a driveway approach extend more than five feet (5') beyond the extended property line of the property being served by
this driveway. No driveway approach shall be within five feet (5') of an intersecting sidewalk or crosswalk at the property line. (Ord. 98-13, 10-20-1998;
amd. 2017 Code)
5-1B-4: PAVING OF DRIVEWAY APPROACH:
All driveway approaches shall be paved with either portland cement concrete or asphaltic cement concrete according to the Mason City standard
specifications. All driveway approaches shall be complete from the street gutter or curbing to the property line and include a portland cement concrete
sidewalk section as specified by the City Engineer. (Ord. 98-13, 10-20-1998; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1B-5: SIDEWALK AS PART OF DRIVEWAY APPROACH:
No driveway which is also a part of the public walk shall have a longitudinal slope greater than one-half inch (1/2") per foot, and no grade of walk shall be
changed so as to make the walk less than six inches (6") above the adjacent gutter. The surface of such walk shall be of a rough finish so as to prevent
slipping. (1953 Code § 59-5)
5-1B-6: CURBS:
A. When a distance from the inside curb line to the outside private property line is ten feet (10') or more, the driveway shall end at the curb line with a flare
having a radius of not less than five feet (5') and which flare shall be tangent to both the driveway and the street curb at the point of intersection. When
the distance from the inside curb line to the outside private property line is less than ten feet (10'), the driveway shall end at the curb line with a flare
having a radius equal to the distance from the inside curb line to the outside private property line minus five feet (5'). In lieu of the radius as above
described, the driveway may be flared on a straight line; provided, that the flared distance does not exceed the limits herein fixed for radii.
B. Sidewalk grades shall not be changed except as provided herein.
C. The tangent curb of any driveway shall at no time make an angle of less than forty five degrees (45°) measured from the street curb. (1953 Code § 59-
6; amd. Ord. 742-1, 3-4-1957; 2017 Code)
5-1B-7: EQUIPMENT SET BACK FROM STREET:
All pumps, oil pits, wash racks and islands, if set parallel with the street line, shall be at least twelve feet (12') from the edge of the property line, and if set
at other than right angles or parallel with the street line, same shall be fifteen feet (15') or more from the property line. All such equipment shall be so
placed that vehicles will not be stopped upon sidewalk or street while being serviced. Where visible type pumps are used, they must be installed upon an
island at least six inches (6") high and thirty inches (30") wide. (1953 Code § 59-7)
5-1B-8: DRAINAGE:
The drainage from all buildings and paved areas, wherever practicable, shall be so arranged as not to flow across a public sidewalk or onto adjoining
private or public properties. Where storm sewer connections are available, connections thereto shall be made; or whenever storm sewer connections
become available, then the same shall be made within sixty (60) days after becoming available. (1953 Code § 59-8; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1B-9: UTILITIES IN STREETS:
Wherever there may be encountered in the street or parking, Municipally owned cables, services, poles, water mains or other Municipally owned utilities,
the applicant shall obtain the written permission of the interested Municipal department for any changes necessary therein, and the reasonable expenses
and cost of all such changes shall be paid by the applicant. (1953 Code § 59-9)
5-1B-10: APPROVAL BY CITY ENGINEER:
Driveways and curbs lying on City property shall be of a type approved by and in accordance with the specifications of the City Engineer. (1953 Code § 59-
10; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1B-11: APPROACH FOR DRIVEWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property in connection with a driveway thereon to use a wooden or metal approach extending from the
street to the top of the curb, regardless of whether the same clamps over the top of the curb or not, and it shall also be unlawful for any person to place
dirt, ashes or other material in the gutter next to the curb for the purpose of building up an approach for a driveway. Temporary driveway approaches within
the right-of-way shall be approved by the City Engineer. (1953 Code § 59-11; amd. 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 87/358
ARTICLE C. OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS
5-1C-1: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to their usual meanings, the following definitions shall apply to the terms used in this article:
AREAWAY: Any opening for stairs or any ramp or other means of ingress or egress from the street, alley or sidewalk level to any cellar or basement or any
part of a building below the level of the street, alley or sidewalk.
ENCROACHMENT: Any areaway, excavation, obstruction, opening or structure.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street, highway, boulevard, avenue, alley, sidewalk, parkway, public place, plaza, mall or other real property owned or controlled
by the City, as set out in section 384.37, Code of Iowa. (1985 Code)
5-1C-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall construct, use or maintain under, in, upon or over the surface of any public property in the City any encroachment such as a chimney,
areaway, stairway, walkway, platform, step, area, railing, grate, vault, opening, room, sign, canopy, marquee, sidewalk cafe or any other encroachment
unless and until a permit, as applicable, is obtained from the City to construct, use or maintain such encroachment, except that no person shall construct,
use or maintain nor shall a permit be issued for any sign, marquee or awning which extends over the surface of any public property unless the City has
issued a permit for said encroachment in the manner specified in title 10, chapter 2, article G of this Code. No such permit shall be required, however, for
the erection and maintenance of a privately owned and maintained mailbox, where required and approved by the United States Postal Service, or for any
newspaper delivery receptacles when installed by any person who publishes a newspaper of general circulation as defined by Iowa law, for and at the
request of or by subscribers to the newspaper so long as the receptacles do not encroach in, upon or over the traveled portion of the public way. Trees,
when placed on public property in accordance with the requirements set forth in chapter 3 of this title, shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this
article. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1C-3: NUISANCES:
This article shall not be construed as authorizing the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. (1985 Code)
5-1C-4: DUTIES OF PERMIT HOLDER:
A. Damages: Any damage occurring in consequence of the creation, use or maintenance of any of the encroachments described in this article or, by
reason of any defect therein, shall be paid by the person using or maintaining such encroachment. (1985 Code)
B. Barricades: No person placing or causing any obstruction of any kind in any street, alley or public ground shall fail or neglect to secure the same by an
enclosure or barricades to cause the opening, excavation or obstruction to be protected and distinctly visible. Compliance with all Federal and State of
Iowa accessibility guidelines shall be followed. Any obstructions such as, but not limited to, barricades and signage placed in the right-of-way shall be
in compliance with the latest version of the MUTCD (Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices). (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1C-5: INSPECTIONS:
Any City employee having jurisdiction is authorized to inspect at any time the different encroachments mentioned in this article. (1985 Code; amd. 2017
Code)
5-1C-6: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
Any City employee having jurisdiction is hereby authorized to enter such areas for any purpose in connection with the legitimate use of such public
property. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1C-7: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this article shall be held in any way to regulate the maintenance of manholes, pits or covers in connection with the construction and operation of
any water, telephone, gas or electric connections, pipes or conduits nor shall anything in this article be held to apply to the use of any public property of the
City by fire escapes or public service corporations wherein such right has been granted by the City. (1953 Code § 60A-3; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1C-8: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
All encroachment permit applications shall be subject to the following requirements:
A. Prerequisite To Granting:
1. No permit required under this article shall be granted for any encroachment until the required fee(s) have been paid, and until an application with
complete plans shall have been filed with the City and approved by the City Council, following review by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 88/358
the City Engineer.
2. No permit shall be granted for any encroachment when it would unreasonably conflict with the rights of travel which the general public has on any
public property or would create a hazard to the movement of people or vehicles unless specifically permitted by the City Council.
3. If said applicant does not agree with the decision, the application may then be submitted to the City Council for consideration.
B. Grant; Contents: All permits required by this article shall be granted by the City Council and shall contain the name of the person securing the permit,
the date granted, the number, size and location of the encroachment and when deemed necessary, a lease, the duration and cost of which to be
determined by the City Council following review and recommendation by the City Engineer.
C. Permit Granted On Condition City Held Harmless: In granting a permit under this article, the party receiving the same shall be deemed to have agreed
to hold and shall hold the City harmless from and indemnified against all damages arising from or growing out of the construction, use or maintenance
of the encroachment. Any person who publishes a newspaper of general circulation as defined by Iowa law and who installs delivery receptacles for
such newspaper in accordance with the terms of section 5-1C-2 of this article, shall be deemed to have agreed to hold and shall hold the City harmless
from and indemnified against all damages arising from or growing out of the installation, placement, use or maintenance of such receptacles.
D. Insurance: Before granting a permit under this article, the City Council may require liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the City and sufficient
to hold the City harmless from and indemnified against all damages arising from or growing out of the construction, use or maintenance of such
encroachment, when, in the judgment of the City Council, the public interest may require it.
E. Suspension Or Revocation Of Permits; Removal Of Encroachments: Upon determination by the building official, City Engineer or other duly authorized
agent, that an encroachment is unsafe for persons or property, is in such a state of repair as to render it useless, or when the encroachment becomes
loathsome to the senses, the City Council may, in its discretion:
1. Order suspension of the permits until such time that improvements are completed to the satisfaction of the City Council. If said improvements are not
completed within sixty (60) days, said permit shall be revocable.
2. Order revocation of the permit for said encroachment. The City Council may order removal within thirty (30) days after the issuance of written notice
of the revocation to the person maintaining the encroachment. If the encroachment is not removed within thirty (30) days, the City Council shall order
the same abated as a nuisance and shall cause the cost thereof to be assessed against the property of the permit grantee.
The City Council has the right to revoke any encroachment permit at any time. Reasons to revoke a permit may include: If the encroachment creates
conflicts with an aboveground or belowground existing or planned public utility extension, future street widening or extension or any City construction
activity.
F. Notice Of Revocation: A copy of the resolution revoking the permit required by this article shall be mailed to the person using or maintaining such
encroachment. The City Clerk shall mail a copy of the resolution revoking such permit to such person at the address shown in the permit.
G. Removal Of Encroachment; Penalty: Any encroachment, constructed or maintained without securing the permit required by section 5-1C-2 of this
article, shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be ordered abated by the City Council. The cost shall be assessed against the property of the
person constructing, using or maintaining, or causing to be constructed, used or maintained, any encroachment in connection with the real property
owned, leased or occupied by the person in violation of this article, who shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
H. Expiration Of Permits: Permits granted under the provisions of this article shall expire and become null and void if the construction or placement of the
obstruction or encroachment is not commenced within six (6) months of the date of such permit, or if said construction or placement is suspended or
abandoned for a period of six (6) months or more after work has commenced. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1C-9: PERMIT FEES:
A. Any person constructing, maintaining or using any area, vault, room or any other encroachment, except as listed in section 5-1C-2 of this article under,
upon or in any part of any public property, shall obtain a permit therefor from the City and shall pay to the City a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
said permit and when required, additional lease fees. Said fee(s) shall be collected by the City at the time of issuance of the permit. (1985 Code; amd.
2017 Code)
B. Encroachments existing at the time of adoption of this section shall be exempt from permit fee payments.
C. Religious organizations shall be exempt from the payment of fees required by this article for property directly used by them for church or hospital
purposes. Charitable and benevolent organizations shall likewise be exempt from the payment of such fees for the temporary use of streets and alleys
for construction purposes, upon application and approval by the City Council. Any person who publishes a newspaper of general circulation, as defined
by Iowa law, and which installs delivery receptacles for such newspaper in accordance with the terms of section 5-1C-2 of this article pertaining thereto,
shall likewise be exempt from the payment of the fees required by this article. (1985 Code)
5-1C-10: TEMPORARY ENCROACHMENTS:
A. Dumpsters In Public Right-Of-Way:
1. Definitions:
ALLEY: A thoroughfare laid out, established and platted as such, by constituted authority.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 89/358
DUMPSTER: Any solid waste container not eligible for disposal by the City Sanitation Department.
DUMPSTER PERMIT: Any thirty (30) day permit issued by the Engineering Department for placement of a dumpster on a roadway.
OWNER: The owner of the dumpster.
ROADWAY: The entire width between property lines of a way designated as a public street when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as
a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic. (An alley is not considered a roadway.)
SUBSEQUENT DUMPSTER PERMIT: A permit issued within ninety (90) days of a previously issued permit for use at the same address.
2. Temporary Encroachment: A dumpster placed in a roadway shall be considered a temporary encroachment.
3. Liability Insurance: A dumpster shall not be placed in public right-of-way unless the owner of the dumpster has filed with the City Clerk a certificate of
insurance showing coverage of not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for
damages to property or injuries to persons that may be caused by the presence of the dumpster in the public right-of-way. The City shall be an
additional insured on the policy. The owner of a dumpster that has damaged public property during placement or removal, shall reimburse the City for
said damages. (Ord. 05-32, 11-15-2005)
4. Approval Of Dumpster Placed In Right-Of-Way: The owner of the dumpster shall contact the City Engineer, or designee, and request that a dumpster
be placed in the City right-of-way. The owner shall provide the proposed dumpster location, intended use, size, time frame needed and any other
information necessary. If approved, the City Engineer, or designee, will grant permission for the owner to place the dumpster in the City right-of-way.
(2017 Code)
5. Dumpster Permits: Except as hereinafter provided, a dumpster shall not be placed or remain in a roadway unless the owner has a valid dumpster
permit from the Engineering Department.
a. Permit Application: The completed application for a permit to place a dumpster on the public right-of-way shall be made by the owner of the
dumpster or the owner's designee to the Engineering Department on a form available from the department. The application must be accompanied
by a sketch showing the approximate location of the dumpster.
b. Fees: The fee for a thirty (30) day dumpster permit shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). Subsequent fees for each permit will be an additional twenty
dollars ($20.00) per thirty (30) days.
c. Issuance Of Permit: Dumpster permits shall be for a period of thirty (30) days. No more than two (2) subsequent thirty (30) day dumpster permits
shall be issued for the same address within any given calendar year. The City Engineer or designee reserves the right to waive the maximum of
two (2) subsequent permits. The City Engineer or designee may deny the permit application or revoke a permit after issuance if there is
noncompliance with any of the requirements of this section or if a health or safety concern arises.
6. Dumpster Safety Provisions: Dumpsters placed in the roadway shall not need a permit if they meet the following criteria:
a. On public rights-of-way, including both streets and alleys, both ends of any dumpster facing oncoming traffic shall have Department of
Transportation certified reflective tape. Reflective tape shall have a width of two inches (2"). The reflective tape shall run in a continuous line or in a
breaking pattern covering at least fifty percent (50%) of the perimeter of the ends and located as close to the extreme edges of the ends as
possible.
b. Dumpsters placed in the roadway shall be placed not more than twelve inches (12") from the curb, or, in the absence of a curb, from the edge of
the traveled way and shall not extend more than nine feet (9') out from the curb or, in the absence of a curb, from the edge of the traveled way.
c. Dumpsters placed in a roadway shall not be placed closer than thirty feet (30') from any intersection or alley or provide a visibility barrier for the
traveling public.
d. Dumpsters placed in a public right-of-way shall comply with all traffic restrictions applicable to motor traffic.
e. The dumpster shall not remain in the roadway longer than fourteen (14) days.
f. There shall be at least sixteen feet (16') of traveled way available along the traveled side of any dumpster placed in a roadway.
g. A dumpster placed in the public right-of-way shall not block a sidewalk.
7. Removal Of Dumpster:
a. The City Engineer or designee may, if he/she determines that the location or condition of the dumpster is a health or safety risk, require the
removal of a dumpster from any public right-of-way within twenty four (24) hours.
b. The City Engineer or designee may, if he/she determines that the owner of the dumpster has not complied with the requirements under subsection
A6 of this section, require removal or relocation of the dumpster.
8. Fines: Any owner of a dumpster in violation of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, pay a fine of two
hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 05-32, 11-15-2005)
ARTICLE D. CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
5-1D-1: DEFINITION:
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY: A highway or street specially designed for through traffic and over, from or to which owners or occupants of abutting
land, or other persons, have no right of easement or only a controlled right of easement for access, light, air or view by reason of the fact that their property
abuts upon such controlled access facility or for any other reason. Such highways or streets may be freeways open to use by all customary forms of street
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 90/358
and highway traffic or they may be parkways from which trucks, buses or other commercial vehicles shall be excluded. (Ord. 765, 1-20-1958; amd. 1985
Code)
5-1D-2: AUTHORITY FOR CONTROL OF ACCESS:
The provisions of this article relating to control of access shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City of Mason City pursuant to chapter
306, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety and for the promotion of the general welfare. (Ord. 765, 1-20-1958; amd.
1985 Code)
5-1D-3: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is now on file in the Office of the City Clerk a list of controlled access facilities as established by the Iowa Department of Transportation and the City
of Mason City. (Ord. 765, 1-20-1958; amd. 1985 Code)
5-1D-4: REGULATION OF ACCESS:
No person shall have any right of ingress or egress to, from or across the controlled access facilities hereby established except at existing points of
access, or at points hereinafter designated or at such points as may be hereafter jointly designated by the Iowa Department of Transportation. (Ord. 765,
1-20-1958)
5-1D-5: POINTS OF ACCESS DEFINED:
The points of access shall consist of accessways from abutting property to the adjacent traffic lane or roadway and their locations and widths shall be in
compliance with the Iowa Department of Transportation's access agency for urban areas. (Ord. 765, 1-20-1958; amd. 1985 Code)
5-1D-6: UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any curb, central dividing section or other separation or dividing line on such controlled access facilities.
B. Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn except through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section, separation or line.
C. Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane provided for that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of the central dividing curb, separation
section or line.
D. Drive any vehicle onto any controlled access facility from a local service road except through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing
section or dividing line which separates such service road from the controlled access facility property. (Ord. 765, 1-20-1958)
ARTICLE E. STREETLIGHT INSTALLATION
5-1E-1: DEFINITIONS:
LONG BLOCK: Any block longer than five hundred feet (500'), measured from center of street to center of street.
LONG CUL-DE-SAC: Any cul-de-sac longer than three hundred fifty feet (350'), measured from center of street to center line of cul-de-sac radius.
STREETLIGHT: A light placed within the street right-of-way for the purpose of providing lighting for the safety of vehicular traffic. (Ord. 97-9, 3-18-1997)
5-1E-2: CRITERIA FOR INSTALLATION:
Streetlights may be installed at all street intersections or as near to the midblock as practical of a long block or at the end of a long cul-de-sac. (Ord. 97-9,
3-18-1997)
5-1E-3: TYPES OF LIGHTING:
All streetlights shall conform to City standards. The following list identifies the possible types of luminaires and the approved mounting height and pole type
that may be used in the City. All other combinations need written approval from the City Engineer. (Ord. 97-9, 3-18-1997)
Wattage Luminaire Type Mounting Height Pole Type
80 Roadway light LED 25 feet Wood
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 91/358
108 Roadway light LED 25 feet Wood
135 Roadway light LED 25 feet Wood
270 Roadway light LED 25 feet Wood
44 Pole topper LED 20 feet Fiberglass
45 Pole topper LED 20 feet Fiberglass
Note: LED means light emitting diode.
(Ord. 97-9, 3-18-1997; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1E-4: APPROVAL PROCESS:
A. If a streetlight request meets the criteria requirements in section 5-1E-2 of this article, the approval process concludes with a petition. The affected area
would be determined by the City Engineer and would include all properties with frontage abutting the affected street(s). Petitions shall be considered
according to the following criteria:
1. Each adjoining property shall be allowed one (1) vote;
2. The vote for each property shall be awarded according to the majority of owners of record on that property;
3. A simple majority shall dictate installation of a light;
4. A tie vote shall nullify the request for installation.
B. Once a legal petition is received and acted upon, a six (6) month period would need to elapse before an additional petition to reverse the action would
be accepted. (Ord. 97-9, 3-18-1997)
5-1E-5: INSTALLATION:
The streetlight shall be placed within the street right-of-way at street intersections, midblocks of long blocks, or at the end of a long cul-de-sac. Lights are
to be placed at the lot lines nearest the midblock of long blocks as practical or the end of long cul-de-sacs. All lights shall be staggered from one (1) side of
the street to the other where possible. (Ord. 97-9, 3-18-1997)
ARTICLE F. COMMERCIAL USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
5-1F-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
FOOD-PRIMARY ESTABLISHMENT: A business where the service of food, as opposed to liquor, is the primary focus of the business and which meets the
following criteria:
A. Serves meals prepared on the premises for consumption on the premises;
B. Has a food service menu from which customers may order;
C. Has an employee whose primary duty is the preparation of food and an employee whose primary duty is to serve food to customers;
D. Has a kitchen separate from the bar equipped with all of the following: a stove, a griddle, a grill or broiler, and a food refrigeration unit with a capacity
in excess of twenty (20) cubic feet;
E. Operates the restaurant service during at least sixty percent (60%) of the hours that the business is open to the public; and
F. Holds itself out to be a restaurant and advertises itself as a restaurant if it advertises;
G. Includes a cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, delicatessen, ice cream shop, lunchroom or tearoom;
H. May also offer alcohol for sale on premises so long as the primary function of the business is to serve food.
LIQUOR-PRIMARY ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment where the service of alcoholic beverages directly to the public, as opposed to food, is the
primary focus of the business.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person traveling on foot or wheelchair.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 92/358
PUBLIC PLAZA: A publicly owned open area, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, that is bounded on not more than three (3) sides by the exterior
walls of one (1) or more buildings.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any public street, alley, roadway, sidewalk, walkway, right-of-way or public way designed for vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian
travel and dedicated to public use.
SIDEWALK: The improved portion of public right-of-way dedicated to pedestrian circulation.
SIDEWALK SALES: The use of the public sidewalk or a public plaza for the display and sale of merchandise.
SIDEWALK SERVICE AREA: An outdoor area located temporarily on a public sidewalk or public plaza contiguous with and having direct access to any
building wherein a food-primary establishment or a liquor-primary establishment is located, and where food or beverages are taken for consumption by
persons sitting or standing at tables in that area. (2017 Code)
5-1F-2: USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY RESTRICTED:
Use of public right-of-way or of a public plaza for any commercial purpose shall be unlawful except as specifically authorized by this Code. (2017 Code)
5-1F-3: USE FOR SIDEWALK SERVICE AREA:
A permit for a sidewalk service area may be issued subject to the following conditions:
A. Usable Area:
1. A sidewalk service area may not extend onto the sidewalk in a manner that will not allow a minimum of five feet (5') of unobstructed sidewalk
adjacent to the street for pedestrian use, nor extend into a public plaza in a manner that will not allow an unobstructed twenty foot (20') fire lane.
2. No tables and chairs shall be placed in street corner areas defined by building lines extended to the street, and no closer than ten feet (10') from an
alley.
3. The area for a sidewalk service area shall be delineated during the hours of operation by ropes or some other suitable method which shall be clearly
visible to pedestrians. If required by the City Council, tables, chairs and other items are not required to be removed at the end of each day's
operation unless required as a condition of approval by the City Council, provided that all items are secure from unauthorized removal or impact from
wind or weather. No materials shall be stored on the public right-of-way.
4. A sidewalk service area may not utilize any public amenities such as benches, seats, tables or trash receptacles.
5. No person shall sell or display merchandise, or permit the sale or display of merchandise, under this subsection until he or she has first obtained
liability insurance or an amendment or rider to an existing liability insurance policy insuring the said person and the City and its officers and
employees, against liability which might arise out of the display or sale of merchandise by such person upon the public right-of-way or public plaza, in
an amount at least equal to the maximum statutory liability of the City, its officers and employees. The City, together with its officers and employees,
shall be named as additional insured in the said liability insurance policy, and shall meet all other requirements established by the City.
B. Days And Hours Of Operation:
1. The sidewalk service area may be operated and used any time of the year. Outdoor heating units, if used, must meet all applicable Building and Fire
Codes.
2. Sidewalk service areas shall be set up and operated each day only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
The City Council may, as part of the initial permit approval, impose more restrictive hours.
C. Sidewalk Service Area Permit Required:
1. Establishments must apply for and obtain a sidewalk service area permit from the City prior to operation. Each applicant shall file an initial
application with the Development Services Director, on forms provided by the City and containing all pertinent information as the City may require,
and shall agree to abide by State and local laws governing use of public right-of-way. Establishments dispensing any alcoholic beverage must do so
under State and local law.
2. An initial sidewalk service area permit shall be reviewed by the City Council. The Council may impose conditions upon the use of public property to
ensure protection of the public health, safety and general welfare.
3. A sidewalk service area permit shall be issued in conjunction with yearly renewals of alcoholic beverage licenses/permits, or one (1) year from the
date of issuance for establishments not dispensing alcohol. The initial application may be less than the one (1) year period to coincide with existing
alcoholic beverage licenses/permits, and will require full payment.
4. Annual renewals shall be reviewed by the Development Services Director. If the sidewalk service area continues to operate in accordance with the
initial permit, the renewal shall be granted. The Development Services Director may impose any conditions he/she deems necessary to minimize the
impact of the sidewalk service area on neighboring properties and to ensure that the sidewalk service area does not pose a threat to public health
and safety. If the Development Services Director determines that the operation, scope or area of the sidewalk service area have changed
significantly from that approved in the initial permit, he/she may require the owner or operator to submit a new permit for review by the City Council.
5. An annual fee for a sidewalk service area permit shall be established by Council resolution.
6. An applicant for a sidewalk service area who intends to serve alcoholic beverages must file an application for and obtain an outdoor service area
permit from the State of Iowa.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 93/358
7. The City shall retain the right to terminate the sidewalk service area permit but only after written notice of violation has been given and the time to
cure the violation has expired. Grounds for termination of the sidewalk service area permit shall include, but not be limited to, violations of the State
and local liquor control laws, violations of the sidewalk service area permit, and creating a safety hazard, health hazard and/or public nuisance under
State or local law. Additionally, the City retains the right to terminate the sidewalk service area permit and direct removal of sidewalk service area
operations if, after deliberation, the City Administrator determines there is a substantial and reasonable need for use of the public right-of-way for a
valid public purpose.
8. The use of public right-of-way permitted shall in no way interfere with access to public or City utilities located and/or operated within the City's public
right-of-way. In addition, each applicant shall be required to provide a certificate of insurance satisfactory to the City, and shall agree to hold the City
harmless against any and all liability arising from interruptions, accidents or other actions arising from the sidewalk cafe operation or location in the
public right-of-way.
9. No person shall establish, operate, or be issued a permit for a sidewalk service area under this subsection until he or she has first obtained liability
insurance or an amendment or rider to an existing liability insurance policy insuring the said person and the City and its officers and employees,
against liability which might arise out of the display or sale of merchandise by such person upon the public right-of-way in an amount of at least one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) cumulative. Failure to obtain such insurance shall be a
misdemeanor violation of this Code. The City, together with its officers and employees, shall be named as additional insured in the said liability
insurance policy, and shall meet all other requirements established by the City.
D. Operation Of Sidewalk Service Area:
1. The City retains the right to limit the number of sidewalk service areas in subsection A of this section.
2. Other than signs permitted in title 12 of this Code, signs shall not be permitted in the sidewalk cafe area except on chairs, tables, umbrellas or other
amenities, as approved by the City. The amenities used in the sidewalk cafe area shall be maintained in good condition.
3. The sidewalk serving area must be arranged to allow for access to building entrances. No blockage of building entrances or exits shall be permitted
in a sidewalk cafe area.
4. Additional restroom capacity may be required to comply with local Building and Housing Codes.
5. Occupancy limits shall be determined as set forth in title 10, "Building Regulations", of this Code.
6. Sidewalk service areas shall be subject to inspection at least annually or at any other time at the direction of the City.
7. A sidewalk service area operated by a liquor-primary establishment must have an employee monitoring the area at all times during the hours liquor
is consumed.
8. "Bring your own bottle of liquor" (BYOB) is not allowed in any sidewalk service area. Any alcoholic beverage possessed or consumed in the sidewalk
service area must have been sold by the sidewalk service area permit holder.
9. The sidewalk service area permit holder shall be responsible for trash removal and must maintain the area and surrounding five feet (5') in a clean
and litter free manner during all hours of operation, and shall restore the area and surrounding five feet (5') to its normal condition as a
pedestrianway and litter free after operation each day.
10. The operation of any sidewalk service area shall be in conformity with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations. (2017 Code)
5-1F-4: USE FOR SIDEWALK SALES:
Any person, partnership, firm or corporation (person) that operates a retail business in Mason City may, with advance written notice to the Director of the
Development Services Department (Director), use a limited part of a sidewalk or plaza that immediately adjoins the premises of such retail business for the
display and sale of its merchandise. The Director may impose additional reasonable restrictions upon, or withdraw approval of, the use of any sidewalk or
public plaza for retail sales where necessary in his or her judgment to protect the public health, safety and general welfare or to prevent a nuisance from
developing or continuing.
A. The display and/or sale of merchandise shall not be permitted in any portion of the sidewalk or public plaza where normal pedestrian traffic flow is
obstructed.
B. No display racks, tables or other equipment of any kind shall be placed, or permitted to remain, on the sidewalk or public plaza during any period when
merchandise is not displayed and available for purchase. While such merchandise is displayed or available for purchase, all racks, tables and other
equipment shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
C. The use of a portion of the sidewalk or public plaza for retail display or sale shall not be an exclusive use. All public improvements including, but not
limited to, trees, light poles, traffic signals, pull boxes or manholes, or any public initiated maintenance procedures or work, shall take precedence over
the use of the public sidewalk at all times. The merchandise and display racks, tables and equipment shall be removed from the sidewalk or public
plaza immediately to permit such public initiated maintenance procedures or work.
D. No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on the sidewalk or public plaza at any time in connection with the sidewalk sale.
E. This section applies to and permits only the sale and display of merchandise and goods, and does not permit the sale, display or provision of services
on the sidewalk or public plaza. This section does not apply to or allow the display and sale of merchandise and goods on sidewalks or public plazas by
transient vendors or other persons who do not operate retail business in a building on the property adjoining the public sidewalk or public plaza where
the display and sales take place.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 94/358
F. No person shall sell or display merchandise, or permit the sale or display of merchandise, under this section until he or she has first obtained liability
insurance or an amendment or rider to an existing liability insurance policy insuring the said person and the City and its officers and employees, against
liability which might arise out of the display or sale of merchandise by such person upon the public sidewalk in an amount of at least one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) cumulative. Failure to obtain such insurance shall be a misdemeanor violation
of this Code. The City, together with its officers and employees, shall be named as additional insured in the said liability insurance policy, and shall
meet all other requirements established by the City. (2017 Code)
5-1F-5: PENALTY:
Any violation of this article shall be considered a Municipal infraction as provided for in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this Code. (2017 Code)
ARTICLE G. SIDEWALKS KEPT CLEAN, FREE FROM SNOW AND ICE
5-1G-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ACCUMULATIONS: Snow and/or ice deposits.
PERSON: An individual or group or association of individuals; a firm or any member thereof; a corporation, or any executive officer, manager, person in
charge or employee thereof; and the use of a pronoun specifying one (1) gender shall include both genders.
SNOWFALL: Any snow, ice or wind event that cause accumulations on sidewalks. (Ord. 08-14, 10-7-2008)
5-1G-2: OWNER/OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITIES:
As set out in section 364.12, Code of Iowa, the abutting property owner is responsible for the removal of the accumulations of snow and/or ice within forty
eight (48) hours of snowfall from the entire width of the sidewalk and may be liable for damages caused by the failure of the abutting property owners to
use reasonable care in the removal of accumulations. It shall be prohibited for any property owner to allow accumulations to remain on sidewalks abutting
the owner's property for more than forty eight (48) hours after snowfall.
Whenever it shall not be practicable to remove the snow and/or ice from such sidewalk by reason of the accumulation of snow and ice being frozen to the
sidewalk, then the owner or occupant shall keep and maintain such accumulations spread with fine cinders and/or sand in such a manner as to provide
traction and prevent the sidewalk from being dangerous to pedestrians. Nothing in this article shall be construed to be a substitute for the removal of
accumulations of snow and/or ice. This article shall only apply when accumulations cannot be reasonably removed, however, all accumulations shall be
removed as soon as practical. (Ord. 08-14, 10-7-2008)
5-1G-3: CITY MAY REMOVE SNOW AND ICE; NOTICE:
A. Whenever the occupant or owner of any such lot or parcel of ground abutting a sidewalk shall fail or refuse to remove the accumulation or to sprinkle
material upon frozen ice, as required by section 5-1G-2 of this article, the Development Services Department may serve a notice upon the property
owner as determined from the records of the County Auditor by one (1) or more of the following, as necessary:
1. Posting a notice on the front door or main entry to the building;
2. Personal service, if the owner can be served within the City limits;
3. United States first class mail, if the owner lives within any zip code that is within or contiguous to the boundaries of Cerro Gordo County.
4. United States certified mail with return receipt, if the owner cannot be served according to any of the above methods.
B. The notice shall direct that said nuisance shall be abated within five (5) business days after the completed service of notice. Said notice shall set forth
those actions which are required of the property owner.
C. If the owner/occupant fails to perform the action required in the notice of abatement within the time prescribed therein, the City may proceed to clear
said sidewalks of snow and ice and may assess the actual cost and expense thereof against each such lot or parcel of ground. (Ord. 08-14, 10-7-2008;
amd. 2017 Code)
5-1G-4: UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF SNOW AND/OR ICE:
No person shall remove, or cause to be removed, accumulations from private premises and deposit the same or cause the same to be deposited upon any
public street, avenue, alley, public square or traveled area within the City. (Ord. 08-14, 10-7-2008)
5-1G-5: ADMINISTRATION OF COSTS:
In addition to the actual cost of removing accumulations or treatment of accumulations from sidewalks abutting private property, a ten dollar ($10.00)
administrative cost shall be paid by the owner of said property.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 95/358
The property owner shall be sent a bill for said costs to permit voluntary payment thereof by the property owner. Failure to pay said bill within the stated
time period on the bill will cause the action to appear on a schedule of assessments to be forwarded to the City Clerk for consideration by the City Council
in accordance with the provisions of chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa. (Ord. 08-14, 10-7-2008)
5-1G-6: RIGHT TO ASSESS:
When the City causes to be removed accumulations and/or treats accumulations, the City may assess the actual cost plus any administrative costs for
removing such accumulations from the abutting property owners' sidewalks and/or treatment of irremovable accumulations. (Ord. 08-14, 10-7-2008)
Chapter 2
PUBLIC PARKS
5-2-1: CONTROL, SUPERVISION:
As set forth in section 364.12, Iowa Code, the City Council has established that all public parks, including dedicated pedestrian and bicycle paths owned or
maintained by the City, shall be under the direct supervision and control of the Park and Recreation Board1 which is empowered to make and prescribe
rules and regulations additional to those prescribed by this chapter for the control and custody of the parks, pedestrian and bicycle paths within the park
system of the City.
A. No person shall ride or drive any motorized vehicle in the parks, or on any pedestrian or bicycle paths included in the park system, except on
established roads, and then only at a moderate rate of speed and in no event at a rate of speed greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour.
Exception: Emergency vehicles. (Ord. 93-17, 7-20-1993)
5-2-2: PARK RULES:
The following rules are hereby prescribed and shall be observed by all persons in or upon the public parks of the City:
A. No person shall ride or drive in the parks except on established roads and ways, and then only at a moderate rate of speed, and in no event at a rate of
speed greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour.
B. Motor vehicles may be parked only in places provided therefor and must be parked in such a manner so as not to obstruct the roadway.
C. No person shall hitch a horse or other animal except where there are hitching posts provided for such purpose.
D. No person shall deface or injure any building, tree, shrub or plant, or other improvements made in or about the parks, or disturb or interfere with birds,
animals, fish, flowers or plants kept or found therein.
E. No fire shall be laid or made except in fireplaces or stoves provided therefor.
F. It shall be unlawful to use arms, explosives or weapons of any kind within a City park. (1953 Code § 17-2)
G. No person shall scatter or litter the grounds or riverbanks with any form of garbage or waste material, including fish of any kind. All litter, garbage,
papers and refuse must be deposited in the receptacles provided therefor.
Exception: Fish shall not be placed in the receptacles. (Ord. 97-21, 9-2-1997)
H. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any violent, obscene or profane language while in any park, or to conduct himself in a disorderly or obscene
manner, or to commit any nuisance in or about the park.
I. No person shall throw any foreign or waste substance into the water within or adjoining the parks; nor shall any person swim or bathe in the water
therein, except at such places as may be directed by the Park and Recreation Board and marked by signs erected in the park.
J. No person shall enter upon any portion of the ground in disregard of signs or posted notices forbidding the same.
K. It shall be unlawful for any person to transact business of any kind or give entertainment or hold public meetings or assemblies or to establish or occupy
a camp within any park except upon the written permission of the Park and Recreation Board.
L. All picnic parties, assemblies, entertainments and other uses made of the park shall occupy only the grounds designated for use for such purposes.
(1953 Code § 17-2)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 96/358
M. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in the following City parks: Lester Milligan Park/Big Blue Pond,
Pierce Pond, Ray Rorick Park, West Park and Parker's Woods. Under special circumstances, a variance of this subsection can be obtained by
appearing before the Mason City Park and Recreation Board. (Ord. 03-8, 4-15-2003)
N. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be within any of the parks between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the
following morning, except that the pedestrians may use the sidewalks of Central Park for the purpose of crossing same. (1953 Code § 17-2)
O. It shall be unlawful for any person who walks or takes an animal upon any public park property or playground to do so without said animal being
attached to a leash or chain of sufficient strength to restrain the animal and not more than six feet (6') in length when said leash or chain is held by a
person competent to restrain and control the animal off the premises. Said person or handler shall clean up, remove and dispose of solid waste
excreted or deposited upon such public or private property. This subsection shall not apply to animals under the direct control of a handicapped person
which are specially trained for the purpose of assisting handicapped persons.
Exception: When animal(s) are included in activities such as a kennel club show, field trial or other special event. (Ord. 94-26, 11-15-1994)
P. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any use of a parkway within a public park in the City in disregard of or contrary to signs or posted notices
which may be installed by direction of the Park and Recreation Board. (Ord. 1156, 6-7-1971)
Q. It shall be unlawful for any watercraft or boat that is gasoline powered or has a gasoline mounted motor to enter Big Blue Pond in Lester Milligan Park.
Exception: Emergency personnel and vehicles.
R. It shall be unlawful to power a boat on Pierce Pond in Lester Milligan Park with a gasoline powered motor; however, a boat may have a gasoline
powered motor mounted on it but it must be out of the water.
Exception: Emergency personnel and vehicles. (Ord. 04-21, 7-20-2004)
Chapter 3
TREES AND SHRUBS
5-3-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
As set out in section 364.12, Code of Iowa, setting forth the authority to adopt regulations by the City Council, this chapter shall be known as and may be
cited as the STREET TREE ORDINANCE of the City of Mason City. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
BOULEVARD: Any unpaved portion of a public street located between opposing travel lanes.
CUL-DE-SAC ISLAND: The unpaved portion of a public street located between the opposing travel lanes.
INSIDE EDGE OF CURB: That side of the curb nearest the outside edge of the public sidewalk.
OUTSIDE EDGE OF PUBLIC SIDEWALK: That edge of the public sidewalk nearest the public roadway.
STREET PARKING: That portion of the public street located between the outside edge of the public sidewalk and the inside edge of the curb. (Ord. 15-07,
7-28-2015)
5-3-3: CITY FORESTER:
The Operations and Maintenance Manager/Street Supervisor, as agent, shall perform the duties of City Forester for the City and shall have charge,
custody and control of all trees and shrubs growing now or hereafter in any street parking, public parks, boulevards and public places in the City and shall
have the power to plant, care for and otherwise maintain such trees and shrubs. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-4: STREET PARKINGS IN EXCESS OF CERTAIN DISTANCES:
A. Trees may be planted in street parking where the unpaved distance between the outside edge of the sidewalk and the inside edge of the curb is more
than four and one-half feet (41/2'), and less than six feet (6') may have plantings that will not exceed thirty feet (30') in height and spread of not more
than ten feet (10') when fully grown. Such planting shall be made after first making application for and obtaining a written permit from the City Forester.
B. Trees to be planted in street parking in excess of six feet (6') shall be for a species conforming with the approved species set forth by the City Forester.
C. All planting shall be done after a permit has been obtained from the City Forester, after first having submitted an application containing information as
set forth in sections 5-3-7, 5-3-8 and 5-3-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 97/358
5-3-5: PERMIT TO PLANT OR REMOVE TREES:
No person shall plant, move, trim or remove any tree in any street parking, boulevard, park or public place in the City nor cause such action to be done by
others without first obtaining a written permit from the City Forester.
Contractors hired to trim or remove a tree on the public right-of-way or property shall be required to obtain a written permit from the City Forester and have
sufficient liability insurance, and obtain a license issued by the City Clerk's Office before performing tree service within the community.
Exception: Annual plants and flowers whose maximum mature height is less than thirty six inches (36") may be planted in any street parking and
boulevard without obtaining a permit. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-6: APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS:
Said application shall be accompanied by a plan or drawing which shall accurately show:
A. The property of the applicant adjacent to the street parking upon which a permit to plant is sought, along with the existing public sidewalk, street,
parking area and curb located between the applicant's property line and the outside edge of the curb, all of which shall be to a definite indicated scale.
B. The species and location of each tree proposed to be planted and of those trees already existing in the street parking, also in definite scale.
C. The location of any fire hydrant, utility poles, street light pole and/or mailbox or other obstructions located upon the street parking, all of which shall be in
scaled relation to the other information required. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-7: APPLICATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL AREAS:
Trees may be planted in an area where the outside edge of the sidewalk runs continuously to the inside edge of the curb, provided the plantings be a
minimum of three feet (3') from the inside edge of the curb, and that before any tree may be planted in such areas, the owner of the property adjacent to
said street parking must first make application to and secure a permit from the City Forester as hereinafter provided.
A. Application Data:
1. Local address of the applicant's property which is adjacent to the street parking upon which a permit to plant is sought;
2. The species, number, height and trunk diameter of each tree proposed to be planted; and
3. Any additional information which the City Forester shall deem is reasonably necessary to enable the making of a fair determination of whether or not
a permit should be issued hereunder; and
4. The recommendations, along with comments, if any, by the City Planner, electrical inspector, current communications company, current power
company and the Iowa Department of Transportation when the street parking abuts the extension of a primary highway within the City.
B. Application Plan Or Drawing: Application plan or drawing shall be as set forth in section 5-3-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-8: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
The City Forester may, after review and consideration of any application as above required, issue a permit to an applicant. Any such permit issued shall be
to plant trees in strict compliance with terms and provisions of this chapter and the application and plan or drawing as finally approved by the City Forester,
a copy of which said finally approved application and plan and drawing shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Forester. All such permits shall be
issued upon the express condition that they may be revoked at any time by the City Forester and that all trees planted pursuant to said permit may be
removed by the City without liability to any person for such removal.
Further, no such permit shall be issued until the applicant shall have executed and filed with the City Forester an indemnification agreement whereby said
applicant agrees to save and hold harmless the City from any and all liability for damage or injury to person or property proximately caused by trees
planted pursuant to said permit. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-9: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
For the purpose of determining the distance under sections 5-3-6 and 5-3-7 of this chapter, where there is no existing public sidewalk or curb, then it shall
be assumed that such improvements have been installed and the location and dimensions of such improvement shall be as determined by the City
Engineer based upon projected improvements. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-10: REGULATIONS FOR PLANTING TREES AND SHRUBS:
A. All trees planted in any street parking area under this chapter shall be planted in strict accordance with the following regulations:
1. All trees planted under section 5-3-7 of this chapter in an area where the outside edge of the public sidewalk runs continuously to the inside edge of
the curb so that there is no unpaved distance between the outside edge of the public sidewalk and the inside edge of the curb shall be planted in the
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 98/358
center of an area which is at least thirty six inches (36") square and the outside line of said square area shall be the inside edge of the curb. Said
planting area may be adjusted to accommodate underground utilities; however, the size of the tree trunk at maturity shall be considered to alleviate
damage to sidewalks and curbs. Offset of tree planting shall meet all conditions.
2. All trees planted under section 5-3-6 of this chapter shall be planted at a point in the street parking at a distance of forty percent (40%) of the parking
width from the outside edge of the public sidewalk and a distance of sixty percent (60%) of the parking width from the inside edge of the curb. The
City Forester shall determine the species and the planting site whenever overhead utility wires are present.
3. All trees hereafter planted in any street parking, except section 5-3-7 of this chapter, shall be at least twenty feet (20') from any intersection street
right-of-way line; at least ten feet (10') from any fire hydrant, alley and driveway; at least one-half (1/2) the diameter of the tree canopy at maturity of
the tree, from a light standard or transmission poles. Spacing between trees shall be dependent upon species and variety of tree being planted.
Standard or large growing trees shall be at least three-fourths inch (3/4") to one inch (1") in diameter, six inches (6") above the ground and at least
five feet (5') to six feet (6') tall. Small growing trees such as flowering and ornamental trees shall be at least four feet (4') to five feet (5') tall and have
five (5) or more branches.
4. Hereafter, the total number of any tree species planted on the parking within a specified block shall equal no more than ten percent (10%) of the
combined total number of tree species that are or may be planted on the parking within that block, except the percentage may be increased by
special permission of the City Forester.
B. Shrubs may be planted in cul-de-sac islands only after a planting plan for said shrubs shall be approved by the City Forester after a statement shall be
submitted in writing assuming responsibility for maintenance of said shrubs; said responsibility assumption shall be made by adjacent property owners
or an area homeowners' association. Said responsibility shall transfer with property ownership. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-11: PROHIBITED SPECIES OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
Hereafter, it shall be unlawful to plant any of the following described species of trees and shrubbery upon any street parking in the City along with any new
species and varieties that are known to be or which may become a public nuisance:
American elm - elm species that are certified to be disease resistant may be planted.
Ash.
Birch - river birch, white or paper birch, etc.
Black locust.
Box elder.
Catalpa.
Chinese or Siberian elm - elm species that are certified to be disease resistant may be planted.
Common fruit trees.
Conifers (evergreens).
Cottonwood.
Ginkgo (female only).
Hawthorn - except thornless variety.
Mulberry, common.
Poplars.
Russian olive.
Silver maple.
Sumac.
Trees bearing large nuts, i.e., walnut, hickory, butternut.
Willow.
All species of shrubbery, except as provided in subsection 5-3-10B of this chapter. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-12: PERMITTED SPECIES OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
Elm - elm species that are certified to be disease resistant may be planted.
Ginkgo (male).
Hackberry.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 99/358
Hard maple - allowed but not recommended due to over population of maples at this time and susceptibility to the Asian longhorn beetle.
Hawthorn - (only thornless varieties allowed) to be used when overhead utility wires are present and the parking is more than ten feet (10').
Japanese lilac - to be used when overhead utility wires are present and the parking is more than ten feet (10').
Kentucky coffeetree.
Linden.
Locust - excluding black locust.
Oak.
Tatarian maple - to be used when overhead utility wires are present and the parking is more than ten feet (10'). (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015; amd. 2017 Code)
5-3-13: MAINTENANCE OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
It shall be the duty of all property owners having trees and shrubbery abutting or overhanging any public property, street parking, public alleys, public
sidewalks and other public property:
A. To keep all trees pruned so that the lower branches are not less than eight feet (8') in height above public sidewalks, sixteen feet (16') above the
traveled portion of all public streets, public alleys and primary highways.
B. To remove all dead, damaged and broken limbs and trees; all limbs and trees which are or may become dangerous to travel upon the public way and all
limbs and trees that obstruct the natural flow of any meandering public streams within the City limits.
C. To maintain all trees, shrubbery, hedges, bushes, vines or plants in such a manner so as not to interfere with the vision of drivers of vehicles
approaching any intersection, street or alley.
D. To keep all trees trimmed so as not to unduly obstruct street lights or traffic signs and traffic signals.
E. While performing any of the preceding maintenance to trees controlled by the City, the Arborist Department may clear any privately owned tree not
conforming to this chapter and retain the option to assess the charge to the property owner(s).
F. In the event a tree is located upon the property lot line and City property, the cost of maintaining or removal shall be equally shared by both parties. The
property owner shall reserve the option to obtain cost estimates by a private contractor and said costs shall be approved by the City Forester before
said work is done. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-14: PROTECTION OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
No person shall break, deface, injure, kill or destroy any tree or shrub in any street parking, park or public place in the City. Also, no person shall place or
permit any toxic, liquid, gaseous or solid substances to seep, drain or be placed on or about any public tree or shrub. During all public building and
construction operations, the contractor or builder shall erect protective barriers around all trees during the period of construction. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-15: TREE DISEASES AND PESTS:
All trees infected with any declared pest such as Dutch elm disease, emerald ash borer or any diseases or pests declared at a later date are hereby
declared to be nuisances, and the owner, occupant or person in charge of the property whereon such tree or trees are located is hereby ordered to remove
such tree or trees or use a proven method of treatment to eliminate or stop the declared disease or pest. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-16: NUISANCE; NOTICE OF ABATEMENT, REMOVAL:
The property owner, as shown by the records of the County Auditor, shall remove said tree or any portion thereof at the owner's expense within thirty (30)
days after receiving a notice to abate said nuisance from the City Forester. In the event the owner does not perform the acts necessary to remove and
abate said nuisance(s) within the time set forth in said notice, the City may perform or contract the required action and assess the costs thereof against the
property upon which the nuisance is located. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-17: CHARGES FOR ABATING NUISANCE:
The following charges will be assessed against the property if the City abates the said nuisance, depending on the equipment used:
A. Equipment: Includes the use of fuel, saws and hauling to landfill: (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 100/358
Per Hour
Brush clipper $ 50.00
Case wheel loader and operator 100.00
Dump truck and 2 people 100.00
High ranger aerial boom 100.00
B. Labor: Rate will be charged according to the equipment used.
C. Minimum Rate: Minimum rate for operators required whenever the aerial boom is used will be at the current hourly rate. A minimum crew consists of
three (3) people, two (2) operators and a driver. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015; amd. 2017 Code)
5-3-18: STATEMENT OF COSTS:
At such time as the City Forester has removed or abated any nuisance hereinbefore authorized, he shall prepare a certified statement of all costs and
expenses connected therewith and shall submit such statement or statements to the Finance Director to be billed to the property owner. If the statement is
left unpaid, it shall be submitted to the City Clerk along with the legal description prepared by the City Engineer of the property involved, and the City Clerk
shall thereupon certify such cost to the County Auditor and it shall then be collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes. (Ord. 15-07,
7-28-2015)
Chapter 4
STREAMS
5-4-1: OBSTRUCTING STREAMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without prior approval from the City, to: (Ord. 87-2, 2-2-1987; amd. 2017 Code)
A. Shovel, rake, throw or deposit in any manner any garbage, refuse, yard waste, dirt or any other material into any stream or creek, or upon the bank of
any river, stream or creek, and the above specific enumerations shall not in any way limit the general enumerations. (Ord. 93-17, 7-20-1993)
B. Change or attempt to change the course of any stream or creek.
C. Dig or dredge the banks of any stream or creek in the City or alter in any manner whatsoever the banks of any such streams or creeks. (Ord. 909, 3-18-
1963)
Title 6
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
Chapter 1
PUBLIC UTILITIES
6-1-1: EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS:
Water mains may be extended at the discretion of the City Engineer and said City Engineer may require that the cost of such extension be paid by owners
of property that would be served by such extension. All water mains or extensions thereof shall be installed by and under the direction of the City Engineer.
No water main or extension thereof shall be installed in any street or property until the same shall have been brought to grade; and, provided further, that
the property to be connected to said water main is accessible to sewer connections and sewer connections have been arranged for, subject to the City
Council's direction. (Ord. 1579, 10-6-1980; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-2: EXCAVATION AFFECTING WATER SYSTEM:
No excavation which may involve the uncovering of any part of any main, water pipe, fixture or appliance of the waterworks system of the City shall be
begun or made in any street, alley or public ground until the excavator shall have secured the permit from the Engineering Department, which permit shall
designate the place and limits of the proposed excavation. The City Engineer shall require that proper protection be made for all such mains, pipes,
fixtures and appliances. No excavation involving such mains, pipes, fixtures or appliances shall be refilled until inspection of the work shall have been
made by the City Engineer and his written permission obtained therefor. (1953 Code § 81-4; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-3: CONNECTIONS PRIOR TO STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 101/358
Whenever the Council has ordered any street permanently improved by paving, the Council shall thereupon notify the City Engineer of the passage of the
resolution of necessity and it shall thereupon be the duty of the City Engineer to report to the Council the lots and names of the owners thereof, and the
number and location of the required connections from any water mains or pipes to the curb line of the abutting and adjacent property. The City Engineer
shall notify, a minimum of six (6) weeks prior to commencement of work, the above mentioned property owners of the upcoming street improvements. The
property owner shall have the ability to install the services before the street improvements commence. (Ord. 97-6, 3-4-1997; amd. 2017 Code)
6-1-4: PERMIT REQUIRED AND FEES; WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
A. A permit for water service connections shall be obtained from the Engineering Department by a City licensed excavating contractor for the property to
be served, and such permit shall state the streets and house number where service is desired, the size of tap required and the approximate location
where such service will enter the premises. This permit shall be and constitute an acceptance by the applicant of all the provisions of this chapter and
all other ordinances now existing or hereafter passed having reference to the waterworks system, and all the rules and regulations of the City and the
Engineering Department relating to the waterworks system, and all such ordinances, rules and regulations shall be a part of the contract between the
City and such applicant. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
B. The permit and inspection fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each water service, new installation or repair, and thirty dollars ($30.00) for each water
service disconnection, payable at said time permit is issued; and the same shall be issued in duplicate, one (1) copy being given to the applicant and
one (1) filed with the Engineering Department. (2017 Code)
6-1-5: SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
All service connections with the City water main between the main and the meter shall be installed by a City licensed excavating contractor. All repairs
ordered by the Water Supply Department shall be charged to the property owner. All service lines from the corporation in the main to the meter are the
property of the owner and shall meet City specifications. All service lines must be installed and maintained at the expense of the property to be served.
(Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-6: EXTENSION OF EXISTING SERVICE:
No service line shall be extended nor shall additional connections thereto be made without special written permission of the City Engineer after full
investigation of the proposed changes or extension. (1953 Code § 15-9; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-7: ABANDONMENT OF SERVICE:
Whenever a service line is abandoned due to demolition of structure(s) and no use is made of the property within two (2) years, the corporation cock must
be closed at the main. The expense thereof shall be charged against the property. (1953 Code § 15-10; amd. 1985 Code)
6-1-8: SERVICE LINES SHALL RUN TO STREET:
Service lines shall not be installed across lots or buildings to adjoining premises, but all service lines must run to the property to be serviced directly from
the mains from an adjacent street or alley. (1953 Code § 15-11)
6-1-9: REPAIRS OF SERVICE LINES:
Whenever a service line becomes out of repair or develops a leak, it shall be the duty of the property owners to immediately authorize its repair or the
installation of a new service. Failure of the property owner to authorize any such work shall subject the property to the immediate discontinuance of
service. (1953 Code § 15-12)
6-1-10: CITY NOT LIABLE:
The City shall not be held responsible by reason of the breaking of or leakage from any service pipe or apparatus, main or water coil or meter, or on
account of the failure in the supply of water or the pressure thereof. In turning on water, the City shall not be responsible for any damage that may occur by
reason of improper fixtures, open or imperfect connections, or from any other cause. (1953 Code § 15-13)
6-1-11: RIGHT TO SHUT OFF WATER:
The City reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut off the water in its mains for the purpose of making repairs or extensions or for other
purposes; and no claim shall be made against the City by reason of breakage of any service pipe or service cock or from any other damage that may
result from shutting off water as herein provided. The Water Department shall give notice of shutting off of water whenever conditions are such that it is
practicable for them to so do. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-12: METERS FURNISHED; PROTECTION:
Water meters of a type and size approved by the Water Department will be furnished to property owners and installed by the Water Department at the cost
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 102/358
thereof in addition to a reasonable charge for the installation thereof. Title to water meters shall remain in the Water Department and maintenance, repair
and replacement of water meters so installed shall be at the cost of the Water Department except those instances in which the repair, maintenance or
replacement is occasioned by the negligence of the user or property owner, in which event such repair, maintenance or replacement shall be at the
expense of the user or property owner.
No person shall use water from City mains without a meter approved by and installed and recorded with the Water Department, except as otherwise herein
provided for fire protection purposes. No person shall in any way interfere with the proper and usual installation of a water meter. No person except an
authorized employee of the Water Department shall break a seal on a meter. In case of any injury resulting to a water meter or in the event it becomes
stopped or works improperly, it shall be the duty of the owner and/or occupant of the premises served to give immediate notice thereof to the Water
Department. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-13: LOCATION OF METERS:
All water meters shall be placed in a horizontal position and in such approved location as will make them readily accessible to authorized representatives
of the Water Department during all reasonable hours for the purpose of reading, testing, inspecting and adjustment. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-
27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-14: TESTING OF METERS:
The accuracy of any meter in service shall be tested by the Water Department upon the request of the owner and may be tested by the Water Department
at any time. In the event the owner shall request a testing of the water meter more often than once every twelve (12) months, the owner shall pay the cost
thereof. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-15: PAYMENT OF CHARGES:
A. Assessment Of Unpaid Charges: As all lines, improvements, meters and repairs are at the request of the property owner, any charges for same that
become delinquent when billed, as heretofore provided, shall be assessed against the property benefitted in the manner provided by and for special
assessments. (Ord. 1443, 6-19-1978; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990)
B. Collection Process: At least annually, the Finance Director shall prepare a delinquent list of persons failing to pay the charges for the installation of
service lines, improvements on said line, meters and repairs on same required by this chapter, listing the premises against which such charge was
made and the amount due therefrom. Resolutions shall thereupon be prepared assessing the delinquent charges to the property so benefitted. Such
resolutions, properly adopted by the City Council, shall be certified as provided by law in cases of special assessments for collection in the manner of
general taxes. (Ord. 1443, 6-19-1978; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-16: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
When requested by the owner or consumer, the Water Department will cause the water to be turned off, provided the curb cock is maintained in working
order and is accessible. Except in cases of emergency, the Water Department shall not cut off or cut on a water meter to any premises except at the curb
cock. The Water Department shall not be called upon to cut off service to property while occupied by a consumer whose account is not delinquent, except
in case of emergency. Should it become necessary to cut off the water at the corporation in the main, the expense thereof shall be charged against the
property. Water rents and charges for services will be made until notice of discontinuance of service is given to the Utility Billing Department and shall be
immediately due and payable. (1953 Code § 15-22; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
6-1-17: FIRE HYDRANTS:
No persons, except officers or employees of the City acting in the regular performance of their duties, shall open or in any manner tamper with any hydrant
belonging to the City. (1953 Code § 15-22)
6-1-18: PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANTS:
Private fire hydrants or standpipes may be installed under the direction and supervision of the City Engineer. All valves thereto shall be sealed closed.
Water therefrom may be used for fire purposes only, and when the seal has been broken for that purpose, notice of such breaking must be given
immediately to the Water Department. If any person shall break such a seal or use water from said hydrant for other than fire purposes, a charge of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) for use of water, as per signed agreement, shall be made. No charge will be made for water used for fire purposes. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-
1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
6-1-19: SPRINKLER SYSTEMS:
Sprinkler systems may be permitted to be attached to the water mains by direct connection without meters under the direction and supervision of the City
Engineer. No open connection can be incorporated in the system, and there shall be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance of the building
which must be sealed open. The owner of the property shall promptly report to the Water Department whenever said seal has been broken for the closing
of the system. A diagram of such sprinkler system must be filed with the City Engineer and free access to all parts of said system must be granted to the
Water Department. No charge shall be made for water used for fire purposes through a sprinkler system. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-
1990; Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
6-1-20: CLOSING OF VALVES:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 103/358
No plumber or any other person shall have the right to open or close any valve or corporation or curb cock attached to any water main or service on the
street side of the meter without the written permission of the City Engineer except in case of emergency, and in such case, an immediate report of such
action shall be made to the Engineering Department. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
6-1-21: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE:
Backflow prevention devices will be required for all underground lawn sprinkling systems. (Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990)
ARTICLE A. WATER RATES
6-1A-1: RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
A. General Rates: Effective with the July 1, 2019 billing date, water shall be furnished at the following monthly rate which shall include an administrative
charge of six dollars twenty eight cents ($6.28) per meter:
PER 100 CUBIC FEET
Cubic Feet Net Gross
First 1,000 4.035 4.483
Next 2,000 3.430 3.811
All over 3,000 2.320 2.578
B. Minimum Rates:
1. Normal Minimum Rates: Regardless of the quantity of water used, there shall be a minimum charge, dependent upon the meter size, of the following
amounts:
Meter Size
(Inches) Per Month
5/8 $ 16.33
3/4 26.45
1 46.63
11/2 98.08
2 219.45
3 451.05
4 1,400.61
6 2,824.95
8 3,334.47
10 4,353.51
12 5,604.15
The minimum monthly charge includes the administrative charge. (Ord. 19-5, 6-18-2019)
2. Special Rates: Industrial users may make an irrevocable application to the City Council for approval of the special rate hereunder, in which case the
user shall, for the first ten (10) years of usage, pay the special rate established herein in lieu of the minimum rates, regardless of quantity of water
used. Upon expiration of the ten (10) year term for said special rate, the general rates then in effect shall apply to said user. For purposes of this
subsection, the special rate shall be three thousand three hundred thirty three dollars ($3,333.00) per month.
3. Special Minimum Rate: Where, in the judgment of the Public Services Director, special conditions surround the sizing of the water meter to the
extent that the application of the minimum water rates provided for in subsection B1 of this section would be inadequate or unfair to either the City or
the customer, a special rate shall be established by the Administrative Services Director, subject to the approval of the City Council. Each such
special rate shall be contained in a written order or direction filed with the Clerk and open to public inspection. The Administrative Services Director is
authorized to make such rates in accordance with the following rule: Where the water meter is larger than the size of meter that would normally be
determined as sufficient for the customer's usage and the customer has not requested the oversized meter, the minimum rate shall be based on the
size of meter that would normally be sized by the Public Services Director for the customer's usage. (Ord. 18-5, 6-19-2018)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 104/358
C. Payment: All water bills which are paid in full on or before the fifteenth day after delivery or mailing thereof shall be eligible for a ten percent (10%)
discount and ten percent (10%) of the gross amount of said bill shall be subtracted therefrom. Any payment transmitted through the United States mail
postmarked on or before the fifteenth day shall be deemed paid within fifteen (15) days. If any water bill shall not be paid, or if transmitted through the
United States mail postmarked on or before the twenty fifth day following the date of delivery or mailing, the property served shall be subject to
immediate discontinuance of service. A hearing on disconnection must be requested in writing by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of the payment due date
as identified on the Disconnection Notice. At this hearing you must be prepared to provide or present any evidence or information that you may have
that would dispute the amounts owed as described in this notice or otherwise disputing this disconnection notice. The hearing will be with the Finance
Director, Assistant Finance Director or designee and between twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. of the payment due date on
Disconnection Notice. When water service shall have been discontinued for nonpayment, service shall not be reestablished until all indebtedness owed
by the owner has been paid, together with an additional charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) for cutting service off and on. (Ord. 19-3, 4-2-2019)
D. Deposits Required: Deposits shall be required, at the discretion of the Finance Director, of applicants for water service connections who have exhibited
a history of delinquency with the City Engineer. At the discretion of the Finance Director, customers who become delinquent shall be required, as a
condition of continued water service, to provide the City Engineer with a deposit. The amount of the deposit shall approximate two (2) months' total
utility bill. In the event of delinquency by the customer, the deposit shall be applied on the water bill with any remaining deposit applied on the amount
of sewer rental due, with any remaining deposit applied on the garbage collection charges due, with any remaining deposit applied on the landfill
charges due. (Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; amd. Ord. 92-24, 11-17-1992)
6-1A-2: ADJUSTMENTS TO BILL:
The bill will be adjusted by deducting the previous year's average monthly consumption and dividing the difference in water consumption equally between
the Public Services Department and the customer. (Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; amd. Ord. 92-24, 11-17-1992)
6-1A-3: PERIODS OF METER READINGS:
Customers' meters will be read each month. In the event meters are found stopped or inaccurately recorded, charges for such month shall be based on
the averages of the preceding quarters or months for which correct readings were obtained. All billings shall be made to the nearest one hundred (100)
cubic feet of water used. Water bills will be mailed or delivered on approximately the same day of the month for each billing period. Separate bills shall be
rendered for each meter in service. (Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990)
6-1A-4: METER REPLACEMENT FEE:
Water meters must be replaced occasionally which normally requires access to the water meter on private property. If a final notice is provided both via
posting of the notice on the property where the meter is located and certified letter to the address of the record title owner(s) of the property on record for
the property with the County Assessor's Office (regardless of signature for, or physical receipt of, such notice and/or certified letter), the unresponsive
property owner shall be charged a monthly service fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) in addition to the otherwise applicable monthly charges and fees for
water service. This service fee shall commence thirty (30) days following the date of posting or postmark of such notice, whichever is later, until the water
meter is replaced at the property in question. Additionally, the City may elect to have the water service disconnected until the water meter is allowed to be
replaced. Nothing in this section shall limit the City's ability to exercise any and all remedies allowed by law. (Ord. 18-14, 12-4-2018)
ARTICLE B. POTABLE WATER
6-1B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY FOR CONTAINMENT: A backflow prevention assembly which is approved by the University of
Southern California Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. The approval listing shall include the limitations of use based on
the degree of hazard. The backflow prevention assembly shall also be listed by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials
(IAPMO) as having met the requirements of ANSI/AWWA C510-97 double check valve backflow prevention assembly, or ANSI/AWWA C511-97 reduced
pressure principle (RPZ) backflow prevention assembly.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY FOR CONTAINMENT IN FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM: A backflow prevention assembly to be
used in a fire protection system which meets the requirements of Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) and Underwriters Laboratory (UL), in addition
to the requirements of an approved backflow prevention assembly for containment.
CONTAINMENT: A method of backflow prevention which requires a backflow prevention assembly on water services. Backflow prevention assemblies for
containment shall be installed as close to the public water supply main as is practical, typical installation shall be immediately following the water meter or
as close to that location as deemed practical by the City.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any connection or arrangement, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixtures or tank,
receptacle, equipment, or device, through which it may be possible for nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted, or contaminated water, or other substance, to
enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition, including, but not limited to, lawn or other landscaping irrigation systems, water
powered or water assisted sump pumps, yard hydrants, or other potentially hazardous water connections.
CUSTOMER: The owner of a building or property which has a water service from the public water system, or the owner or operator of a private water
system which has water service from the public water system.
DEGREE OF HAZARD: The rating of a cross connection or a water service which indicates if it has the potential to cause contamination (high hazard) or
pollution (low hazard).
REGISTERED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTER: A technician registered with the State of Iowa Department of Public Health as set forth
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 105/358
in Iowa Code chapter 135K, Backflow Prevention Assembly Testers and Iowa Administrative Code chapter 26, Backflow Prevention Assembly Testers
Registration. (Ord. 1650, 8-16-1982; amd. 2017 Code)
6-1B-2: REQUIRED CONNECTIONS:
The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public water supply system, is required, at the
owner's expense, to connect such facilities directly with the proper public water supply system within ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do
so; provided, that said public water supply system is within two hundred feet (200') of the property line. (Ord. 1650, 8-16-1982; amd. 2017 Code)
6-1B-3: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of the foregoing section shall not be required where such property, used for human occupancy, is serviced by a suitable water supply
system which is not contaminated, as defined above. (Ord. 1650, 8-16-1982)
6-1B-4: TESTING:
All tests to determine whether or not a water supply system is contaminated shall be performed by a laboratory approved by the Water Superintendent.
(Ord. 1650, 8-16-1982; amd. 2017 Code)
6-1B-5: REQUEST FOR EXEMPTION:
Within sixty (60) days after the installation of a public water supply system within two hundred feet (200') of the owner's property line, said owner must
apply for an exemption pursuant to the above provisions and have an approved laboratory test the owner's existing water supply for contamination. All
applications for exemption shall grant to the City the right of ingress and egress to said system for the purpose of inspection and testing. Additional tests at
the owner's expense may be required at the discretion of the Water Superintendent. Said application may be obtained from the City Engineer. (Ord. 1650,
8-16-1982; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
6-1B-6: RESTRICTING POTENTIAL SOURCES OF CONTAMINATION NEAR PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY WELLS:
No structure or facility of the following types shall be located within the distances set forth, from a public well located within the City of Mason City, Iowa:
Feet
A. Well house floor drains to ground surface, and: 5
1. Drain constructed of water main material encased in concrete 5 - 10
2. Drain constructed of water main material 10 - 25
3. Drain constructed of sewer pipe material 25 - 75
B. Well house floor drains to sewers; water plant waste drains; sanitary sewers; storm sewers; all drains; when:
1. Drain constructed of water main material 25 - 75
2. Drain constructed of sewer pipe material 75 - 200
C. Sewer force mains constructed of water main material 75 - 400
D. Sanitary and industrial discharges to ground surface 400
E. Land application of solid waste or wastewater 100
F. Concrete vaults or septic tanks 100
G. Mechanical wastewater treatment plants, cesspools, earth pit privies, soil absorption fields 200
H. Lagoons 400
I. Chemical application to ground surface and aboveground chemical storage 100
J. On or under ground chemical storage 200
K. Animal pasturage 50
L. Animal enclosure; land application of animal wastes storage tank 100
M. Animal wastes solids stockpile 200
N. Animal wastes liquid storage 400
O. Earthen silage storage 100
P. Basements, pits and sumps 10
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 106/358
Q. Flowing streams or other surface water and cisterns 50
R. Cemeteries 200
S. Private wells 200
T. Solid waste disposal sites 1,000
(Ord. 88-25, 11-7-1988)
6-1B-7: BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES FOR CONTAINMENT:
A. Under Public Law 99-339, the Safe Drinking Water Act amendments of 1986 and regulations of the State, the elimination of cross connections or the
installation and maintenance of a proper type of approved backflow prevention assembly, at the water service connection, is hereby required whenever
a potential hazard is determined to exist in the customer's system. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be required for all new construction or change
of use of an existing structure.
B. A water service determined to present a high hazard shall be protected by an air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly.
C. A water service determined to present a low hazard shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly, an air gap or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.
D. Dual water connections with a direct connection to the public water supply and other auxiliary supplies such as wells, ponds, rivers, industrial waters are
strictly prohibited. (Ord. 93-16, 8-13-1993; amd. 2017 Code)
6-1B-8: ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY:
A. The Administrative Authority for this article is the City Engineer or such persons the City Engineer shall designate.
B. The City Engineer shall require the submission of plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary for a building, property or private water
system to which a water service is proposed. The information submitted shall be reviewed to determine if cross connections will exist and the degree of
hazard. Each customer or their representative shall survey the activities and processes which receive water from the water service and shall report to
the City if cross connections exist and the degree of hazard.
C. The owner of a building, property or private water system shall install, or cause to be installed, an approved backflow prevention assembly for
containment as directed by the City before water service is initiated. All backflow assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the latest version of
the Uniform Plumbing Code.
D. The City shall have the right to access any property to inspect the plumbing of any building, property and private water system which has a water
service to determine if cross connections exist and the degree of hazard. Failure to grant access for inspection shall be cause for termination of water
service.
E. If the City determines that nonpotable water may potentially enter the public water supply, the customer shall be required to install the appropriate
backflow prevention assembly for containment. If a customer refuses to install a backflow prevention assembly for containment when it is required,
water service to the customer may be discontinued until an appropriate backflow prevention assembly is installed.
F. The City Engineer shall institute a Backflow Prevention Assembly for Containment Program and maintain all pertinent records of cross connection
surveys, installations, testing records, or other required records. (2017 Code)
6-1B-9: CUSTOMER REQUIREMENTS:
A. The customer shall be responsible for ensuring that no cross connections exist without an approved backflow prevention assembly.
B. The customer, at their own expense, shall cause installation, operation, maintenance and testing of the backflow prevention assemblies required by this
section. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed by a State of Iowa licensed plumbing contractor. A registered backflow prevention assembly
tester shall test the backflow prevention assembly at initial installation and annually thereafter. Backflow prevention assemblies installed on irrigation
systems shall be tested annually by May 1.
C. Following any repair, overhaul, repiping or relocation of an assembly, the customer shall have the backflow prevention assembly tested to ensure that it
is in good operating condition. Maintenance and repairs of backflow prevention assemblies shall be made by licensed plumbers and tests shall be
conducted by a registered backflow prevention assembly tester.
D. The customer shall maintain accurate records of tests and repairs made to backflow prevention assemblies and provide copies of such records to the
City Engineering Department. The records shall be on forms approved by the City Engineer and shall include the list of materials or replacement parts
used.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 107/358
E. The customer shall immediately notify the City Engineer and Water Superintendent when the customer becomes aware that backflow has occurred in
the building, property or private water system receiving water service, and take measures to confine the contamination or pollution by turning off valves
to isolate the area of the incident. The City may order a water service be temporarily shut off when a backflow occurs in a customer's building, property
or private water system.
F. Backflow prevention assemblies for fire protection systems must be tested annually on a routine scheduled basis by a registered backflow prevention
assembly tester. The City Engineering Department shall be copied with test results. (2017 Code)
6-1B-10: BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTING:
A. Backflow prevention assemblies which are in place, but have not been used for more than three (3) months, shall be tested prior to being placed back
into service.
B. Any backflow prevention assembly that fails a test and is repaired or replaced must successfully pass the test prior to being placed into operation.
C. The City may require more frequent testing of backflow prevention assemblies.
D. The City may conduct, at its own cost, additional testing of a backflow prevention assembly to verify test procedures and results.
E. To suspend the testing requirements for an irrigation system or other system taken out of service, the customer shall have a State of Iowa licensed
plumbing contractor disconnect all piping and remove the backflow prevention assembly. When the system is to be placed back into service, the
backflow prevention assembly must be reinstalled by a State of Iowa licensed plumbing contractor and tested by a registered backflow prevention
assembly tester. The customer must contact the Chief Building Official for an appointment to have the disconnection and reconnection inspected. (2017
Code)
6-1B-11: TERMINATION FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
Water service may be terminated in the case of noncompliance with, but not limited to, the following:
A. Refusal to allow City access to the property to inspect for cross connection at reasonably scheduled times.
B. Unauthorized removal or bypassing of a backflow prevention device required by the City.
C. Providing inadequate backflow prevention when a cross connection exists.
D. Failure to install an approved backflow prevention assembly when required by the City.
E. Failure to test a backflow prevention assembly as required by the City and/or submit the required test report within fifteen (15) days of the test.
F. Failure to comply with any other provisions of this article or reasonable requests. (2017 Code)
ARTICLE C. PRIVATE WELLS
6-1C-1: SCOPE:
The provisions of this article shall apply to all private water wells, including, but not limited to, new construction and modification of existing wells located or
to be constructed within the City limits of Mason City, Iowa, as defined in section 1-5-1 of this Code. (Ord. 09-06, 6-2-2009)
6-1C-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. No person shall construct a private well within the area described in section 6-1C-1 of this article in the City of Mason City after the effective date of this
provision, unless a permit has been issued for the well by the Mason City Engineering Department. This permit shall be in addition to any permits
required by the State or County. This requirement shall not apply to monitoring wells used for soil and groundwater investigation.
B. The applicant shall be required to have an environmental assessment completed to determine if there are known sources of contamination within five
hundred feet (500') of the proposed site.
C. The permit applicant shall also provide to the Engineering Department any further study/testing required to further address any problems identified in
the assessment described in subsection B of this section concerning the soil and groundwater contamination in the particularly described application
site. (Ord. 03-6, 4-1-2003)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 108/358
6-1C-3: PERMIT PROCESS:
A. Any person desiring a well permit shall make application to the Mason City Engineering Department on the form prescribed. The Mason City
Engineering Department shall determine the necessary information, data and testing required for the issuance of the permit.
B. In determining whether to issue a permit or not, the Mason City Engineering Department shall consider the availability of public water to serve the real
property, building or facility, the estimated amount of water to be consumed, possible contamination of the water, and the purpose for which the water
will be used.
C. If the property, building or facility to be served is located within two hundred feet (200') of public water, the Mason City Engineering Department shall
automatically deny the permit and the applicant shall be required to use the public water system.
D. If the Mason City Engineering Department determines that the water is in an area of contamination or is otherwise unfit, the permit may be denied or
limitations may be made as to the use of the water from said private well as necessary to protect life and property. In determining what the actual area
of contamination is, the Mason City Engineering Department shall consider current levels and areas of contamination, as well as where the
contamination might reasonably be expected to expand to in the foreseeable future.
E. The application shall not be deemed complete until all information, data and testing results required by the Mason City Engineering Department have
been submitted for consideration along with a fifty dollar ($50.00) application fee. (Ord. 03-6, 4-1-2003)
ARTICLE D. SOUTH WATER LINE DISTRICT
6-1D-1: SCOPE:
The purpose of this article is to establish the south water line connection fee district in the City of Mason City, Iowa, and the imposition of a fee for
connection to the City of Mason City water district upon property owners in said area who desire to connect to the City of Mason City water district. (Ord.
05-28, 10-18-2005)
6-1D-2: DEFINITIONS:
BENEFITTED SERVICE AREA AND CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT: The area within the City limits of Mason City, Iowa, described as the south water line
connection fee district consists of property located within and described as follows:
That part of Sections 16, 17, 20, 21, 28, and 29, all in Township 96 North, Range 20 West of the 5th P.M., Cerro Gordo County, Iowa, described as
follows: Beginning at the Northeast Corner of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 21; thence Southerly along the Easterly line of said Southeast
Quarter to the Southeast Corner of said Southeast Quarter, said point also being the Northeast Corner of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 28;
thence Southerly along the Easterly line of said Northeast Quarter to a point perpendicular with said Easterly line and a point on the Northerly right of
way line of U.S. Highway No. 18, said point also designated as Side Road Station 2259+40.000, 64.000 meters left of centerline Side Road U.S.
Highway 65 as shown on Exhibit A attached to Warranty Deed filed February 29, 1996 in Book 96 Page 1413 in the Office of the Cerro Gordo County
Recorder; thence Southwesterly, 589.52 feet along said Northerly right of way line; thence Southwesterly, 598.43 feet along said Northerly right of
way line to a point on the Southerly line of said Northeast Quarter; thence Westerly along said Northerly right of way line and along said Southerly
line to the Southwest Corner of said Northeast Quarter, said point also being the Southeast Corner of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 28;
thence Westerly along the Southerly line of said Northwest Quarter and along said Northerly right of way line to the Southwest Corner of said
Northwest Quarter, said point also being the Southeast Corner of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 29; thence Westerly along the Southerly line
of said Northeast Quarter and along said Northerly right of way line to the most Easterly point of that tract of land described in Warranty Deed and
shown in Acquisition Plat 2 of 2, both filed February 29, 1996 in Book 96 Page 1412 in the Office of the Cerro Gordo County Recorder; thence
Northwesterly, 999.32 feet along said Northerly right of way line; thence Northwesterly, 1020.66 feet along said Northerly right of way line; thence
Northwesterly, 525.68 feet along said Northerly right of way line to a point on the Easterly right of way line of the Union Pacific Railroad; thence
Northerly along said Easterly right of way line to the Southwest Corner of Lot 1, Golden Grain Energy First Subdivision, Cerro Gordo County, Iowa;
thence Easterly along the Southerly line of said Lot 1 to the Southeast Corner of said Lot 1, said point also being the Southwest Corner of Lot 2, said
Golden Grain Energy First Subdivision; thence Northerly along the Westerly line of said Lot 2 to the Northwest Corner of said Lot 2; thence Easterly
along the Northerly line of said Lot 2 to the Northeast Corner of said Lot 2; thence Northerly along the Easterly line of said Lot 1 to the Northeast
Corner of said Lot 1; thence Westerly along the Northerly line of said Lot 1 to a point on said Easterly right of way line of the Union Pacific Railroad;
thence Northerly and Northeasterly along said Easterly right of way line to the most Northerly Corner of that tract of land described in Warranty Deed
filed December 29, 2003 in Document No. 2003-16329 in the Office of the Cerro Gordo County Recorder; thence Southerly along the Easterly line of
said tract of land; thence Easterly along the Northerly line of said tract of land to a point on the Easterly line of the Southeast Quarter of said Section
17; thence Northerly along said Easterly line to the Southeasterly right of way line of the Union Pacific Railroad; thence Northeasterly along said
Southeasterly right of way line to a point on the Northerly line of South 510 feet of the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of said Section
16; thence Easterly along said Northerly line to a point on the Easterly line of said Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter; thence Southerly
along said Easterly line and along the Easterly line of the Southwest Quarter of said Southwest Quarter to the Northwest Corner of the Northeast
Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 21; thence Easterly along the Northerly line of said Northwest Quarter to a point 100 feet Westerly,
measured at a right angle, from the Easterly line of said Northwest Quarter; thence Southerly along a line parallel with said Easterly line to a point
100 feet Southerly, measured at a right angle, from the Southerly line of Midland Heights First Addition, Mason City, Iowa; thence Easterly along a
line parallel with said Southerly line to a point on the Easterly line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 21; thence Southerly along said Easterly
line to the Point of Beginning; containing 1320 acres more or less.
CONNECTION: Any act that results, directly or indirectly, in receiving water service from the City water utility.
CONNECTION FEE: The sums specified below per acre of property within the connection fee district served by the connection.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 109/358
A. Connection fee is two hundred thirty seven dollars ($237.00) per acre from August 2, 2005 and thereafter.
B. The connection fee shall be paid prior to connection to the Mason City water utility and upon application for connection to the Mason City water
utility. (Ord. 05-28, 10-18-2005)
6-1D-3: PAYMENT AND CONNECTION:
A. Connection to the Mason City water utility shall not be permitted until the connection fee specified above is paid in full.
B. Prior to connection, a property owner shall file an application, on a form provided by the City, with the City Engineer. Upon approval of the application,
the City Engineer shall advise the applicant of the connection fee to be paid. Upon payment of the connection fee and accrued interest, if any, to the
City Treasurer, or upon entry into an agreement to pay said fee in installments if so allowed by separate action of the City Council of the City of Mason
City, Iowa, the City shall issue a connection permit. Upon completion of the connection, the property owner shall notify the City Engineer, and the City
Engineer or the City Engineer's designee shall, at his or her discretion, inspect the connection. Connections found to be faulty shall be corrected by the
property owner immediately.
C. Connection fees collected by the City Treasurer shall be used only for the purposes of operating the Mason City water utility, or to pay debt service on
obligations issued to finance improvements or extensions of the utility.
D. The water connection fees established by this article are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fees for connection required under the Plumbing
Code, other provisions of this Code, or City policy. The property owner paying a connection fee will be responsible for the full cost of providing any
necessary water line extensions or service lines from the private property improvements or buildings to the water main being constructed as part of the
project.
E. In the event a connection is made to the City of Mason City water utility serving Mason City south water line connection fee district without the permit
required by this article, or without payment of the connection fee set forth in this article, or if any installment payment of such fee as provided by
subsequent ordinance of the City Council is not made, the City may, pursuant to the provisions of section 384.84, Code of Iowa:
1. Give ten (10) days' notice of the intention to disconnect such service from the City of Mason City water utility until such time as the property owner
has received a permit for the connection and paid the required connection fee; upon failure to show cause why disconnection should not be
accomplished by the City, the City may proceed with disconnection in the manner provided by law. Any environmental pollution or damage caused by
unpermitted connection, disconnection, and permitted reconnection, shall be the exclusive responsibility of the property owner.
2. Pursuant to the provisions of said section 384.84, the City may declare the connection fee specified above, plus interest, due and payable, and in
default, and may certify said amount to the County Treasurer as immediately due and payable, whereupon the County Treasurer shall certify said
amount as a lien upon the property in accordance with section 384.84. Upon satisfaction of the lien, the property owner shall be entitled to
connection, all costs of which shall again be borne entirely by the property owner.
3. In addition, the City may pursue any other remedy allowed by law. (Ord. 05-28, 10-18-2005)
Chapter 2
SANITARY SEWERS
6-2-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Intent: This chapter is to implement provisions of the Act, the General Pretreatment Regulations and the Iowa Administrative Code, chapter 567,
sections 62.4 and 62.8. This chapter is to be construed and applied in accordance with the Clean Water Act amendments, the General Pretreatment
Regulations, the Iowa Administrative Code and the purpose and policy provisions set forth in subsection B of this section.
B. Purpose And Policy: This chapter regulates the use of sewers, private disposal, the installation and connection of building sewers and the discharge of
water and waste into the sewers and drains of the City sewage system, and the City's publicly owned treatment works (POTW). This chapter sets forth
uniform requirements for dischargers into the collection and treatment systems for Mason City and enables the City to comply with all applicable State
and Federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR part 403). The objectives
of this chapter are:
1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that may interfere with the operation of the system or interfere with sludge management and
disposal;
2. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that may pass through the system inadequately treated and ultimately into receiving water,
the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
3. To ensure that the quality of the treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable
statutes and regulations;
4. To protect workers' safety and health and to protect against damage to the POTW;
5. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim sludge from the POTW;
6. To provide for equitable distribution of treatment and industrial pretreatment costs resulting from pollutants introduced into the POTW;
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 110/358
7. To enable the City to comply with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other Federal or State laws to which
the POTW is subject.
C. Administration: Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be delegated by the Superintendent to other City personnel.
D. Interpretation: This chapter shall be construed and interpreted to conform with 40 CFR chapter I and it is the intent of this chapter that it comply with
said Federal regulations. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT OR THE ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251, et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The Iowa Department of Natural Resources/EPA.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER: An authorized representative of an industrial user may be:
A. A principal executive officer of at least the level of Vice President, if the industrial user is a corporation;
B. A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
C. A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from
which the indirect discharge originates.
BASELINE MONITORING REPORT: The report required by 40 CFR part 403.12(b)(1-7) and by POTW.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called "house connection".
CATEGORICAL USER: A. The industrial activity performed at the facility is regulated by one (1) or more of the Federal regulations found in title 40 CFR.
B. The facility discharges process wastewater to a POTW.
C. In the EPA Pretreatment Categories and Standards, the categorical activity is assigned pretreatment limitations, reporting requirements or both.
COLOR: The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance is
equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and stormwater or surface water.
COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA: The formula as found in 40 CFR part 403.6(e).
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: A sample resulting from the combination of individual samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or
time.
CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT: BOD, COD, O&G, suspended solids, pH, ammonia nitrogen, total.
DISCHARGE OR INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The introduction of treated or untreated wastewater into the POTW.
DOMESTIC USER: All users discharging only domestic sewage from premises consisting of any building or parts of buildings designed for or occupied by
one (1) or more persons as a single housekeeping unit, including such units within multi-family dwellings, flats and apartment buildings.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The United States Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be
used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE: Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease, in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated, and the water system does not interfere with the collection system.
GARBAGE: Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one time basis without regard to flow in the waste stream and without consideration of
time.
HEADWORKS: The main wet well at the POTW treatment plant prior to any treatment process.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 111/358
INDUSTRIAL USER: A discharge into the POTW from any source other than a domestic user. See definition of categorical user or significant industrial
user.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any liquid, gaseous, radioactive, or solid waste substance resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business
or from the development of any natural resource.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with the discharge or discharges from other sources:
A. Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
B. Causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or prevents
sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any Federal, State or local regulations or permits.
LIMIT: The maximum allowable discharge of a given pollutant as in the following definitions:
Daily Maximum Limit: The maximum allowable discharge of pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units
of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that
day.
Monthly Average Limit: The maximum allowable value for the average of all measurements of a pollutant obtained during one (1) calendar month.
MAY: Permissive or discretionary.
MEDICAL WASTE: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood by-products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiological
agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA under section 307(b)
and (c) of the Clean Water Act applicable to industrial users and includes prohibitive discharge limits (40 CFR chapter 1, subpart N, parts 401-471)
established pursuant to 40 CFR 401.5.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR NPDES PERMIT: A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Clean Water Act (33
USC 1342).
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body or surface or
ground water.
NEW SOURCE: Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants to navigable water, the construction
of which commenced after the promulgation of standards of performance under section 306 of the Act which are applicable to such source, provided that:
A. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; the building, structure, facility or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or the production or generating
processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether
these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.
B. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification, rather than a new source, if the construction does not create a
new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection A of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing
process or production equipment.
C. Construction of a "new source", as defined herein, has commenced if the owner or operator has:
1. Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program, any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment;
or significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the
placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
2. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in the operation of the new
source within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.
NONCONVENTIONAL POLLUTANTS: All pollutants which are not included in the definition of "conventional pollutants".
PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City of Mason City's NPDES permit (including an increase
in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or
any other legal entity, or their representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State or local governmental entities.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 112/358
pH: The hydrogen ion activity of a solution expressed as a logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion activity in moles per liter at twenty five degrees
centigrade (25°C). pH is a measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of the solution. The range extends from 0 - 14; 0 - 7 being acidic, 7 - 14 being
alkaline.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical waste, chemical wastes, industrial
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes and
the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, odor).
POLLUTION: The alteration of chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water as a result of human activity or enterprise.
PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained
by physical, chemical or biological processes or process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR section 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to the industrial users. "Pretreatment Standard" includes prohibitive discharge
limits established pursuant to 40 CFR.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in section 6-2-9 of this chapter.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded such that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 USC 1292) which is owned in this
instance by the City of Mason City. This definition includes any sewers that convey to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or
other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey
wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the City who are, by permit with the City, users of the City's POTW.
SANITARY SEWER: A drain or sewer that carries liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface water that are not admitted intentionally.
SEWAGE: The water carried waste products from residences, public buildings, institutions or other buildings, including the bodily discharges from human
beings or animals together with such groundwater infiltration and surface water as may be present.
SHALL: Mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: A. An industrial user of the City's wastewater disposal system that meets any of the following conditions:
1. Has a discharge flow of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blow down wastewater;
2. Contributes a process wastestream five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW;
3. Is subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; or
4. Is designated by the City of Mason City as a significant industrial user on the basis that the contributing industry, either singly or in combination
with other contributing industries, has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the operation of or effluent quality from the POTW or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirements.
B. Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection A1 or A2 of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the operation of the POTW or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City POTW may, at any time on its own initiative or in
response to a request received from an industrial user or POTW, determine that an industrial user is not a significant industrial user.
SLUDGE: The solids separated from the liquids during the wastewater treatment process.
SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which, when measured by either a grab or a composite, exceeds, for any period of duration longer than
fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flow limit found in a user's most recent wastewater
discharge permit.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE: A classification pursuant to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" issued by the U.S.
Office of Management and Budget.
STORM DRAIN (Sometimes Termed STORM SEWER): A drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any
source.
STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting therefrom, including snowmelt.
SUPERINTENDENT: The person designated by the City of Mason City to manage and supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with
certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or a duly authorized representative.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 113/358
T: When used as a portion of a chemical name, shall designate "total" such as in "Cyanide-T" where "T" means total cyanide.
TKN: The total Kjeldahl nitrogen concentration expressed in mg/l as determined using EPA approved methods.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): The portion of total solids retained by a filter using EPA approved methods.
TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS: The summation of all quantified values greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter for the toxic organics as specified in the
applicable regulation.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed in 40 CFR part 403 appendix B.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
USER: See definition of industrial user.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
dispose of the effluent.
WATER RECLAMATION FACILITY: An arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used
synonymously with "sewage treatment plant", "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant".
WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently.
The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use. (Ord. 94-14,
7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-3: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
COD - Chemical oxygen demand
EPA - United States Environmental Protection Agency
gpd - Gallons per day
IDNR - Iowa Department of Natural Resources
l - Liter
mg - Milligrams
mg/L - Milligrams per liter
NCPS - National Categorical Pretreatment Standard
NPDES - National pollution discharge elimination system
O&M - Operation and maintenance
POTW - Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC - Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901, et seq.)
TSS - Total suspended solids
USC - United States Code
(Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-4: SANITARY DISTRICT:
The City shall comprise one sanitary district for the collection and disposal of garbage, sewage and other waste matter. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-5: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 114/358
A. Unlawful Deposits: It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste.
B. Unlawful Discharge: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City and/or to the
POTW, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
chapter.
C. Privies, Vaults, Etc., Prohibited; Connection Required:
1. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for
the disposal of wastewater. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
2. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of
the City are hereby required, at their own expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that said public
sewer is within two hundred feet (200') of the property line. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-6: PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL:
A. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is available under the provisions of section 6-2-5 of this chapter, the building sewer shall not be connected
to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a permit from the Engineering
Department. Said applicant shall supplement any plans, specifications and other information as is deemed necessary by the City Engineer. A permit
and inspection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed.
C. A permit for use of a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer. The Engineering Department shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of the construction and, in any event, the applicant for the
permit shall notify the Engineering Department when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The
inspection shall be made within twenty four (24) hours of the receipt of notice by the Engineering Department exclusive of weekends and holidays.
D. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the
area of the lot is less than one square acre. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
E. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in section 6-2-5 of this
chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within ninety (90) days in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools
and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with a suitable material.
F. The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
G. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer. (Ord.
18-2, 4-17-2018)
6-2-7: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the City Engineer.
B. There shall be the following classes of building sewer permits:
1. For residential and commercial service; and
2. For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, a City licensed excavating contractor shall obtain a permit furnished by the
Engineering Department. The permit request shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the City Engineer. A permit and inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential, seventy five dollars ($75.00) for commercial and
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for industrial property and thirty dollars ($30.00) for each sanitary sewer disconnection payable at time said permit
is issued; and the same shall be issued in duplicate, one copy being given to the applicant and one filed in the Engineering Department.
C. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection or repair of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly, or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. Work shall be done
only by a contractor licensed under the provisions of title 3, chapter 13 of this Code.
D. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior
lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. The front building
may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the City does not and will not assume any obligation or
responsibility for damage caused by, or resulting from, any such single connection aforementioned.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 115/358
E. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the City Engineer, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
F. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the Mason City Standard Specifications or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. In the
absence of Code provisions, or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF
"Manual of Practice No. 9" shall apply.
G. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged
to the building sewer.
H. No person(s) shall make connections of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly, or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the
City Engineer for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
I. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable
rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF "Manual of Practice No. 9". All
such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved by the City Engineer before installation.
J. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Engineering Department when the building sewer is ready for inspection. The connection
shall be approved by the City Engineer or a duly authorized representative, prior to backfilling.
K. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. (Ord. 18-2, 4-
17-2018)
6-2-8: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
A. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
noncontact or unpolluted water to any sewer, except stormwater runoff from limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times, may be
discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the City Engineer. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
However, this section shall not apply to any single-family residence located more than four hundred fifty feet (450') from the nearest sanitary sewer line
and which otherwise meets all requirements of this chapter and State law for installation, maintenance, repair and replacement of private wastewater
disposal systems. (Ord. 95-21, 10-17-1995)
B. Stormwater, other than that exempted under subsection 6-2-7H of this chapter, and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as
are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the City Engineer and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial
cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the City Engineer, and other regulatory agencies, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
(Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-9: GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS:
No industrial user shall introduce, or cause to be introduced into the POTW, any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through or interference. These
general prohibitions apply to all industrial users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national,
State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. Furthermore, no industrial user may contribute the following substances to the POTW:
A. Fire Or Explosion Hazard: Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the Municipal wastewater collection system and POTW, including, but
not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
B. Corrosive Properties: Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or higher than 9.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works.
C. Solid Or Viscous Substances: Solids or viscous substances in quantities, or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the sewers, or
other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and flesh, entrails, asphalt residues from refining
or processing of fuel or lubricating oil and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders, or other substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F)
(65°C).
D. Pollutants: Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference or pass-through at the Mason City POTW or which constitutes a "slug" load as defined in this chapter.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 116/358
E. Temperature: Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) upon entering the collection system, or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case shall wastewater which causes temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F).
F. Petroleum Products: Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil in origin, in amounts that will cause interference or passthrough.
G. Toxic Substances: Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
H. Imported Material: Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the City. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
I. Discharge Limits: Discharge of wastewater from underground storage tank site cleanups or any wastewater containing petroleum products shall not
exceed the following limits prior to discharge to the POTW:
Benzene 0.050 mg/L
BETX 0.750 mg/L
(Ord. 97-3, 1-21-1997; amd. 2017 Code)
J. Ground Garbage: Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see definition of "properly shredded garbage" in section 6-2-2 of this chapter).
Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar
places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.
K. Heavy Metals: Any waters or wastes containing iron, arsenic, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, nickel, mercury, and zinc, and similar objectionable or
toxic substances in concentration or at flow rates that would cause interference. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
L. Odoriferous Substances: Any waters or wastes containing odor producing substances exceeding limits or causing public nuisance which may be
addressed by the Wastewater Superintendent and other regulatory agencies. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
M. Deleterious Substances: Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases,
form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues), or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate), which exceed or create a condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
N. Dyes: Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent thereby violating the City's NPDES permit. Color (in combination
with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten
percent (10%) from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life.
O. Radioactive Wastes: Any radioactive wastes unless they comply with the Atomic Energy Commission Act of 1954 (68 stat. 919 as amended and part
20, subpart D - Waste Disposal, section 20.303 of the regulations issued by the Atomic Energy Commission, or amendments thereto).
P. Runoff: Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent.
Q. Residues: Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes.
R. Toxicity Test: Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.
S. Foaming Substances: Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
(Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
T. Animal Fats: Any discharge of fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin is limited to two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l), or categorical
standards if more stringent. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
U. Pretreatment Requirements: Any waters which do not meet the applicable requirements or National Pretreatment Standards (40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(ii)).
V. Discharge: Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. All floor
drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW.
(Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 117/358
W. Local Limits:
1. Headworks Limits; Average Mass: The average composite loading of all industrial users contributing the following specific pollutants to the POTW
shall not exceed the allowable total pounds. The Superintendent will distribute the allowable industrial load through permits to significant industrial
users.
TABLE A
Pollutant
Total Of All Sources
(30 Day Average
Allowable In
Pounds/Day)
Industrial
(30 Day Average
Allowable In
Pounds/Day)
BOD 28,235 20,638
TSS 33,814 24,817
NH3 3,348 2,457
TABLE B
Pollutant
Maximum Allowable
Headworks Loading
Pounds/Day
Maximum Allowable
Industrial Loading
Pounds/Day
Total Industrial
Arsenic-T 0.365 0.337
Cadmium-T 0.278 0.271
Chromium-T 6.020 5.913
Chromium VI 6.020 4.392
Copper-T 10.958 8.895
Cyanide-T 2.066 2.027
Lead-T 0.918 0.764
Mercury-T 0.208 0.201
Molybdenum-T 0.329 0.216
Nickel-T 2.192 2.007
Selenium-T 0.438 0.383
Silver-T 0.054 0.040
Zinc-T 20.805 18.175
2. Discharge Concentration Or Mass Limits And Review Criteria:
a. Concentration Or Limits: Discharge concentration or mass limits and review criteria shall be as follows:
(1) The discharge into the POTW of any materials, water or wastewater having a pollutant level greater than the limits in tables A, B, C or D of this
subsection W or containing pollutants not listed in this subsection W shall be subject to the review and approval of the POTW Superintendent.
(2) After review of the proposed discharges, the Superintendent may:
(A) Reject the water or wastewater.
(B) Require pretreatment to an acceptable pollutant level for discharge to the POTW.
(C) Require control of the quantities and rates of discharge of the water or wastewater.
(D) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treatment of water or wastewater or any combination thereof.
(E) Reduce the maximum or average mass loading of present and prospective industrial users on any reasonable prorated basis to meet
headworks loading limits at the WRF.
(F) Require the user to obtain a wastewater discharge permit and be subject to any of the rules and regulations contained therein.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 118/358
(G) Require the user to meet local limits when local limits are more restrictive than National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
(H) Initiate enforcement action in response to any noncompliance with this article using the enforcement procedures outlined in sections 6-2-40
through 6-2-42 of this chapter.
b. Wastewater With Pollutant Concentrations: Users discharging wastewater with pollutant concentrations that are greater than the following shall be
considered industrial users for purposes of sewer charges and may be regulated or permitted by the POTW Superintendent as appropriate:
TABLE C
Pollutant
Daily Maximum
(mg/l)
BOD 300
TSS 250
Oil and grease-T 200
TKN 30
NH3-N 15
Having an unusual concentration of flow constituting a slug load
c. Pollutant Limits: New industrial users shall contact the POTW if any of the following limits are exceeded to assess if a permit is required:
TABLE D
Pollutant
Monthly Limit
(mg/l)
Arsenic-T 0.04
Cadmium-T 0.26
Chromium-T 1.71
Chromium VI 1.28
Copper-T 2.07
Cyanide-T 0.65
Lead-T 0.43
Mercury-T 0.003
Molybdenum-T 0.025
Nickel-T 2.38
Selenium-T 0.045
Silver-T 0.24
Zinc-T 1.48
(Ord. 97-3, 1-21-1997; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-10: FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 401-471 are hereby incorporated. If categorical industry
imposes limits, the most stringent limit will apply. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-11: IOWA DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES REQUIREMENTS:
IDNR requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than USEPA or City requirements and limitations
unless allowed by the IDNR. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-12: CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION:
The City reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW than those contained in this chapter if
deemed necessary to comply with the purpose and policy objectives presented in subsection 6-2-1B of this chapter. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 119/358
6-2-13: SPECIAL AGREEMENT:
A. The City reserves the right to enter into special agreements with industrial users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the
POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. However, the industrial user may request a
net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment
standard from EPA. Such a request will be approved only if the industrial user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different
from the factors considered by EPA when establishing that pretreatment standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor
variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provision in 40 CFR 403.13. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
B. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in section 6-2-9 of this chapter, and which may have deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment
or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, refer to subsection 6-2-9W2 of this chapter for guidance.
C. If the Wastewater Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Wastewater Superintendent.
D. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Wastewater Superintendent and other regulatory agencies, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in section 6-2-9 of this chapter, or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent and other regulatory agencies, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintenance of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by
the Superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner(s), personnel must be performed by currently licensed
waste disposal firms.
E. Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner(s) at his expense.
F. When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property, serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes, shall install a suitable structure
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all
times. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-14: PROHIBITION OF DILUTION:
No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The
Superintendent may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in
other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-15: PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER:
A. Industrial Pretreatment Facilities: Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment, as required, to comply with this chapter and shall achieve
compliance with all Federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the Federal pretreatment regulations. Any
facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed
plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City for review, and shall be approved by the City before
construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operation procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the City under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment
facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the City prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
B. Tenant Responsibility: If an owner of property leases premises to any other person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, and either the
owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-
1994)
6-2-16: VANDALISM:
No person shall maliciously, wilfully or diligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or
equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in sections 6-2-39 to 6-2-
43 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-17: WASTEWATER SURVEYS:
A. Industrial Wastewater Survey: The Federal regulations (40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(i)) require control authorities to identify and locate all IUs that might be
subject to the pretreatment program. Control authorities must ensure that the entire service area is reviewed. The IWS questionnaire requests
information regarding IU activities and the nature of wastes discharged. Key to the IWS is to identify facilities that are subject to categorical standards
(i.e., CIUs) or otherwise have the potential to impact the POTW (i.e., SIUs). If requested by control authority, industrial or businesses using City sewers
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 120/358
must submit information on the nature and characteristics of wastewater by completing a survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable
grounds for terminating service and shall be considered a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-18: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS:
A. Wastewater Discharge Permit Required:
1. It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to discharge wastewater into the City's POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge
permit from the Superintendent. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 6-2-39 through 6-2-43 of this chapter. Obtaining a
wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State pretreatment standards or
requirements or with any other requirements of Federal, State and local law.
2. The Superintendent may require other industrial users, including liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
B. Wastewater Discharge Permitting New Connections: Any significant industrial user proposing to begin, or recommence, discharging industrial waste
into the POTW must obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to the beginning, or recommencing, of such discharge. An application for this
wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin. (Ord. 94-14, 7-
5-1994)
6-2-19: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION; BASELINE MONITORING REPORT:
Users applying for a wastewater discharge permit or submitting a baseline monitoring report shall submit the following information as required by 40 CFR
403.12 or by the POTW Superintendent:
A. Users applying for a wastewater discharge permit must submit an application on a form prescribed by the City and accompanied by the application fee.
All new significant users must submit such application one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the date of any wastewater discharge. Existing users
subject to new National Categorical Pretreatment Standards must, within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of the standard, submit
such an application. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become industrial users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the City a report which contains the information
listed below in this subsection. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged. The following information is
required:
1. Identifying Information: The user shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners. The name of the
person or agent authorized to accept legal service of process.
2. Permits: The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
3. Description Of Operations: The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production and Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC) of the operations carried out by such industrial user or applicable North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) Codes. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
4. Flow And Pollutant Measurement: Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any
Federal, State or local standards with sampling and analysis performed in accordance with Environmental Protection Agency approved methods, and
meeting the following requirements:
a. The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
b. All samples shall be representative of daily operations. See subsections 6-2-32H and I of this chapter for sample collection and analytical
requirements.
c. A minimum of four (4) grab samples, if required, must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics. For all
other pollutants, twenty four (24) hour composite samples must be obtained through flow proportional composite sampling techniques where
feasible. The Superintendent may waive flow proportional composite sampling for any user that demonstrates that flow proportional sampling is not
feasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time proportional techniques or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the
user demonstrates that such sampling will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
d. Samples must be taken immediately downstream from the pretreatment facilities, if such exists, or immediately downstream from the regulated
process if no pretreatment exists and prior to mixing with other waste. If nonregulated wastewater is mixed with regulated wastewater prior to
pretreatment, the user must measure the flows and concentration necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR
403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with pretreatment standards. When an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit, along with the supporting data shall be submitted to the Superintendent. Users not subject to
categorical standards shall submit analysis of wastewater representative of the effluent discharged to the POTW.
e. The Superintendent may allow the submission of an application which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for pretreatment.
f. A statement indicating the time, date and place of sampling, methods of analysis and certifying that such sampling and analysis is representative of
normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW shall accompany each application/baseline monitoring report unless such
sampling analysis was performed by the City.
5. Time And Duration: Time and duration of all discharges.
6. Flow Rates: Daily maximum, daily average and monthly average wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 121/358
7. Activities At The Site: Description of activities, facilities and plant processes at the site, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used at the
facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the POTW.
8. Plans: The site plans, floor plans and mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation. The plans shall include a schematic process diagram which indicates all points of discharge to the POTW.
9. Product Produced: Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production.
10. Raw Materials: Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day).
11. Employees; Hours Of Operation: Number and type of employees, and hours of operation and proposed or actual hours of operation of the
pretreatment facility.
12. Statement: A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the "industrial user" (as defined in section 6-2-2 of this chapter) and certified
by a professional engineer, registered in the State, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet pretreatment standards and
requirements.
13. Schedule: If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance will be required to meet pretreatment standards or requirements, then the user
shall supply a compliance schedule indicating the shortest time schedule necessary to accomplish installation or adoption of such additional
pretreatment or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule:
a. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such schedule shall
include, where applicable, but not be limited to, dates for the hiring of an engineer, completing preliminary plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing construction, beginning operation and conducting routine operations).
b. No time increment in the schedule may exceed nine (9) months.
c. The user shall submit a progress report to the Supervisor, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the
reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return, no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the Superintendent.
14. Additional Information: Any additional information required by the Superintendent to evaluate a permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the industrial user for revision.
B. All applications and reports must contain the certification statement and be signed in accordance with section 6-2-20 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-
1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-20: APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION:
Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12(L) and POTW requirements, BMRs, ninety (90) day compliance reports and periodic compliance reports must be signed by an
authorized representative of the facility and must contain a certification statement attesting to the integrity of the information reported. The categorical and
significant reports must be signed by one (1) of the following:
A. A responsible corporate officer if the IU is a corporation; a responsible corporate officer is defined as either of the following:
1. A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function.
2. The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long term environmental compliance with environmental laws and
regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control
mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
3. A general partner or proprietor if the IU is a partnership or sole proprietorship.
4. A duly authorized representative of the above specified persons if such authorization is in writing, is submitted to the POTW, and specifies a person
or position having overall responsibility for the facility where the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
facility.
B. As required in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii) and by the POTW, the certification statement must read as follows:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
All applications and reports shall be signed by an authorized representative of the "industrial user" as defined in section 6-2-2 of this chapter. Users
shall maintain a current and accurate authorization on file with the Superintendent. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-21: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 122/358
The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. Within sixty (60)
days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the Superintendent will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit. If no determination is made within this time period, the application will be deemed denied. The Superintendent may deny any application for
wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-22: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION:
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the Superintendent. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will
expire. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-23: CONTINUATION OF EXPIRED PERMITS:
Expired permits shall remain effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued, unless the user is notified of permit termination by the City. (Ord. 94-14,
7-5-1994)
6-2-24: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS:
Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the Superintendent to prevent pass-through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management
and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW.
A. Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions:
1. A statement that indicates the duration of the wastewater discharge permit; which, in no event shall exceed five (5) years.
2. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the City, and provisions for
furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit.
3. Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable standards in Federal, State and local law.
4. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to
be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type based on Federal, State and local laws.
5. Statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal, State or local law.
B. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following:
1. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
2. Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or
properties. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
3. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to
reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants to the POTW.
4. Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent
accidental, unanticipated or routine discharges.
5. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
6. Compliance schedules.
7. The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
8. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment for each separate discharge to the POTW.
9. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, types and standard tests and reporting
schedules.
10. A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable
Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit.
11. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Superintendent to ensure compliance with this chapter, and State and Federal laws, rules and
regulations.
12. Interim limits effective during the installation or updating of pretreatment equipment.
13. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the Superintendent and affording the
Superintendent, or the Superintendent's representatives, access thereto.
14. Requirements for the notification of any change in the manufacturing processes, pretreatment processes, quantity or quality of waste discharged to
the POTW ninety (90) days prior to such change. The Superintendent shall approve, deny or condition a changed discharge prior to a change
occurring.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 123/358
15. Requirements for the notification of excessive, accidental or slug discharges. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-25: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS:
Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the City to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of its
issuance.
A. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
B. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for the objection(s), and an
alternate condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.
C. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
D. If the City fails to act within sixty (60) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater
discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final administrative
action for purposes of judicial review.
E. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Iowa
District Court for Cerro Gordo County within the required statute of limitations. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-26: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION:
The Superintendent may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following:
A. To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements. After becoming aware of more stringent
standards or requirements, the Superintendent will update the permits within ninety (90) days.
B. To make substantial alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance.
C. To make a change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
D. Upon notification of information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the City's POTW, wastewater treatment personnel or the
receiving stream.
E. Upon occurrences of a violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit.
F. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting.
G. Revision of, or a grant of, variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit.
I. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator.
J. Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules and
regulations.
The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification, revocation and reissuance, termination, or a notification of planned changes or anticipated
noncompliance shall not have the effect of staying or delaying the implementation or effective date of any permit condition. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd.
2017 Code)
6-2-27: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER:
Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days'
advance notice to the Superintendent and the Superintendent approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Superintendent must
include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which:
A. States the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and process;
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 124/358
B. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
C. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-28: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION:
If the Superintendent believes that the change at a permitted facility will result in a substantial change in process, operation, or management practices at
the POTW, the Superintendent shall modify, revoke or reissue the permit. Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons: (Ord.
94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
A. Failure to notify the City of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the discharge change;
B. Failure to provide prior notification to the City of change condition pursuant to subsection 6-2-32B of this chapter;
C. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
D. Falsifying self-monitoring results;
E. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
F. Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and records;
G. Failure to meet effluent limitations;
H. Failure to pay fines;
I. Failure to pay sewer charges;
J. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
K. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
L. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility;
M. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be void upon nonuse, cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits are
voided upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-29: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE:
A significant industrial user shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge permit application, in
accordance with section 6-2-19 of this chapter, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the industrial user's existing wastewater discharge
permit. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-30: CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Baseline Monitoring Reports (40 CFR 403.12(b)) Located In Section 6-2-19: BMRs must be signed and certified by an authorized representative of the
CIU as detailed in 40 CFR 403.12(L) and as described in section 6-2-20 of this chapter. If a CIU has already submitted the specific information required
in a permit application or data disclosure form and the information is still current, it need not be reproduced and resubmitted in the BMR. The BMR is a
one time report, unless changes in the Federal Categorical Standards require submission of a new or updated BMR.
B. Compliance Schedule Progress Report (40 CFR 403.12(c)(3)): A CIU that is not in compliance with applicable categorical standards by the time the
standards are effective might have to modify process operations or install treatment facilities to comply. Federal regulations require that the POTW
develop and impose a compliance schedule for the CIU to install technology to meet applicable standards. As part of the BMR, a CIU that is unable to
comply with the categorical standards must include a schedule for attaining compliance with the discharge standards. The final compliance or
completion date in the schedule may not be later than the final compliance date specified in the categorical standards. The POTW may require
compliance earlier than the final compliance date specified in the Federal regulations. The conditions that apply to the schedule are located in
subsection 6-2-19A13 of this chapter.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 125/358
In addition, the CIU must submit progress reports to the POTW no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the compliance schedule (and
final date for compliance) that include the following:
1. A statement of the CIU's status with respect to the compliance schedule.
2. A statement of when the CIU expects to be back on schedule if it is falling behind and the reason for the delay and steps the CIU is taking to return
to the established schedule.
3. The control authority can consider initiating appropriate enforcement action to correct the problem(s).
C. Ninety Day Compliance Report (40 CFR 403.12(d)): Section 403.12(d) of the general pretreatment regulations requires a CIU to submit the results of
the self-monitoring of its wastewater discharge(s) to the POTW in a final compliance report.
All new sources subject to existing categorical pretreatment standards shall submit a report to the City within ninety (90) days from the date of first
discharge to the POTW demonstrating actual and continuing compliance with those standards.
All existing sources required to comply with newly promulgated categorical pretreatment standards shall submit a report to the City within ninety (90)
days of the date on which compliance is required with those standards demonstrating that actual and continuing compliance with such standards has
been achieved.
Such ninety (90) day compliance report shall contain at a minimum the information required in subsections 6-2-19A4, A5, A6, A12, A13 and A14 of this
chapter.
Ninety (90) day compliance reports must be signed and certified by an authorized representative of the CIU as detailed in 40 CFR 403.12(L) and as
described in section 6-2-20 of this chapter.
For CIUs subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the POTW (40 CFR 403.6(c)), the report must contain a reasonable
measure of the IU's long term production rate. For CIU subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or another measure of operation), the report must include the IU's actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-31: SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Baseline Monitoring Reports: Refer to section 6-2-19 of this chapter.
Significant industrial users will use the same format as the categorical for baseline reporting in section 6-2-19 of this chapter but not be subject to
categorical requirements by the EPA Federal regulations.
B. Compliance Schedule Progress Report: The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by subsection 6-2-19A13 of this chapter. The
schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and conducting
routine operation).
Progress reports should contain information below:
1. A statement of the status with respect to the compliance schedule.
2. A statement of when IU expects to be back on schedule if it is falling behind and the reason for the delay and steps the IU is taking to return to the
established schedule.
3. The control authority can consider initiating appropriate enforcement action to correct the problem(s).
C. Ninety Day Compliance Schedule:
All new sources shall submit a report to the City within ninety (90) days from the date of first discharge to the POTW demonstrating actual and
continuing compliance with those standards.
All existing sources required to comply with newly promulgated pretreatment standards shall submit a report to the City within ninety (90) days of the
date on which compliance is required with those standards demonstrating that actual and continuing compliance with such standards has been
achieved.
Such ninety (90) day compliance report shall contain at a minimum the information required in subsections 6-2-19A4, A5, A6, A12, A13 and A14 of this
chapter.
All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 6-2-20 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-32: CATEGORICAL AND SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Periodic Compliance Reporting (40 CFR 403.12(e) And (h)):
40 CFR 403.12(e) categorical: After the final compliance date or, in the case of a new source, after beginning the discharge into the POTW, CIUs
(except NSCIUs) are required to submit, in June and December, the self-monitoring results of their wastewater discharge(s). The POTW may modify
the months in which the reports are to be submitted and may require more frequently. All results for self-monitoring performed must be reported to the
POTW, even if the CIU is monitoring more frequently than required.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 126/358
40 CFR 403.12(h) significant: After the final compliance date or, SIUs not subject to categorical pretreatment standards must submit to the POTW at a
minimum of once every six (6) months (on dates specified by the POTW) a description of the nature, concentration and flow of the pollutants required
to be reported by the POTW. The POTW may modify and increase the frequency of collection and reporting. All results for self-monitoring performed
must be reported to the POTW, even if the IU is monitoring more frequently than required.
Periodic compliance reports must include the following:
1. The nature and concentration of pollutants as required by the POTW.
2. Flow data (average and maximum daily) as required by the POTW.
3. Mass of pollutants discharged (applicable to CIUs where mass limits have been imposed).
4. Production rates (applicable to CIUs where equivalent limits have been imposed or where limits imposed are expressed in allowable pollutant
discharged per unit of production).
5. All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in
good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
6. If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in and of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW,
using the procedures prescribed in subsection I of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
As a result of the streamlining rule, the Superintendent has the authority to allow an IU subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego
sampling of a pollutant regulated by that categorical pretreatment standard if the CIU has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors
that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without
any increase in the pollutant resulting from activities of the CIU. To be authorized to forego this sampling, the IU must provide the sampling data and
meet the requirements in 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2). Nondeductible sample results may be used only as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if
the EPA approved method from 40 CFR part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis. This monitoring
waiver does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in the categorical pretreatment standards.
For a CIU authorized by the POTW to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard, the CIU must certify on each
report, using the statement in 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)(v), that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream from activities of the IU.
The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the IU's control mechanism, but it may not be longer than five (5) years.
The CIU must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent control mechanism. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994;
amd. 2017 Code)
B. Report Of Changed Conditions: Each industrial user is required to notify the Wastewater Superintendent of any planned significant changes to the
industrial user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before change.
1. The Wastewater Superintendent may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 6-2-19 of this chapter.
2. The Wastewater Superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 6-2-21 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater
discharge permit under section 6-2-26 of this chapter.
3. No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition(s) until and unless the Wastewater Superintendent has responded to the industrial
user's notice.
4. For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of ten percent (10%) or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be
deemed significant.
C. Spill Containment:
1. Accidental Discharge Protection: Users having the ability to cause interference, or pass-through at the POTW, or to discharge a slug, shall provide
protection from accidental discharge to the POTW of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be at the user's cost and expense.
2. Spill Containment Plan (SCP): Users meeting the criteria in subsection A of this section shall develop an SCP. The plan shall require the approval of
the Superintendent and shall contain the following:
a. A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
b. A description of stored chemicals;
c. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any that would violate the discharge prohibitions in section 6-2-9 of
this chapter. Notification procedures shall comply with subsections C3 and C4 of this section;
d. A description of procedures and structures necessary to prevent adverse POTW impact from accidental spills including inspection and
maintenance of stored areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for
emergency response;
e. A schedule for the completion or implementation of necessary procedures and structures. Complete implementation and installation of any
procedures or structures shall be according to the shortest possible schedule but in no case longer than one (1) year. Review and approval of such
plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify and operate its facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
3. Written Report: Users shall submit a written report to the Superintendent within five (5) days following such an accidental or deliberate discharge
describing the cause of the discharge and measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Users shall submit follow up
reports as may be required by the Superintendent. Such report, or reports, shall not relieve the user of any expenses, loss, damage or other liability
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 127/358
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such report relieve the user
of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or otherwise. Failure to report accidental or deliberate discharges
may, in addition to any other remedies available to the City, result in the revocation of the discharger's wastewater discharge permit.
4. Control Of Discharge Production: Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable
regulations upon reduction, loss or failure of its pretreatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of pretreatment is provided.
This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power to the user's pretreatment facility is reduced, lost or
fails.
5. Posting Of Notice: Users required to have a spill containment plan must permanently post a notice in English and the language of common use on
the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call should a prohibited discharge occur. Users shall ensure that all
employees who are in a position to cause, discover, or observe such an accidental discharge are advised of the emergency notification procedures.
D. Treatment Upsets: Users shall inform the Superintendent within one (1) hour of becoming aware of an upset in operations that places it in a temporary
state of noncompliance with the pollutant limits in this chapter. Users shall provide a follow up written report to the Superintendent within five (5)
working days. The report must demonstrate that the pretreatment facility was being operated in a prudent and appropriate manner and shall contain:
1. Description of the upset, its cause(s), and impact on the user's compliance status;
2. The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if noncompliance is continuing, the time by which
compliance is reasonably expected to be restored;
3. All steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of such an upset.
E. Treatment Bypass:
1. Unavoidable Bypass: Bypass is prohibited unless it is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage or no feasible
alternatives exist such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime.
2. Essential Bypass: The Superintendent may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause a violation of pretreatment standards, but only if it is
essential for maintenance to assure efficient operation.
3. Notification Of Bypass:
a. Anticipated Bypass: The user shall immediately notify the Superintendent and submit a written notice to the POTW within five (5) days. This report
shall specify:
(1) A description of the bypass, its cause and the duration;
(2) Whether the bypass has been corrected;
(3) The steps being taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent a reoccurrence of the bypass.
4. Liability: Proper notification shall not relieve the user of liability for treatment costs and fees or other remedies as provided for in sections 6-2-39 to 6-
2-43 of this chapter.
F. Reporting Requirements From Nonsignificant Industrial Users: All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the City as the Superintendent may require.
G. Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And Reporting: If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user must notify the
City within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the City within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not required to resample if
the POTW performs sampling at least once a month, or if the POTW performs sampling between the industrial user's initial sampling and when the
industrial user receives the results of this sampling.
H. Analytical Requirements: All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or
report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis must
be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
I. Sample Collection:
1. Except as indicated in subsection I2 of this section, the industrial user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow proportional composite sampling is infeasible, the Superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional sampling
or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being
discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
2. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, toxicity, sulfides and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
J. Determination Of Noncompliance: The Superintendent may use a grab sample(s) to determine noncompliance with pretreatment standards.
K. Timing: Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 128/358
L. Record Keeping: Industrial users shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records and information required to be retained under
this chapter. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of
any litigation concerning compliance with this chapter, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the
Superintendent. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
M. Self-Monitoring Requirements: All SIUs, including CIUs, must conduct self-monitoring as part of several different reporting requirements. That may
include BMR, ninety (90) day compliance report and periodic compliance reports. Those reports must be based on data that were obtained through
appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report and are representative of conditions occurring during the
reporting period. In cases where a violation is identified, the IU must repeat the sampling and analysis for the pollutant in violation and submit the
results within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Noted in 40 CFR 403.123(g)(5), sample collection and analysis for all required
pretreatment program reports must be conducted using 40 CFR part 136 procedures or with any other test procedures approved by the EPA
Administrator. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-33: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
A. Inspection And Sampling: The City shall have the right to enter the facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter, and
any permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the industrial user is complying with all requirements thereof. Industrial users shall
allow the Superintendent, or authorized representatives, ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties.
1. Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the
City, State and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
2. The City, State and EPA shall have the right to set up on the industrial user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
3. The City may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the industrial user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater
flow and quality shall be calibrated once yearly to ensure their accuracy.
4. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the Superintendent and shall not be replaced.
5. Unreasonable delays in allowing City personnel access to the industrial user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-34: NOTIFICATION OF DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE:
A. Notification: Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the
EPA hazardous waste number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than ten kilograms (10 kg)
of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and
readily available to the industrial user:
1. An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
2. An estimation of the mass and concentration of the constituents in the IU's discharge; and
3. An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective date of rule 40 CFR 403.12 shall provide the notification no later than one hundred
eighty (180) days after the discharge commences of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this subsection need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under subsection 6-2-
32B of this chapter. The notification required in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of:
baseline monitoring reports, compliance schedule progress reports or periodic compliance reports. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
B. Exemption; Additional Notification:
1. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection A of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen
kilograms (15 kg) of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR part 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
Discharge of more than fifteen kilograms (15 kg) of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes
as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one time notification.
2. Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.
C. New Regulations: In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing
any additional substances as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division
Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
D. Reduction Program: In the case of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 129/358
6-2-35: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the Superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof, and if the Superintendent has demonstrated
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the City
designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then upon application by the Superintendent to a judicial magistrate for Cerro Gordo County, a search and/or seizure warrant describing
therein the specific location subject to the warrant shall be issued. The warrant shall specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on the
property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the Superintendent, in the company of a uniformed police officer of the City. In
the event of an emergency affecting public health and safety, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a warrant. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-36: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
A. Except as herein provided, information and data obtained from user reports, questionnaires, permit applications and inspections, shall be made
available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction. If the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate that the release of
such information would divulge information concerning processes or methods of production entitled to protection under law as trade secrets of the user
or would give advantage to competitors and serve no public purpose, the Superintendent shall not make such information available to the public but
such information shall be available to the USEPA or IDNR.
B. Decisions by the Superintendent to deny confidential status for information may be appealed using the procedures in section 6-2-25 of this chapter. In
determining whether information is confidential, the provision of chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa shall prevail.
C. Effluent data and City enforcement actions will not be considered confidential records or information. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-37: PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
The City shall annually publish, in the largest daily newspaper published in the Mason City community, a list of users which, at any time during the
previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance. Instances of SNC are user violations which meet one (1) or more of the following criteria:
A. Violations Of Wastewater Discharge Limits:
1. Chronic Violations: Sixty six percent (66%) or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit in a six (6)
month period (any magnitude of exceedance).
2. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) Violations: Thirty three percent (33%) or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the
same average limit by more than the TRC in a six (6) month period.
There are two (2) groups of TRCs:
Group I for conventional pollutants (BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, etc.) TRC = 1.4
Group II for all other pollutants TRC = 1.2
3. Endangering Health: Any other violation(s) of an effluent limit (average or daily maximum) that the control authority believes has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference (e.g., slug loads) or pass-through; or endangered the health of the sewage treatment personnel or
the public.
4. Exercise Of Emergency Authority: Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health/welfare or to the
environment and has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
5. Failure To Meet Compliance: Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule data, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local
control mechanism or enforcement or for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance.
6. Failure To Provide Reports: Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety
(90) day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedule.
7. Noncompliance Report: Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
8. Other Violations: Any other violation or group of violations which the control authority determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the pretreatment program.
B. Significant Noncompliance: When a user is in SNC, the Superintendent is directed to:
1. Report the information to IDNR as part of the annual pretreatment performance summary of permitted user noncompliance;
2. Include the user in the annual public notification as described above;
3. Address SNC through appropriate enforcement actions or document in a timely manner the reasons for withholding enforcement. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-
1994)
6-2-38: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 130/358
A. Notification Of Violation: Whenever the Superintendent finds that any user has violated or is violating this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the Superintendent or a duly authorized representative may serve upon said user a
written notice of violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves
the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the City
to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
B. Consent Orders: The Superintendent is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar
documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to
correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as the administrative
orders issued pursuant to subsections D and E of this section and shall be judicially enforceable.
C. Show Cause Hearing: The Superintendent may order any user which causes or contributes to violation(s) of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits,
or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Superintendent and show cause why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action, the reasons for such action and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of
the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested at least 7 days prior to the hearing). Such notice may
be served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued
following the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
D. Compliance Orders: When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this chapter, wastewater discharge permits or orders
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that the user come into compliance within ten (10) days. If the user does not come into compliance within ten (10) days, sewer service shall
be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders
may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to
minimized the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a Federal
pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user.
E. Cease And Desist Orders: When the Superintendent finds that a user is violating this chapter, the user's wastewater discharge permit, any order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Superintendent may issue an
order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
1. Immediately comply with all requirements.
2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-39: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
A. Violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement referred to in 40 CFR of chapter 1, section 403.8 is a Municipal infraction and shall be punishable
by a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day said violation exists or continues. All other Municipal infractions shall be
punishable by a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each initial separate violation and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each repeated
violation. In addition to the penalties established in this section for Municipal infractions, corporation counsel shall seek all other appropriate remedies
allowed by law in regard to the abating correction or discontinuance of activities which constitute Municipal infractions under this subsection.
B. Assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the Superintendent shall have such other collection remedies as
may be available for other service charges and fees.
C. Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of five percent (5%) of the unpaid balance.
Interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one and one-half percent (1.5%) per month. A lien against the individual user's property will be sought for
unpaid charges, fines and penalties.
D. Issuance of a Municipal infraction citation shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-40: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge (after informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary in order to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons. The Superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge (after notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with
the operation of the POTW, or which presents an endangerment to the environment.
A. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Superintendent shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent shall
allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the period of endangerment
has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in section 6-2-41 of this chapter are initiated against the user.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 131/358
B. A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment, shall submit a detailed written statement describing
the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the Superintendent, prior to the date of any show
cause or termination hearing under subsection 6-2-38C and section 6-2-41 of this chapter.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-41: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE:
In addition to those provisions in section 6-2-28 of this chapter, any user that violates the following conditions of this chapter, wastewater discharge
permits, or orders issued hereunder, is subject to discharge termination:
A. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
B. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
C. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
D. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling;
E. Violation of the pretreatment standards set out in sections 6-2-9 to 6-2-14 of this chapter.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause, under section 6-2-25 of this chapter,
why the proposed action should not be taken. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-42: JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
A. Injunctive Relief: Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, wastewater
discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the Superintendent may petition the Iowa District Court through
the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the industrial user. Such other action as appropriate
for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the City. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other
action against a user.
B. Criminal Prosecution:
1. Any user that wilfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both.
2. Any user that wilfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least one hundred dollars ($100.00) and be subject to imprisonment for thirty
(30) days. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under State law.
3. Any user that knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, wastewater discharge permit or order, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both.
C. Second Conviction: In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation
per day or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days or both.
D. Remedies Nonexclusive: The provisions in section 6-2-37 of this chapter and this section are not exclusive remedies. The City reserves the right to take
any, all or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with
the City's enforcement response plan. However, the City reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.
Further, the City is empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-43: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue in full
force and effect. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
ARTICLE A. SEWER RATES
6-2A-1: ENFORCEMENT:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 132/358
The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent is hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this article. (Ord. 04-18, 7-6-2004)
6-2A-2: RATES ESTABLISHED:
There are hereby established just and equitable rates and charges for the use of the sewage system and facilities and wastewater treatment plant
maintained and operated by the City which shall be paid by the owner and occupant of each lot, parcel of real estate or building which is now or may
hereafter be connected with said sewage system or that is in any way served by said wastewater treatment plant, in accordance with the schedule in
section 6-2A-3 of this article. (Ord. 04-18, 7-6-2004)
6-2A-3: SCHEDULE OF RATES:
A. General Rates: Effective with the July 1, 2019, billing date, sewer rate charges will be determined by using the following monthly rates per each water
meter which shall include an administrative charge of five dollars one cent ($5.01):
PER 100 CUBIC FEET
Net Gross
2.432 2.702
B. Minimum Rates: Regardless of the quantity of water used, there shall be a minimum charge, dependent upon the water meter size, of the following
amounts:
Meter Size (Inches) Per Month
5/8 $ 10.05
3/4 16.99
1 22.91
11/2 59.74
2 141.25
3 279.40
4 412.98
6 559.51
8 755.01
10 950.52
12 1,146.02
The minimum monthly charge includes the administrative charge. (Ord. 19-06, 6-18-2019)
C. Special Rates: Where, in the judgment of the City Engineer, special conditions surround the use of the City water to the extent that the application of the
rental rate provided for in subsection A of this section would be inadequate or unfair to either the City or the contributor, a special rate shall be
established by the City Engineer. Each such special rate shall be contained in a written order or direction filed with the Clerk and open to public
inspection. The City Engineer is authorized to make such rates in accordance with the following rules:
1. Rate Based On Amount Of Sewage: Where a substantial portion of the City water consumed is not polluted or is not discharged into the sanitary
sewer system, the rate shall be based upon an estimate of the amount of sewage, and in the event that the property owner or contributor does not
agree to such rate, then such property owner or contributor shall, at his own expense, install a meter for the purpose of determining the amount of
sewage being discharged into the sanitary sewage system.
2. Additional Rate Based On BOD: Where the BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) of the sewage exceeds three hundred (300) parts per million by
weight, the following additional rate shall be added to the regular rate above set forth: (BOD-300) x (gallons of sewage . 1,000)(0.0017). The
contributor shall, upon the request of the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent, provide a satisfactory opening in the lateral before the sewage
reaches the sewer main where a representative sample of sewage can be taken by the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent or a designated
representative.
The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent or a designated representative shall, when he deems it necessary, take representative samples of
sewage and run the BOD test which shall be used to calculate the rate.
3. Discharging Of Waste Jeopardizing Wastewater Treatment Plant Prohibited: No sewage or industrial waste having characteristics tending, in the
opinion of the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent, to jeopardize the successful and continued operation of the wastewater treatment plant or any
of its units including sanitary sewers leading to the same, shall be discharged into the sanitary sewage system. Such waste may be pretreated by the
contributor at his own expense and discharged into said system, but said contributor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Wastewater
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 133/358
Treatment Superintendent that such pretreatment is adequate and dependable to the extent that the sewage or waste discharged into the sanitary
system does not jeopardize the successful and continuous operation of the wastewater treatment works.
4. Optional Payment Of One- And Two-Family Residences: The owner, lessee or occupant of any one- or two-family dwelling connected with the City
sewage system shall have the option of paying his sewer rental charges for one (1) year in advance; provided, that such payment shall be made not
later than March 31. Said charge shall be based on the net water bills for the twelve (12) complete preceding months for said premises, and shall be
figured on the amount of the nine (9) lowest water bills multiplied by one and one-third (11/3) the amount thus arrived at to be multiplied by the
percentage set forth in subsection A of this section. The application of these rates is limited to residences used only for one- and two-family dwellings
and shall not apply where any commercial or industrial use is made of the premises.
5. Usage Established For Residential Structures: Effective January 1, 1991, for residential structures connected to the City sewage system without the
benefit of City water, the usage shall be established at three hundred (300) cubic feet per month per each occupant with a maximum of one thousand
five hundred (1,500) cubic feet being charged per month.
The sewer rental rates will be charged as set forth in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 09-04, 6-2-2009)
6-2A-4: PAYMENTS:
Bills for sewer rental shall be rendered to public utility consumers by adding to the water and garbage service a statement showing the amount of the
charge or rate for sewer rental as herein provided. All sewer rental charges which are paid in full on or before the fifteenth day after delivery or mailing
thereof shall be eligible for a ten percent (10%) discount and a ten percent (10%) discount of the gross amount of said bill shall be subtracted therefrom.
Any payment transmitted through the United States mail postmarked on or before the fifteenth day shall be deemed paid within fifteen (15) days. If any
sewer rental bill shall not be paid, or if transmitted through the United States mail postmarked after the twenty fifth day following the date of delivery or
mailing, the property served shall be subject to immediate discontinuance of service. (Ord. 02-12, 4-16-2002)
6-2A-5: DEPOSITS REQUIRED:
Deposits shall be required for sewer rental at the discretion of the Finance Director as provided for in subsection 6-1A-1D of this title. (Ord. 94-29, 12-20-
1994)
6-2A-6: SEWER RENTAL FUND:
All funds collected under the provisions of this article and turned over to the Finance Director shall be kept by the director in a separate and distinct fund to
be known as the Sewer Rental Fund. Said fund shall be used for the following purposes:
A. Paying the expenses of collection of said rents and the enforcement of the provisions of this article;
B. For the construction of new sanitary sewers paid for by the City, with or without special assessment against benefited and abutting property;
C. For the payment of deficiencies in assessments for the construction of new sanitary sewers;
D. For the remodeling, repair or enlargement of the sewage treatment plant or for the construction of a new sewage treatment facility;
E. For the usual operating expenses of the sewage treatment facilities, including the paying of salaries or wages of employees at said plant. (Ord. 1438, 5-
8-1978; amd. Ord. 94-29, 12-20-1994)
6-2A-7: ADJUSTMENTS TO BILL:
Only one (1) adjustment will be made during any twelve (12) month period.
If an adjustment is needed for water that did not enter the sanitary sewer system, the customer must provide verification that the water did not enter the
sanitary sewer. The bill will be adjusted by deducting the previous year's average quarterly consumption and dividing the difference between the Public
Utilities Department and the consumer.
For total credit on the sewer rental bill, the consumer may purchase a separate water meter to meter the flow not discharged to the sanitary sewer. The
credit meter shall be installed and maintained by the owner. The owner shall notify the Public Utilities Department before removing the credit meter in order
to receive credit. A service fee of two dollars ($2.00) will be charged for any part of a quarterly billing period the credit meter is used. (1985 Code)
ARTICLE B. WASTE HAULERS
6-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following terms are defined as follows:
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: The liquid waste from industrial users.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 134/358
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Clean Water Act, owned by the City of Mason
City. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of wastewater or industrial waste of a
liquid nature or that convey wastewater to the wastewater treatment plant, regardless of ownership.
SUPERINTENDENT: The Administrator of the Mason City Water Reclamation Division, wastewater treatment facility, POTW, or his/her designated deputy,
agent, or representative.
VEHICLE: A device equipped with a tank and used to remove or transport waste.
WASTE: Human excreta, water, scum, sludge, septage, and food waste grease solids from public and private wastewater disposal systems or holding
tanks; impervious vaults, portable, or chemical toilets; and devices used to trap grease resulting from food preparation.
WASTE HAULER: A person or firm engaged in the removal, transport, or disposal, into the City of Mason City's water reclamation facility, the contents of
any privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, chemical toilet or acceptable industrial waste, who shall be subject to the provisions of this article and shall be
referred to herein as a waste hauler.
WASTEWATER: A combination of the liquid and water carried waste from residences, commercial buildings, institutions and industrial establishments,
together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to
enter the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of
wastewater and industrial waste. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
6-2B-2: LICENSE:
No waste hauler shall remove from within the City or shall dispose of waste, whether from a source inside or outside the City, into the Mason City POTW
without first obtaining a waste hauler's license from the POTW, with the following exceptions:
A. Waste haulers utilized by industrial with current wastewater discharge permit by the POTW.
B. Waste haulers granted temporary authorization by the POTW Superintendent in order to deal with an emergency. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994; amd. 2017
Code)
6-2B-3: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The waste hauler's license shall be issued by the Wastewater Treatment Plant Superintendent upon written application that shall consist of the following
minimum requirements: (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
A. Inspection: The Water Reclamation Division, upon application, shall inspect the trucks, hoses, valves, and associated equipment of the applicant for a
waste hauler's license and determine if it meets the minimum qualifications for complying with the conditions of this article. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994;
amd. 2017 Code)
B. License Fee And Bond: An application shall be required for each vehicle used by the applicant, a license fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) and a bond with
reasonable surety in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for the faithful compliance with the provisions of this article including the prompt
payment of fees, fines and damages. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
C. Renewal Of License: Renewal application must be made in the same manner as initial application. License will expire, from the date of issuance, on
March 31 every other year. Failure to pay application fees, have a current bond and permit, or completed inspection of tanker with POTW personnel will
result in relinquishing disposal privileges. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
D. Transferability Of License: Waste hauler licenses are not transferable. Waste haulers shall remove City license stickers and inform the water
reclamation facility when truck ownership is transferred. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
6-2B-4: DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The City may suspend, revoke or deny a waste hauler license for any of the following reasons: (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
A. The making of any false or misleading statement concerning the nature, origin or quantity of liquid waste delivered for disposal. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-
1994; amd. 2017 Code)
B. Failure to pay fees or costs as allowed by this Code.
C. Violation of the rules governing waste haulers as found in this article.
D. An inspection shows deficiencies in equipment.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 135/358
E. The waste hauler's license has been suspended by the City due to noncompliance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
6-2B-5: DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION PROCEDURE:
In the event of an occurrence warranting the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this article, the following procedure shall apply:
A. The Administrator or Superintendent of the POTW shall notify the permit holder, in writing, that the permit is suspended or revoked. Such notice shall be
sent to the permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address listed on the permit holder's application. The notice shall set forth the
nature of the violation and shall set forth the period of suspension, or in the case of revocation, that the permit is revoked. The Administrator and
Superintendent shall have the authority to determine whether a violation requires suspension (and for how long) or whether the permit should be
revoked. The permit holder receiving a notice of suspension or revocation may request a hearing thereon before the Administrator and/or the
Superintendent. The hearing request must be in writing, must have a copy of the notice of suspension or revocation attached to it and must be
delivered to the POTW Superintendent no later than ten (10) days after the date of such notice at 10 1st Street N.W. If no request for a hearing is made
within the time set forth above, the suspension or revocation shall, upon the expiration of such time, become immediately effective and the permit
holder shall have no right to further hearing or appeal. If timely request of hearing is made, the permit holder shall be notified in writing of the time, date
and place of hearing which shall be not sooner than five (5), nor more than fifteen (15), working days following the receipt of the request for hearing. In
case a violation of this article is of such nature that the violation is deemed to be an immediate hazard by the Superintendent of the water reclamation
facility, the Superintendent shall be authorized to temporarily suspend the license until notice can be given and hearing held.
B. If, after such a hearing, the City Administrator or Superintendent of the POTW makes a finding based on substantial evidence that a violation of this
article did, in fact, occur as alleged, the City Administrator or Superintendent may continue suspension of, suspend or revoke the license; the
determination of whether to revoke such license shall be in the discretion of the City Administrator or Superintendent and shall be dependent upon the
circumstances surrounding the violation and its severity.
C. The decision of continued suspension or revocation made by the City Administrator or POTW Superintendent may be appealed to the City Council. In
order to appeal such decision, written notice of appeal must be filed with the City Clerk within three (3) days after receipt of the decision. Failure to file
such written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of right to appeal the decision of continued suspension or revocation.
D. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail to the City Clerk. The hearing of such
appeal shall be scheduled at the next regular Council meeting, if such notice is received by two o'clock (2:00) P.M. on the Thursday before the next
regular Council meeting. If notice is not received by the above designated time, the hearing will be scheduled for the next following Council meeting.
The hearing may be continued for good cause. The hearing shall be confined to the record made before the City Administrator and POTW
Superintendent, and the arguments of the parties or their representatives, but no additional evidence shall be taken. After such hearing, the City
Council may affirm or reverse the order. Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed with the City Clerk within three (3)
days after the hearing, or any continued session thereof.
E. If the City Council affirms the action of the City Administrator and the POTW Superintendent, continuing the suspension or revocation, the City Council
shall so state and order in its written decision.
F. A licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible for another waste hauler's license for a period of two (2) years. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-
1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2B-6: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Liquid wastes will be accepted at the disposal station between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. through four o'clock (4:00) P.M., Monday through
Friday, except by special arrangement between the waste hauler and the Superintendent to permit response to emergency conditions. Weekend and
holiday hauling will not be accepted, nor liquid waste before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. or after four o'clock (4:00) P.M., unless prior approval from the
Superintendent, by making written or verbal request to the POTW Superintendent at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of the date the work is to be
performed. The request shall state the location of the property, the name of the owner, the date, and the hours of work. Waste haulers shall maintain the
designated location in a clean and orderly condition to avoid noxious odors and unsanitary conditions. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2B-7: STANDARDS FOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT:
For all vehicles and equipment used by waste haulers, the licensee shall:
A. Prevent waste and wastewater from leaking, spilling, or discharging onto roads or rights-of-way.
B. Ensure proper construction and repair of the equipment to allow cleaning.
C. Maintain vehicles and equipment in an essentially rust free and sanitary condition and appearance.
D. Display the business name as it appears on the waste hauler's license in three inch (3") or larger letters on the left and right sides of the vehicle.
E. Display a City permit decal on the left side of the tanker bearing the expiration date of the license. A City permit decal shall be provided by the
Superintendent or designee as the only proof of licensing after the applicant has met all conditions and requirements of this article. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-
1994; amd. 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 136/358
6-2B-8: DISPOSAL:
Waste haulers shall dispose of hauled wastes permitted in this article according to rules for land application as found in chapters 65, 69, and 121, Code of
Iowa, or at a location designated by the Wastewater Treatment Plant Superintendent. Waste disposal is only accepted during the set hours of operation.
Waste haulers may also dispose of hauled wastes at Municipal wastewater plants outside the Mason City service area where such wastes are accepted.
(Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2B-9: IDENTIFICATION OF SOURCE:
Waste haulers must document the nature and origin of wastes collected and the site and method of disposal for wastes that are delivered to the
wastewater treatment plant. Such information shall be provided on a manifest form provided by the water reclamation facility. The manifest shall also
include: a) the name, address and phone number of the waste generator; b) the type of waste collected; c) the approximate volume of the load; d) any
other information consistent with identification and tracking of wastes. The Superintendent or his/her designee shall have the right to verify all information
required by this article including the right to measure, sample and analyze any waste regulated by this article. The waste hauler shall obtain approval from
the Superintendent, or his/her designee, prior to loading wastes originating from an industrial/commercial source unless previous approval is on record at
the water reclamation facility. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
6-2B-10: MIXING WASTES:
Wastes from residential and nonresidential sources shall not be mixed. Wastes from an industrial/commercial source shall not be mixed with wastes of any
type from another location. Portable toilets may be mixed with similar wastes from different locations. Grease trap waste may only be mixed with other
similar grease trap loads as long as each source is identified on the waste manifest form. Residential wastes from several sources may be mixed as long
as each source is identified.
Any tanks or equipment used for hauling waste to the POTW shall not be used for hauling hazardous or toxic wastes, as defined in the Iowa Code and in
40 CFR part 261, or other wastes detrimental to the POTW. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2B-11: STANDARDS FOR DISPOSAL AT POTW:
Disposal of wastes to the POTW shall be carried out in accordance with pretreatment standards and requirements established by Federal, State, and City
governments including categorical standards developed for the waste generator's industrial category. The Superintendent may reject wastes from waste
haulers that do not comply with this section or with any other provision of this article. Waste haulers shall not deliver wastes to the Mason City POTW that:
(Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
A. Exceed the limits found in sections 6-2-9, 6-2-10, and 6-2-11 of this chapter.
B. Are hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR part 261 or 567 IAC, and the Iowa Code.
C. Originate from sand traps, such as those located in car, truck, and trailer washes, which primarily remove sand and dirt.
D. Originate from mineral oil and grease traps, such as those located at vehicle maintenance facilities.
E. Originate from an animal confinement facility.
F. Are not completely identified or are from industrial/commercial sources that are not approved by the Superintendent as required in section 6-2B-9 of this
article.
G. Are mixed in a manner prohibited in section 6-2B-10 of this article.
H. Are wastes other than residential from outside the City limits, except through requests to the Superintendent. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994; amd. 2017
Code)
6-2B-12: REJECTION OF WASTE LOADS:
The Superintendent, or his/her designee, may reject any hauled waste load that violates or is suspected to violate the requirements of this Code or that
fails to meet any other guidelines established by the Superintendent to protect personnel, equipment, and processes at the POTW. Waste haulers must:
A. Remove rejected waste from the POTW.
B. Properly dispose of all rejected wastes in accordance with State and Federal law.
C. Provide the Superintendent with a written statement, signed by the waste hauler license holder, stating the location, date, and time the rejected load
was disposed of. The statement is due within five (5) calendar days after the waste is rejected.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 137/358
Vehicles used to haul rejected wastes shall not be allowed to enter the POTW with additional wastes until the statement required by this section is
delivered to the Superintendent. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
6-2B-13: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Any person, corporation or other legal entity who violates or resists the enforcement of any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Municipal
infraction punishable by a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the initial offense and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each repeat
offense. Each violation constitutes a separate offense. Any person, corporation or other legal entity that violates a provision of this article after having
previously been found guilty of violating the same provision of this article at the same location or at a different location shall be guilty of a repeat
offense.
B. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this section does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief, including any order for abatement or
injunctive relief, from the court in the same action or as a separate action. The enforcement provisions in this section are in addition to those set out in
sections 6-2-38 through 6-2-42 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
6-2B-14: FEE PAYMENT FOR DOMESTIC AND INDUSTRIAL WASTES:
A. A treatment fee shall be set per gallon of hauled waste which shall be equal to the cost of disposal and treatment of an equivalent mass of pollutants
otherwise delivered into the sewer system. Currently, the fee is thirty dollars ($30.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of sewage. This treatment fee
will be adjusted according to the costs associated with the administrative requirements of this article. (Ord. 07-15, 6-5-2007)
B. Loads originating outside the area served by the wastewater treatment plant shall pay a fee equal to one and one-half (11/2) times the in service fee.
C. Fees shall be computed and recorded by the Data Processing Department and shall be paid by the waste hauler on the basis of monthly billings by the
Finance Department. Limits of credit shall be reasonable limits to be determined by the Finance Department. Abuse of such credit shall be grounds for
liability on the waste hauler's bond and for refusal of disposal services to any waste hauler under this article. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
6-2B-15: OTHER REGULATIONS:
The regulations set forth in this article are in addition to, and not in substitution of, any other applicable Federal, State, or local statutes, rules and
regulations regarding the subject matter of wastewater collection, transportation and disposal. Any person holding a permit issued under this article shall,
at all times, abide by and remain in strict compliance with all such other statutes, rules and regulations. (2017 Code)
Chapter 3
STORM SEWERS
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, for the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this section:
AIR CONDITIONING AND COOLING EQUIPMENT: Any equipment or apparatus using in excess of one thousand (1,000) gallons of water in any one (1)
day for cooling or purifying purposes, the wastewater of which will not be of such a nature as will render it unfit to be wasted into storm sewers.
DOWNSPOUTS: Any duct used for carrying roof water from the roof toward the ground.
GREASE PIT: A place where vehicles or machinery are greased, the waste from which greasing is conducted to a sewer.
LOT: A continuous tract of land under one (1) ownership.
OWNER: The owner of real estate, a duly authorized agent or attorney of an owner, a tenant, purchaser, devisee, fiduciary and any person having a
vested or contingent interest in the property.
PAVED AREA: Any unroofed area surfaced in such a manner that the water falling on the same does not penetrate into the ground but runs off over the
surface.
PERSON: An individual, copartnership, corporation, fiduciary and trustee.
WASH RACK: A place other than on residential property where automobiles, trucks, busses or tractors are washed with water. (Ord. 723, 6-4-1956)
6-3-2: STORM SEWER DISTRICT:
A storm sewer district to be known as District 1 is established for the purpose of preserving the health and to meet the demands of the property owners in
said district. The boundary lines of said District 1 are now on file in the Office of the City Clerk for public inspection. (1953 § 44-1; amd. 1985 Code)
6-3-3: DRAINAGE DISTRICT:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 138/358
A drainage district to be known as Drainage District 17 has been established for the purpose of preserving the health and to meet the demands of the
property owners in said district. The boundary lines of said Drainage District 17 are now on file in the Office of the City Clerk for public inspection. (1985
Code)
6-3-4: DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Discharge Into Sanitary Sewers Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged into any sanitary sewer any
wastewater from downspouts, drain tiles, drainage system for surface or subsurface water or air conditioning or cooling equipment.
B. Discharge Into Storm Sewers Required: The owner of property upon which is situated air conditioning and cooling equipment shall cause the
wastewater therefrom to be discharged into the storm sewer. (Ord. 1568, 7-7-1980)
6-3-5: DRAINAGE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED:
The owner of any lot or property subject to the provisions of this chapter shall cause all downspouts, drain tiles or drainage systems for surface or
subsurface water to be connected with storm sewers:
A. When the roof area exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the lot area; or
B. Where the water from the roof area is now discharged directly or indirectly into a sanitary sewer; or
C. Where downspouts now discharge onto, across or under a public sidewalk, pavement or paved area or onto an area which drains onto a public street,
avenue, alley or sidewalk; or
D. Where the area of a paved area is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the area of the lot upon which it is situated, and where the slope and grade of such
paved area is such that the water from said paved area runs onto or across any public street, avenue, alley or sidewalk; or
E. Where the area of the paved area plus the area of the roof area when combined exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the lot area. (Ord. 723, 6-4-1956)
6-3-6: APPROVAL OF CONNECTIONS:
All connections to storm sewers shall be made under supervision of the City Engineer in an approved manner. Work shall be done only by a contractor
licensed under the provisions of title 3, chapter 13 of this Code. (Ord. 723, 6-4-1956; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; Ord. 92-20, 11-3-1992; 2017 Code)
6-3-7: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall be applicable only to wash racks, grease pits, air conditioning and cooling equipment, downspouts, drain tiles or other surface or
subsurface drainage systems situated on a lot adjacent to a storm sewer or if not adjacent, upon a lot which has access not exceeding one hundred feet
(100') distance to a usable storm sewer. (Ord. 723, 6-4-1956)
6-3-8: PERMITS REQUIRED:
No construction shall be allowed within the corporate limits of any Municipally owned property, sidewalks or alleys by any City licensed excavating
contractor or any other person without first obtaining a permit.
A. Fees: The permit and inspection fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential, seventy five dollars ($75.00) for commercial and one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) for industrial property, and thirty dollars ($30.00) for each storm sewer disconnection, payable at time said permit is issued; and the
same shall be issued in duplicate, one (1) copy being given to the applicant and one (1) filed in the Engineering Department. Permit shall show the
name of the applicant, the exact location of the concrete construction, and such other information as the Engineering Department may require. (Ord.
92-20, 11-3-1992; amd. 2017 Code)
ARTICLE A. STORMWATER UTILITY POLICY
6-3A-1: RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
A. General Rates: Effective with the July 1, 2019 billing date, storm sewer rate charges will be applied to each property's monthly utility bill by using the
following monthly rates. The rates will be based on three (3) classifications. These classifications are according to the types designated by the City
Assessor.
Classification Per Month
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 139/358
Residential $ 2.75
Commercial 6.75
Industrial 11.75
(Ord. 19-08, 6-18-2019)
Title 7
AIRPORT
Chapter 1
AIRPORT COMMISSION
7-1-1: ESTABLISHING COMMISSION:
There is hereby established the Airport Commission of the City of Mason City, Iowa, created pursuant to section 330.17, Code of Iowa, to be composed of
five (5) residents of the City of Mason City, Iowa, who shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council and who shall hold office
for six (6) years from November 1 following their appointment. (Ord. 1333, 7-21-1975; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
7-1-2: COMPENSATION; EXPENSES:
All members of the Airport Commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for necessary travel and other expenses incurred while
on official commission business. Such reimbursement shall come from the funds appropriated to the airport. (Ord. 1333, 7-21-1975; amd. 1985 Code)
7-1-3: JURISDICTION EXTENDED:
The police jurisdiction of the City of Mason City, and all applicable laws, regulations and orders issued pursuant thereto, are hereby extended to and made
applicable to the Mason City Municipal Airport. Any person who violates any resolution, ordinance or lawful order issued pursuant thereto on or at the
Mason City Municipal Airport shall be subject to prosecution, conviction and penalty in the same manner as if such violation occurred within the corporate
limits of the City of Mason City. (Ord. 1333, 7-21-1975)
7-1-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Airport Commission shall have the following powers, duties and authority:
A. To acquire real estate and personal property for airport purposes in the name of the City of Mason City, Iowa, by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease or
otherwise.
B. To acquire or cause to be moved, removed, abated, eliminated, mitigated or altered any structure or object protruding above the surface of the ground,
or any use of land obstructing the air space necessary for the safe and efficient flight of aircraft landing at, or taking off from, the Mason City Municipal
Airport, or otherwise constituting a hazard to such landing or taking off.
C. To make and enforce rules and regulations for the control, supervision and operation of the Mason City Municipal Airport which authority shall include
space above or in the vicinity of the Mason City Municipal Airport necessary or desirable for the safe landing and taking off of aircraft.
D. To manage, control, improve, maintain and operate the present Mason City Municipal Airport and any future Municipally owned real estate acquired for
similar purposes. (Ord. 1333, 7-21-1975)
E. To have and exercise all power, authority and duties which the City of Mason City might possess or exercise with respect to the Mason City Municipal
Airport, except the power to sell real estate comprising the Mason City Municipal Airport, which shall be sold only upon the unanimous vote of all
members of the City Council, and except as herein limited. (Ord. 1533, 1979)
7-1-5: FEDERAL AND STATE AID:
The Airport Commission is authorized to accept, receive and receipt for Federal and State monies and other monies, public or private, for the acquisition,
construction, enlargement, improvement, maintenance, equipping and operation of the Mason City Municipal Airport and other air navigation facilities and
sites therefor, and to comply with provisions of the laws of the United States and of the State of Iowa, and any rules and regulations made thereunder, for
the expenditure of Federal or State monies upon the Mason City Municipal Airport or other air navigation facilities. (Ord. 1333, 7-21-1975)
7-1-6: CHARGES AND LEASES:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 140/358
The Airport Commission may from time to time fix, establish and collect a schedule of charges for use of the Mason City Municipal Airport, or any part
thereof, which charges shall be used in connection with the maintenance and operation of said airport. The Airport Commission may lease all or any
portion of property acquired for airport purposes for a period of years not to exceed fifty (50), and shall have the authority and duty to hold such public
hearings as may be required in connection therewith, and may sell any equipment no longer required. (Ord. 1533, 1979)
7-1-7: FUNDS:
The Airport Commission shall annually certify to the City Council the amount of tax required for airport purposes in the ensuing fiscal year and shall
present to the City Council detailed budget estimates which shall be subject to approval, increase or decrease at the discretion of the City Council. (Ord.
1333, 7-21-1975)
All funds derived from taxation or otherwise for airport purposes shall be under the sole and absolute control of the Airport Commission for the purposes
prescribed herein, and shall be deposited with the City Clerk to the credit of the Airport Commission, and shall be disbursed only on orders of the Airport
Commission by written warrants of the City Finance Director, pursuant to mutually acceptable procedures established by the Airport Commission and City
Council. (Ord. 1333, 7-21-1975; amd. 1985 Code)
7-1-8: REPORTS:
The revenues and expenditures of the Airport Commission shall be reported monthly by the Finance Director, in the manner of other departmental
expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each member of the commission and in the Finance Director's report to the City Council. (1985 Code)
Chapter 2
AIRPORT RULES AND REGULATIONS
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter mean:
ARFF: Aircraft rescue and firefighting.
AIR OPERATIONS AREAS: Runways, taxiways, safety areas and approach zones on the airport.
AIRCRAFT: Machine or structure designed or used for flight in air.
AIRCRAFT FACILITIES AREAS: Hangars, ramps, aprons and other areas utilized by aircraft at the airport outside air operations areas.
AIRPORT: The Mason City, Iowa, Municipal Airport and all its improvements and appurtenances.
AIRPORT ACTIVITIES: Any one (1) of the following:
Aerial photography or survey.
Aircraft rental.
Aircraft repair station (including paint shop).
Aircraft sales.
Aircraft store.
Avionics sales and repair station.
Banner towing and aerial advertising.
Charter service.
Crop dusting, seeding, spraying and bird chasing.
Flight instruction.
Fuel service.
Power line or pipeline patrol.
Propeller sales and service.
AIRPORT EMPLOYEE: Employee of the commission.
AVIATION OPERATOR: Person under written lease with the commission providing on the airport and serving the public with one (1) airport activity and
otherwise meeting the minimum standards set forth herein for an aviation operator.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 141/358
CITY: City of Mason City, Iowa.
COMMISSION: The Airport Commission of the City.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicle of the Police Department, Fire Department, ambulance or other vehicle transporting an airport official or airport
employee in response to an emergency.
FAA: Federal Aviation Administration, United States Department of Transportation.
FAR: Federal Aviation Regulation written, published and adopted by FAA.
FIXED BASE OPERATOR: Person under written lease with the commission providing on the airport and serving the public with at least five (5) airport
activities, three (3) of which shall be: a) aircraft repair station; b) fuel service; and c) charter service, and otherwise meeting the minimum standards set
forth herein for a fixed base operator.
FUEL TRUCK: Motor vehicle used for transporting, handling or dispensing of aviation fuel or petroleum products.
FUELING OPERATIONS: Fueling, defueling, oil service, sumping and any other activity involving the handling or dispensing of fuel or petroleum products
at the airport.
INOPERABLE AIRCRAFT: Aircraft having: a) no valid airworthiness certificate; b) no current Federal or State registration; c) broken or missing windshield
or other glass; d) deflated tire(s); or e) damaged propeller(s), control surfaces or other part rendering the aircraft incapable of safe takeoff or flight.
LOCAL OPERATOR: Person under written lease with the commission providing on the airport and serving the public with at least two (2) but not more than
four (4) airport activities and otherwise meeting the minimum standards set forth herein for a local operator.
MANAGER: The Airport Manager appointed by the commission or the airport employee designated by the Manager with commission approval.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Machine or structure designed or used for self-propelled movement on ground, except for any emergency vehicle and commission
vehicles.
NFPA: National Fire Protection Association.
NONSCHEDULED OPERATOR: Person whose operations are not required to meet regulations imposed by the FAA upon a scheduled air carrier
operating aircraft at the airport for the purpose of transporting passengers, mail, express, freight, cargo or for refueling, for hire, gift, remuneration or
reward.
PERSON: Individual, legal entity or association.
POLICE OFFICER: Person authorized by law to direct or regulate traffic and enforce airport rules and regulations.
PRIVATE AREA: Space on the airport to which public access is limited.
PUBLIC AREA: Space on the airport other than private area.
SCHEDULED AIR CARRIER: Person whose operations meet regulations imposed by the FAA upon a scheduled air carrier operating aircraft at the airport
for the purpose of transporting passengers, mail, express, freight or cargo. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008; amd. 2017 Code)
7-2-2: SCOPE AND APPLICATION:
The operation of aircraft in the air space above the airport and at the airport and other activity at the airport shall be conducted in conformity with Federal,
State and local law, including the rules, regulations, minimum standards and other provisions of this chapter. Should any provision of this chapter or local
law conflict with Federal or State law, such Federal or State law shall take precedence. Nothing herein shall be construed to waive or limit the application
of any Federal, State or local law more stringent, more restrictive or affording another remedy respecting any matter the subject of this chapter. (Ord. 08-
09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-3: CLOSING OF AIRPORT:
When the Manager believes airport facilities are unsafe for aeronautical activity, the Manager may close the airport. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-4: INTERFERING OR TAMPERING WITH AIRCRAFT:
No person, except airport employees when acting in their official capacities or other person designated by the Manager, shall put in motion or interfere or
tamper with any aircraft, aircraft part, instrument or tool, without permission of the owner. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-5: REFUSAL OF AIRPORT USE:
The Manager may restrict or prohibit any flight or other activity at the airport in the interest of public safety and welfare. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-6: CARELESS OR NEGLIGENT OPERATION:
No aircraft shall be operated: a) in a careless or negligent manner; b) while the pilot or any other person aboard the aircraft and controlling any part of its
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 142/358
operation is under the influence of an intoxicating beverage or other drug; or c) if the aircraft is in a condition or loaded so as to endanger persons or
property. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-7: AIRCRAFT EQUIPMENT:
No aircraft may land or take off unless it is equipped with brakes or other means of preventing movement on the ground and is otherwise in sound
condition. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-8: AIRCRAFT TAKEOFFS, LANDINGS AND TAXIING:
A. Aircraft takeoffs and landings shall be made only on designated runways, except by rotary wing aircraft. Turn areas shall not be used for takeoffs or
landings except in emergencies. Taxiways and ramp areas shall not be used for takeoffs or landings by fixed wing aircraft except in emergencies.
B. Rotary wing aircraft, during final landing or takeoff, shall not pass over any building, motor vehicle parking area or aircraft ramp.
C. Aircraft operating under visual flight rules shall conform to a standard left hand traffic pattern.
D. Aircraft shall taxi at a safe speed with due regard for other aircraft, persons and property and not in excess of ten (10) miles per hour while on ramps or
aprons adjacent to buildings.
E. No aircraft shall be taxied into or out of any hangar. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-9: PARKING OF AIRCRAFT:
A. Unhangared aircraft shall be parked only in areas designated by the Manager and shall be secured when left unattended. Owners of such aircraft shall
be responsible for any damage or loss resulting from noncompliance with this provision.
B. Use by aircraft or motor vehicles of ramp loading areas at the airport terminal building shall be limited to fifteen (15) minutes unless otherwise approved
by the Manager. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-10: AIRCRAFT ENGINE OPERATION:
A. No aircraft engine shall be operated by a person other than a pilot or mechanic licensed and certified in its operation.
B. Aircraft shall be operated only in locations designated by the Manager and when the operation will not endanger persons or property. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-
2008)
7-2-11: INOPERABLE AIRCRAFT:
A. Inoperable aircraft shall not be parked on the airport.
B. The owner of an inoperable aircraft shall be responsible for the parking of the inoperable aircraft on the airport in violation of this chapter.
C. Upon discovery of an inoperable aircraft parked on the airport, notification in writing shall be given the owner that:
1. Parking of the inoperable aircraft constitutes a violation of this chapter;
2. The owner must abate the violation by removing or repairing the inoperable aircraft within sixty (60) days after service of the notice;
3. Failure of the owner to remove or repair the inoperable aircraft within the sixty (60) day notice period shall be sufficient cause for removal and
disposal of the inoperable aircraft by the City and assessment of costs to the owner.
D. Each day after expiration of the sixty (60) day notice period that the inoperable aircraft remains parked on the airport, the owner may be charged with a
new violation of this chapter.
E. As an alternative to the foregoing provisions of this section, a citation for a Municipal infraction may be issued to the owner of the inoperable aircraft,
setting forth the violation of this chapter and seeking an order of removal on conviction.
F. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to inoperable aircraft under the custody and control of a person under lease with the commission and
serving the public as an aircraft repair station or as authorized by the Manager. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-12: REPAIR OF AIRCRAFT:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 143/358
No person shall repair an aircraft or aircraft part in any area other than that designated by the Manager, except minor adjustments may be made while the
aircraft is on the loading ramp preparatory to takeoff when such adjustments are necessary to prevent a delay in departure. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-13: REGISTRATION:
Owners of aircraft using the airport as a base of operation shall register with the Manager, giving such information as may be required by the Manager for
airport records. Any change in aircraft ownership will require a change in registration. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-14: THREATS:
A. A person having knowledge or suspicion of an aircraft or person possessing explosives on the airport shall notify the Manager immediately.
B. The Manager may issue directives and take action necessary to protect people and property when a threat involving explosives, weapons or sabotage
exists at the airport.
C. The Manager may establish or revise at any time procedures for dealing with threats involving explosives, weapons or sabotage. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-15: STUNT FLYING; AEROBATICS:
Events involving aerial activities not of a routine nature shall require authorization by the commission and shall be coordinated with the Manager who may
require an "air boss" experienced in directing and controlling such activities. Any such activities shall be conducted in a manner that does not endanger
persons or property. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-16: FUELING AND FLAMMABLES:
A. Fuelers: The following rules shall apply to persons engaged in fueling operations:
1. Only persons holding a permit issued by the commission may engage in fueling operations, except owners with respect to their own aircraft.
2. Application for a permit shall be made to the commission in writing.
3. Permittees shall pay flowage fees as determined and pursuant to procedures established by the commission.
B. Fueling Operations: The following rules shall apply to fueling operations: (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
1. All fueling operations shall comply with applicable FAA and NFPA Standards and Codes.
2. Fueling operations shall be conducted only at locations designated by the Manager.
3. Fuel storage areas shall be fenced, with gates and warning signs prohibiting public access.
4. No aircraft shall be fueled with one (1) or more engines running or while heat is being applied to the aircraft.
5. No aircraft shall be fueled in a hangar, other enclosed space or congested area.
6. No smoking or open flame shall be permitted within one hundred feet (100') of fueling operations.
7. In fueling operations, aircraft and fuel servicing equipment shall be bonded and operated in a manner that will prevent static ignition of volatile
liquids.
8. During fueling operations, a fueler shall have at least one (1) person on duty who has been trained in fire safety and completed an aviation fuel
training course approved by the Manager.
9. During fueling operations, at least two (2) dry chemical fire extinguishers with a minimum rating of 20B:C shall be available for immediate use.
10. During fueling operations, no person shall operate any radio, transmitter, receiver, electrical appliance, cell phone or other equipment having the
potential to cause a spark or ignition of volatile liquids.
11. Fueling operations shall cease during an electrical storm or when lightning discharges occur within the vicinity of the airport.
12. Fuelers shall take all precautions to prevent spillage of fuel; any spill in excess of one (1) gallon shall be reported to ARFF personnel for inspection
and cleanup; the fueler shall be responsible for all costs incident to each spill and cleanup.
13. Equipment used in fueling operations shall be maintained in good and safe condition; fueling shall cease in the event of an equipment malfunction
and shall not resume until the equipment has been repaired or replaced.
14. Electrical switches and fixtures in areas that could be reached by fuel or fuel vapors shall be explosion-proof.
15. Fuel trucks shall not be parked or stored inside a building except when undergoing maintenance in a building approved for the purpose. (Ord. 08-
09, 8-5-2008; amd. 2017 Code)
16. No aircraft engine shall be started when there is gasoline on the ground under the aircraft.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 144/358
17. No aircraft shall be fueled while passengers are on board, unless a passenger loading ramp is in place at an open cabin door with attendants
present or nearby.
18. No airborne radar equipment shall be operated or ground tested in an area where the directional beam is within three hundred feet (300') of another
aircraft, fueling operations, fuel truck or fuel storage facility.
19. Fuel trucks shall be conspicuously marked.
20. No flammable gas or oil exceeding ten (10) gallons in quantity shall be stored in any structure at the airport unless approved by the Manager.
21. No cylinder or flask of compressed flammable gas shall be stored in any structure at the airport.
C. Cleaning Of Aircraft: The cleaning of aircraft and parts thereof using flammables shall be conducted in open air or in a fireproof room with readily
accessible fire extinguishers.
D. Cleaning Of Floors: Flammables shall not be permitted in cleaning floors, which shall be kept clean and free from oil.
E. Disposal Of Toxic Liquids Prohibited: No flammable, corrosive or toxic liquid shall be disposed of into storm sewer, toilet, shop or hangar drains, catch
basins or ditches, or onto aprons, parking lots, roadways or elsewhere at the airport. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-17: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person on the airport to:
A. Smoke in areas designated nonsmoking by the Manager.
B. Deface, damage, destroy or remove any building, other improvement, traffic sign, signal or device, or other signage permitted by the Manager, or fence,
railing, guard, barrier, light or other device placed in the vicinity of any excavation, hole, pile of material or other hazard.
C. Enter any private area without authorization by the Manager.
D. Bring any animal, except for a service dog in the custody of its master, a dog utilized for law enforcement purposes or an animal properly leashed and
confined for air shipment.
E. Fire or discharge any weapon or possess any explosive or other dangerous article; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply to police officers
in the discharge of their duties.
F. Interfere in any manner with airport operations.
G. Commit any act that would be in violation of law. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-18: JURISDICTION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT:
The jurisdiction of the Police Department of the City is extended to the airport and all police officers shall have authority to enforce ordinances of the City at
the airport. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-19: COMMERCIAL AIRPORT ACTIVITIES:
No commercial activity may be conducted at the airport without written agreement with the commission. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-20: CERTIFICATED AIR CARRIERS:
Schedules of rates and charges for all certificated air carriers shall be set by the commission and revised whenever deemed necessary by the
commission. Rates and charges shall include landing fees, floor rental charges and other charges that are pertinent to the operation of the airport. Such
fares and charges shall apply without discrimination to all certificated scheduled and nonscheduled air carriers using the airport. Landing fees will be
based on a weight frequency basis unless otherwise specified in a written agreement between the commission and the carrier. No person shall operate
from the airport any aircraft that is not fully certificated by and registered with the FAA and carrying a current certificate of airworthiness, with the exception
of government owned aircraft. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-21: OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. No motor vehicle shall be operated in an air operations area without permission from the Manager.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 145/358
B. Motor vehicle operations in aircraft facility areas may be restricted by the Manager.
C. Motor vehicles shall travel at safe speeds as conditions warrant and in no event in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour on ramps, aprons and in aircraft
facilities areas.
D. Aircraft and pedestrians shall at all times have the right-of-way over motor vehicle traffic.
E. All motor vehicles shall pass to the rear of taxiing aircraft.
F. No motor vehicle shall be operated on the airport so as to endanger persons or property.
G. Parking of motor vehicles shall be permitted only in areas and for such periods of time as designated by the Manager.
H. A motor vehicle traversing an air operations area with permission of the Manager shall be escorted by an airport employee having two-way radio
communication.
I. In the event of emergency, there shall be no motor vehicle movement on the airport unless permitted by the Manager.
J. Separate areas may be designated for parking by members of the public, airport employees, airport tenants or others as designated by the Manager.
K. Except for minor repairs necessary to remove motor vehicles from the airport, no such vehicles shall be cleaned or repaired at the airport, unless
approved by the commission.
L. All airport roadways shall have City "status".
M. The operation of motor vehicles shall otherwise be governed by applicable law. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-22: SPECIALIZED COMMERCIAL FLYING SERVICES:
A. Statement Of Concept: A specialized commercial flying services operator is a person providing for hire in the conduct of any of the following activities:
1. Crop dusting, seeding, spraying and bird chasing.
2. Banner towing and aerial advertising.
3. Aerial photography or survey.
4. Power line or pipeline patrol.
5. Any other operation specifically excluded from FAR part 135.
B. Minimum Standards:
1. The operator shall lease from the commission an area of not less than four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet of ground space including a
building thereon providing at least two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor space for aircraft and other storage and at least five hundred (500)
square feet of floor space for office and restrooms. The operator shall be responsible for heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for
customer access to the building and furnishing it with communication facilities, including a point of contact, for customer use.
2. An operator engaged in crop dusting, seeding or spraying shall make suitable arrangements and provide adequate equipment upon the leased
premises for the safe loading, unloading, storage and containment of chemicals.
3. The operator shall provide and have based upon the leased premises not less than one (1) airworthy aircraft, either owned or under written lease to
operator, meeting all requirements of the FAA and other applicable law with respect to the type of operation being performed.
4. The operator shall employ trained personnel in such numbers as may be required to meet the minimum standards in an efficient manner, but never
less than one (1) person holding a current FAA commercial certificate, properly rated for the aircraft to be used and the type of operation being
performed.
5. The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits specified:
a. Aircraft liability: Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence; passenger liability,
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence; limited to two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per passenger.
b. Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage: Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence.
c. Products liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-23: AIRCRAFT RENTALS:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 146/358
A. Statement Of Concept: An aircraft rental operator is a person engaged in the rental of aircraft to the public.
B. Minimum Standards:
1. The operator shall lease from the commission an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of ground space including a building thereon
providing at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor space for aircraft storage and at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space for
office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall be responsible for heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for customer
access to the building and furnishing it with communication facilities, including a point of contact, for customer use.
2. The operator shall have available upon the leased premises not less than two (2) certified and airworthy aircraft, at least one (1) of which shall be a
four-place aircraft, and at least one (1) of which shall be equipped for and capable of flight under instrument conditions.
3. The operator shall provide services upon the leased premises eight (8) hours daily, six (6) days per week. The operator shall employ trained
personnel in such numbers as may be required to meet the minimum standards in an efficient manner, but never less than one (1) person holding a
current commercial pilot certificate with appropriate ratings, including instructor rating.
4. The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits specified:
a. Aircraft liability: Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence, limited to two
hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per passenger.
b. Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage: Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence.
c. Student and renters' liability: One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-24: AIRCRAFT SALES:
A. Statement Of Concept: An aircraft sales operator is a person engaged in: 1) the sale of new or used aircraft, on a retail or wholesale basis, through a
franchise, licensed dealership or distributorship of an aircraft manufacturer; and 2) arranging for such repairs, services and parts as necessary to meet
any guarantee or warranty on aircraft sold by the operator.
B. Minimum Standards:
1. The operator shall lease from the commission an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of ground space including a building thereon
providing at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor space for display and storage of aircraft and at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of
floor space for office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall be responsible for heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for
customer access to the building and furnishing it with communication facilities, including a point of contact, for customer use.
2. The operator shall make arrangements for such repair, services and parts as necessary to meet any guarantee or warranty on new or used aircraft
sold by the operator. Such arrangements may be made by written agreement with a person engaged in activity as an operator of an approved aircraft
repair station at the airport. The operator shall provide an adequate inventory of spare parts for the type of new aircraft sold by the operator.
3. The operator shall provide services upon the leased premises eight (8) hours daily, five (5) days per week. The operator shall employ trained
personnel in such numbers as may be required to meet the minimum standards in an efficient manner, but never less than one (1) person having a
current, effective commercial pilot certificate with single-engine rating and instructor rating.
4. The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits specified:
a. Aircraft liability: Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence; passenger liability,
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence; limited to two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per passenger.
b. Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage: Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence.
c. Products liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-25: AIRCRAFT REPAIR STATIONS:
A. Statement Of Concept: An aircraft repair station operator is a person providing either or both airframe and power plant repair service, which shall
include the nonexclusive right to sell aircraft parts and accessories.
B. Minimum Standards:
1. The operator shall lease from the commission an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of ground space including a building thereon
providing at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor space for either or both airframe and power plant repair service and at least one
thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space for office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall be responsible for heating, lighting and
making adequate arrangements for customer access to the building and furnishing it with communication facilities, including a point of contact, for
customer use.
2. The operator shall provide services upon the leased premises eight (8) hours daily, five (5) days per week. The operator shall employ trained
personnel in such numbers as may be required to meet the minimum standards in an efficient manner, but never less than one (1) person currently
holding an FAA inspection authorization and otherwise certified by the FAA with ratings appropriate to the work being performed.
3. The operator shall provide equipment, supplies and parts sufficient to meet requirements for certification by the FAA as an approved aircraft repair
station.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 147/358
4. The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits specified:
a. Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage: Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence.
b. Hangar keepers liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each accident or replacement value of the aircraft being repaired, whichever is more.
c. Products liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-26: AVIONICS AND PROPELLER SERVICE:
A. Statement Of Concept: An avionics and propeller service operator is a person engaged in the repair of aircraft radios, propellers, instruments and
accessories for general aviation aircraft, which shall include the nonexclusive right to sell such items.
B. Minimum Standards:
1. The operator shall lease from the airport an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of ground space including a building thereon
providing at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor space for repair service and at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space for
office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall be responsible for heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for customer
access to the building and furnishing it with communication facilities, including a point of contact, for customer use.
2. The operator shall provide services upon the leased premises eight (8) hours daily, five (5) days per week. The operator shall employ trained
personnel in such numbers as may be required to meet the minimum standards in an efficient manner, but never less than one (1) person holding
appropriate certifications issued by the FAA for rating as a radio, instrument or propeller repair person.
3. The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits specified:
a. Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage: Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence.
b. Hangar keepers liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence.
c. Products liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-27: CHARTER SERVICES:
A. Statement Of Concept: A charter services operator is a person providing air transportation to the general public for hire, either on a charter basis
(commercial operation) or as an air taxi operator, as defined by the FAA.
B. Minimum Standards:
1. The operator shall lease from the airport an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of ground space including a building thereon
providing at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor space for aircraft storage and at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space for
office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall be responsible for heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for customer
access to the building and furnishing it with communication facilities, including a point of contact, for customer use.
2. The operator shall provide, either owned or under written lease to operator, not less than one (1) single-engine, four-place aircraft and one (1) multiengine
aircraft, both of which shall meet the requirements, including for instrument operations, of the air taxi commercial operator certificate held by
the operator.
3. The operator shall provide services upon the leased premises eight (8) hours daily, six (6) days per week. During all other times, the operator shall
provide on call service. The operator shall employ trained personnel in such numbers as may be required to meet the minimum standards in an
efficient manner, who shall include not less than at least one (1) FAA certified commercial pilot rated to permit the flight activity offered by the
operator.
4. The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits specified:
a. Aircraft liability: Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence; passenger liability,
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence; limited to two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per passenger.
b. Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage: Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-28: FLIGHT INSTRUCTION:
A. Statement Of Concept: A flight instruction operator is a person certified by the FAA for and engaged in the instruction of pilots in the operation of fixed or
rotary wing aircraft, with such instruction to include ground school and flight checks designed to prepare students for meeting requirements for
licensure and rating as pilots.
B. Minimum Standards:
1. The operator shall lease from the commission an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of ground space including a building thereon
providing at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor space for aircraft storage and at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space for
office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall be responsible for heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for customer
access to the building and furnishing it with communication facilities, including a point of contact, for customer use.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 148/358
2. The operator shall have available for use in flight instruction, either owned or under written lease to operator, not less than two (2) properly
certificated aircraft, at least one (1) of which shall be a four-place aircraft, and at least one (1) of which shall be equipped for instrument flight
instruction.
3. The operator shall provide services upon the leased premises eight (8) hours daily, six (6) days per week. The operator shall employ trained
personnel in such numbers as may be required to meet the minimum standards in an efficient manner, who shall include not less than at least one
(1) flight instructor certified by the FAA to provide the instruction offered.
4. The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits specified:
a. Aircraft liability: Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence; passenger liability,
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence; limited to two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per passenger.
b. Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage: Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence.
c. Student and renters' liability: One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-29: FUELING SERVICE:
A. Statement Of Concept: A fuel service operator is a person engaged in fueling operations, which may include ramp assistance for and the parking,
storage and tiedown of aircraft within the area leased by the operator.
B. Minimum Standards:
1. The operator shall lease from the commission an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of ground space including a building thereon
providing at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space for office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall be responsible for
heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for customer access to the building and furnishing it with communication facilities, including a
point of contact, for customer use.
2. The operator shall have available for use, either owned or under written lease to operator, at least two (2) 10,000-gallon fuel storage tanks at the
airport and shall provide at least two (2) grades of fuel adequate to meet the demand of general aviation users of the airport. The operator shall
provide separate meters, filter equipped dispensers and pumps, fixed or mobile, for each grade of fuel dispensed by the operator.
3. The operator may provide minor repair service that does not require a certificated mechanical rating and cabin services, but only on the ramp or
apron parking area within the leased premises and when such services may be performed efficiently at that location.
4. The operator shall make provision for the transportation of pilots and passengers of transient general aviation aircraft using the operator's facilities
and services from and to the operator's office and the airport terminal.
5. The operator shall provide and maintain equipment and supplies appropriate and necessary for the servicing of general aviation aircraft using the
airport.
6. The operator shall provide services upon the leased premises at least nine (9) hours daily, seven (7) days per week, except major holidays. During
such major holidays and all other times, the operator shall provide on call service. The operator shall employ trained personnel in such numbers as
may be required to meet the minimum standards in an efficient manner.
7. The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits specified:
a. Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage: Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence.
b. Hangar keepers liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence.
c. Products liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence.
d. Motor vehicle liability: Bodily injury and property damage combined single limit, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-
5-2008)
7-2-30: MULTIPLE SERVICES:
A. Statement Of Concept: A multiple services operator shall be a fixed base operator (FBO) or local operator (LO).
B. Minimum Standards:
1. The FBO shall lease from the commission an area of not less than twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet of ground space including a building
thereon or to be erected thereon providing at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor space for office, customer lounge and restrooms. The
LO shall lease from the commission an area of not less than sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet of ground space including a building thereon or to
be erected thereon providing at least eight thousand (8,000) square feet of floor space for office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall
be responsible for heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for customer access to the building and furnishing it with communication
facilities, including a point of contact, for customer use. The operator shall otherwise meet the minimum standards established by this chapter for
each airport activity engaged in by the operator, except where this would result in duplication, in which case the operator shall meet the highest
applicable minimum standards among those set for aviation activities engaged in by the operator.
2. The operator shall carry insurance as required to meet the minimum standards for each airport activity engaged in by the operator, except where this
would result in duplication, in which case the operator shall meet the highest applicable minimum standards among those set for airport activities
engaged in by the operator. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 149/358
7-2-31: AVIATION OPERATORS:
A. Statement Of Concept: An aviation operator is a person engaged in a single airport activity.
B. Minimum Standards:
1. Except as provided hereafter, the operator shall lease from the commission ground space including a building thereon in size not less than that
required under this chapter for the airport activity engaged in by the operator.
2. The operator shall otherwise meet the minimum standards established by this chapter for the airport activity engaged in by the operator.
C. Minimum Use Fee: In the event the airport activity of the operator, as determined by the commission, does not require the lease of space upon the
airport, the operator shall pay a fee determined by the commission and the minimum standard for rental of space otherwise applicable to the aviation
activity shall not apply. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-32: FLYING CLUBS:
A. Flying Clubs Permitted: The commission may permit flying clubs at the airport.
B. Organization And Membership: Any group seeking to function as a flying club at the airport shall make written application to the commission and
provide such documentation and other information as may be required by the commission. Only groups organized as nonprofit corporations under Iowa
law for the purpose of fostering flying for pleasure, the development of skills in aeronautics, pilotage and navigation, and increasing related awareness
and appreciation by the general public shall be considered for recognition as flying clubs at the airport.
C. Registration Of Aircraft And Commercial Restrictions: Aircraft owned, leased or used by a flying club shall be registered with the commission and may
not be leased or used for any commercial purpose. No flying club or member thereof shall provide instruction for persons other than members of the
flying club, and the flying club shall not operate or provide charter service of any nature.
D. Insurance: The flying club shall carry the following insurance with the limits specified: comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage: bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-33: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. All leases entered into with the commission shall contain provisions required by the FAA for compliance with grant assurances required by the FAA in
exchange for Federal funding relative to development at the airport.
B. Evidence of all insurance required under this chapter shall be filed with the commission by the person obliged to carry the insurance. Insurance required
under this chapter shall be subject to change by the commission.
C. Evidence of every certification required under this chapter shall be filed with the commission by the person obliged to hold the certification.
D. Minimum standards relative to building requirements may be satisfied with one (1) building, attached buildings or separate buildings including at
different locations on the airport. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-34: HANGAR DEVELOPMENT:
Private development may be permitted on the airport at locations and upon terms and conditions deemed appropriate by the commission. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-
2008)
7-2-35: COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Any police officer shall have authority to enforce ordinances of the City at the airport.
B. Any person acting in violation of a provision of this chapter may be forcibly ejected and removed from the airport by any police officer or the Manager.
C. The commission reserves the right, power and privilege to exercise all other reasonable means to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
D. Violation of this chapter is a violation of this Code, and any other applicable law and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
Chapter 3
AIRPORT ZONING
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 150/358
7-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MASON CITY MUNICIPAL AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE or the AIRPORT ZONING
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context requires otherwise. In each case the singular shall include the
plural and the plural shall include the singular.
AERIAL NAVIGATION: The movement of an aircraft through the air.
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance used or designed for carrying humans in flight through the air, but not including parachutes.
AIRPORT: The Mason City Municipal Airport.
AIRPORT COMMISSION: The Mason City Airport Commission or its duly appointed representative.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: One thousand two hundred thirteen feet (1,213') above mean sea level (MSL).
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or tree or use of land which would exceed the Federal obstruction standards as contained in 14 CFR FAR, part 77, and
which obstructs or is otherwise hazardous to the landing or takeoff of any aircraft at the airport, or hazardous to persons or property on the ground.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA: Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided by this chapter.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The building official of Mason City, Iowa, or the building official of Clear Lake, Iowa, or a duly authorized designee thereof.
CITY: The City of Mason City, Iowa, and/or the City of Clear Lake, Iowa.
COUNTY: Cerro Gordo County, Iowa.
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (FAA): An agency of the United States government that administers the Federal regulations that relate to the use
and flight of aircraft, and related regulations. The location of the controlling FAA office may be found in section 7-3-17, "Appendix I", of this chapter.
INNER EDGE: That edge of any zone that is closest to the runway end to which the zone applies. The inner edge is perpendicular to the runway
centerline.
JURISDICTION: The City of Mason City, Iowa, and/or the City of Clear Lake, Iowa, and/or Cerro Gordo County, Iowa.
NONCOMPATIBLE USE: Any activity that would degrade the safety of people on the ground, or occupants of aircraft in flight, including, but not limited to:
putrescible waste landfills, smoke or steam producing activities, any activity that would produce electrical or radio signal interference not compatible with
safe operation of an aircraft, and those that lead to an assembly of people, including, but not limited to: residences, churches, schools, hospitals, office
buildings, shopping centers, and other uses with similar concentrations of persons.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: Any structure or portion of any structure that is located within or underlying any of the zones created by this chapter
and that does not conform to the height and use provisions of this chapter.
OBSTRUCTION: Any structure or tree, the height of which exceeds that which is allowed by this chapter.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or body politic, and includes any trustee,
assignee or other similar representative thereof.
RUNWAY THRESHOLD: A designated point on any airport runway that establishes the end of the runway. The runway threshold may or may not
correspond with the end of the paved portion of the runway.
STRUCTURE: Any object, whether permanent or temporary, stationary or mobile, constructed or installed by humans, including, but not limited to:
buildings, towers, smokestacks, scaffolds, lighting fixtures, public and private roads, railways, and overhead transmission lines, including poles or other
structures supporting the same.
TREE: Any object of natural growth twenty feet (20') in height or greater, or that may be expected to grow to a height of twenty feet (20') or greater.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The Zoning Administrator of Cerro Gordo County, Iowa, or a duly authorized designee thereof. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-3: AIRPORT ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones which are described herein and depicted on the
Mason City Airport Zoning Map, which is hereby made a part of this chapter. Any structure or tree located in more than one (1) zone is considered to be
only in the zone with the more restrictive height and use limitation. The various zones hereby established and defined are as follows:
A. Approach Overlay Zone (AO):
1. Defined: The airspace above a sloping plane extending outward from each end of each runway, rising uniformly at a fixed ratio, and of fixed size,
through which aircraft commonly operate when arriving at, and departing from, the airport. AO Zones vary in size and slope based upon the present
or future use that can be expected for each airport runway. The AO Zones at the airport are as follows:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 151/358
a. Runway 36 (AO36): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the paved portion at the end of the runway and centered on the extended
centerline of the runway, the inner edge of the zone is one thousand feet (1,000') wide, expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of sixteen
thousand feet (16,000'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the runway threshold at the centerline. For each fifty feet (50')
of horizontal distance the floor of the zone rises from the inner edge one foot (1') (50:1) for a distance of ten thousand feet (10,000'), and for an
additional forty thousand feet (40,000'), for each forty feet (40') of horizontal distance, rising at a rate of one foot (1') (40:1).
b. Runway 18 (AO18): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the paved portion at the end of the runway and centered on the extended
centerline of the runway, the inner edge of the zone is one thousand feet (1,000') wide, expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of sixteen
thousand feet (16,000'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the runway threshold at the centerline. For each fifty feet (50')
of horizontal distance the floor of the zone rises from the inner edge one foot (1') (50:1) for a distance of ten thousand feet (10,000'), and for an
additional forty thousand feet (40,000'), for each forty feet (40') of horizontal distance, rising at a rate of one foot (1') (40:1).
c. Runway 30 (AO30): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the paved portion at each end of the runway and centered on the extended
centerline of the runway, the inner edge of each zone is five hundred feet (500') wide, expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of three
thousand five hundred feet (3,500'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the runway threshold at the centerline. The floor of
the zone rises from the inner edge one foot (1') for each thirty four feet (34') of horizontal distance (34:1), for a distance of ten thousand feet
(10,000').
d. Runway 12 (AO12): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the paved portion at each end of the runway and centered on the extended
centerline of the runway, the inner edge of each zone is five hundred feet (500') wide, expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of three
thousand five hundred feet (3,500'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the runway threshold at the centerline. The floor of
the zone rises from the inner edge one foot (1') for each thirty four feet (34') of horizontal distance (34:1), for a distance of ten thousand feet
(10,000').
2. Height Limitations:
a. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or alter any structure, nor plant or grow any tree, so as to penetrate any Approach
Overlay Zone created herein.
b. No person shall establish or maintain any private roadway in any location that would result in penetration of any AO Zone by any portion of any
vehicle that shall be permitted to operate upon such roadway.
B. Controlled Activity Zone (CA):
1. Defined: An area of fixed size, underlying the innermost portion (closest to the runway end) of the AO Zone for that runway, descending from the
floor of the AO Zone to the ground. The width and length of CA Zones may vary, and may be different on each runway end. The CA Zones for the
airport are as follows:
a. Runway 36 (CA36): Underlying the innermost two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of the AO Zone at the south end of the runway, the width of
the CA Zone is one thousand feet (1,000') at the inner edge and expands uniformly to a width of one thousand seven hundred fifty feet (1,750').
b. Runway 18 (CA18): Underlying the innermost two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of the AO Zone at the south end of the runway, the width of
the CA Zone is one thousand feet (1,000') at the inner edge and expands uniformly to a width of one thousand seven hundred fifty feet (1,750').
c. Runway 30/12 (CA30, CA12): Underlying the innermost one thousand seven hundred feet (1,700') of the AO Zone at each end of the runway, the
width of each CA Zone is one thousand feet (1,000') at the inner edge, expanding uniformly to a width of one thousand five hundred ten feet
(1,510').
2. Use Limitation: No person shall establish or maintain any noncompatible use in any Controlled Activity Zone.
C. Horizontal Overlay Zone (HO):
1. Defined: The airspace above a horizontal plane, the perimeter of which is established by swinging arcs of ten thousand foot (10,000') radii from the
center of the inner edge of the AO Zones of Runways 36, 18, and 30, and an arc of five thousand foot (5,000') radius from the center of the inner
edge of the AO Zone of Runway 12, and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. The floor of the HO Zone is one hundred fifty
feet (150') above the airport elevation, or one thousand three hundred sixty three feet (1,363') above mean sea level.
2. Height Limitation: Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or alter any structure, or plant or grow any tree, so as to penetrate
the Horizontal Overlay Zone created herein.
D. Transitional Overlay Zone (TO):
1. Defined: The airspace above a sloping plane rising from the sides of each runway and from the sides of each AO Zone at the rate of one foot (1') of
elevation for each seven feet (7') horizontally (7:1). The TO Zones for the airport are as follows:
a. Runway 36 (TO36): Along each side of the runway, beginning at a point five hundred feet (500') from the centerline of the runway and at right
angles to the runway centerline, and from each side of the AO Zone at the south end of the runway, at right angles to the extended runway
centerline. The TO Zone is interrupted at the point where it intersects the HO Zone, and resumes at the outer edge of the CO Zone (see
subsection E of this section) and continues outward for a distance of five thousand feet (5,000') from the edge of the AO Zone.
b. Runway 18 (TO18): Along each side of the runway, beginning at a point five hundred feet (500') from the centerline of the runway and at right
angles to the runway centerline, and from each side of the AO Zone at the north end of the runway at right angles to the extended runway
centerline. The TO Zone ends at the point where it intersects the HO Zone.
c. Runway 30/12 (TO30/12): Along each side of the runway, beginning at a point five hundred feet (500') from the centerline of the runway and at
right angles to the runway centerline, and from each side of the AO Zone at each end of the runway at right angles to the extended runway
centerline. The TO Zone ends at the point where it intersects the HO Zone.
2. Height Limitations:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 152/358
a. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or alter any structure, or plant or grow any tree, so as to penetrate any Transitional
Overlay Zone created herein.
b. No person shall establish or maintain any private roadway in any location that would result in penetration of any Transitional Overlay Zone by any
portion of any vehicle that shall be permitted to operate upon such roadway.
E. Conical Overlay Zone (CO):
1. Defined: The airspace above a sloped horizontal plane beginning at the periphery of the HO Zone and rising one foot (1') in height for each twenty
feet (20') horizontally (20:1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand feet (4,000').
2. Height Limitations: Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or alter any structure, or plant or grow any tree, so as to penetrate
the Conical Overlay Zone created herein. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-4: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS:
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or alter any structure in any zone created herein without having first obtained a building
permit from the building official or a zoning permit from the Zoning Administrator. No person shall be issued a permit for any construction or alteration
without a determination or finding from the FAA. (See subsection 7-3-6B of this chapter.) Such finding or determination shall not find or determine that
the proposed construction or alteration:
1. Would create a hazard.
2. Would establish a noncompatible use.
3. Would endanger the general safety, health and welfare of persons in the vicinity of the airport, or occupants of aircraft in flight.
4. Would result in the raising of the minimum instrument flight altitude of any Federal airway, approved off airway route, or instrument approach
procedure to the airport.
B. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall occupy any structure in any zone created herein without having first obtained an occupancy
permit from the building official or Zoning Administrator. No person shall be issued an occupancy permit for any noncompatible use.
C. No person shall establish or maintain any private roadway in any location that would result in penetration of any zone created herein by any portion of
any vehicle that shall be permitted to operate upon such roadway.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no person shall, in any zone created by this chapter, or upon any land or water underlying such
zones:
1. Establish any putrescible waste landfill, or open air composting facility one (1) acre in size, or larger.
2. Create, alter, or maintain any structure or use that would create a bird strike hazard.
3. Create, alter, or maintain any structure or use in such a manner as to create electrical or radio interference with aviation navigational signals or
aircraft communications.
4. Install, align or use any lighting devices that make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, create glare in the eyes of
pilots, or otherwise impair visibility.
5. Produce steam, smoke, or other visual hazard that would impair visibility.
6. Create, alter, or maintain any structure or use that would endanger or interfere with landing, takeoff or maneuvering of any aircraft.
7. Plant, or allow the growth of, any tree, which, during the normal life cycle of such tree, can be expected to grow into any zone created herein. (Ord.
09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-5: LIGHTING AND MARKING:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any person constructing or altering any structure located in any zone created by this chapter shall
install all lighting or markings upon said structure as shall be recommended by the FAA as a part of its review of the applicant's notice of proposed
construction or alteration. Such lighting or markings shall be made in a manner consistent with FAA regulations and advisories.
B. Any permit or variance granted under the provisions of this chapter may be so conditioned so as to require the owner of the land, structure, or tree in
question to permit the City or County, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain such lighting and/or markings as the City or County deems
necessary to indicate to operators of aircraft the presence of an airport obstruction. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-6: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE:
A. Administration Of Regulations: The building official or Zoning Administrator shall perform the administration of these zoning regulations.
B. Notice Of Construction: Any person who proposes to construct or alter any structure in or underlying any of the zones created herein shall notify the
Administrator, Federal Aviation Administration, by filing with the appropriate Federal agency, an executed FAA Form 7460-1, notice of proposed
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 153/358
construction or alteration (see section 7-3-17, "Appendix II", of this chapter). Such notice should be given sixty (60) days prior to, and shall be given no
later than thirty (30) days prior to the earlier of the following dates:
1. The date the proposed construction or alteration is to begin.
2. The date an application for a building permit or occupancy permit is to be filed.
C. Waiver Of Notice Requirements: In the event of an emergency involving essential public services, public health, or public safety that requires immediate
construction, the building official, or Zoning Administrator, may waive the thirty (30) day notice requirement, provided that the applicant complies with
the requirements of 14 CFR FAR, part 77.17(d).
D. Issuance Of Permit: Except as otherwise provided herein, the building official or Zoning Administrator shall not issue any building permit or occupancy
permit without first:
1. Having received from the applicant a copy of the applicable FAA Form 7460-1, as submitted under subsection B of this section, and the
corresponding finding or determination from the FAA that the proposed construction or alteration complies with section 7-3-4 of this chapter.
2. Having determined that the proposed use is not noncompatible, and is consistent with the zoning provisions contained herein.
E. Exceptions: No FAA Form 7460-1 is required to be submitted to the FAA or to the building official or Zoning Administrator for a building permit for
construction or alteration of any structure which the building official or Zoning Administrator has determined that:
1. The proposed structure meets the requirements for shielding. Each and all of the following requirements are required for a determination of
shielding:
a. The property upon which the construction or alteration is proposed is located within the congested area of a City.
b. The proposed structure does not lie within any CA Zone.
c. There exists a structure or structures of a permanent and substantial nature at least as tall and at least as wide as the proposed structure, and
which lie(s) between the location of the proposed construction or alteration, and a point on the runway centerline at the threshold of the closest end
of the closest runway of the airport.
d. The shielding structure is within five hundred feet (500') of the structure that is proposed for construction or alteration.
e. It is evident beyond a reasonable doubt that the shielded structure will not adversely affect aerial navigation.
2. The proposed structure is an antenna that is no greater than twenty feet (20') in height, and does not increase the height of an existing antenna
structure.
3. The proposed structure is an airport, aerial navigation, or meteorological device, of a type approved by the FAA, the location and height of which is
fixed by function.
F. Waiver: The building official or Zoning Administrator shall set aside the provision of subsection D1 of this section when the following conditions have
been met:
1. The applicant has provided evidence that an applicable FAA Form 7460-1 has been submitted in accordance with subsection B of this section, and
that thirty (30) days or more have elapsed since said submission.
2. That the FAA has not issued a determination in response to the applicable FAA Form 7460-1.
3. The applicant agrees that should the subsequent FAA determination, when issued, find that the proposed construction or alteration constitutes a
hazard, or otherwise fails to comply with section 7-3-4 of this chapter, that the construction or alteration shall be revised and/or reconstructed so as to
alleviate the condition which the determination has found to be adverse.
a. The applicant further agrees that required revision and/or reconstruction shall be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days of the issuance
of the FAA determination.
b. The applicant further agrees that failure to revise or reconstruct as provided herein constitutes a nuisance, and is subject to abatement in
accordance with applicable law. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-7: NONCONFORMITIES:
A. The regulations prescribed herein are not retroactive and shall not be construed to require the removal of any tree, or the reconstruction or alteration, or
the discontinuation of any use of any structure made nonconforming by the adoption of this chapter.
B. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction or alteration, or the intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of
which was begun prior to the effective date hereof, and which is completed within one (1) year thereafter.
C. No preexisting nonconforming structure, use, or tree shall be rebuilt, altered, allowed to grow higher, or be replanted, so as to constitute a greater
airport hazard than it was at the time that these regulations were adopted.
D. Whenever the building official or Zoning Administrator determines that a nonconforming structure has been abandoned, or more than fifty percent (50%)
torn down, physically deteriorated, damaged, or decayed, no building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued that would allow such structure to
exceed the applicable height and use provisions of this chapter. Any tree so damaged or destroyed shall be subject to the provisions of subsection 7-3-
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 154/358
4D7 of this chapter.
Notwithstanding the previous provisions of this section, the owner of any preexisting nonconforming structure or tree shall be required to permit the
installation, operation, or maintenance thereon of any markers and/or lights as shall be deemed necessary by the City or County to indicate to the
operators of aircraft, the presence of such structure or tree. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the
City or County. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-8: AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 329.9 of the Iowa Code, there shall be a Mason City Municipal Airport Zoning Commission, consisting of seven (7)
members, two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the City of Mason City, two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the City of Clear Lake, two (2) of whom
shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors of Cerro Gordo County, and one (1) additional member whom shall be selected by a majority vote of the
City and County appointed members, and who shall serve as Chairperson of said commission. The terms of such members shall be as provided by
section 329.9 of the Iowa Code. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-9: AIRPORT ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 329.12 of the Iowa Code, there shall be a Mason City Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment, consisting of seven (7)
members, two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the City of Mason City, two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the City of Clear Lake, two (2) of whom
shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors of Cerro Gordo County, and one (1) additional member who shall be selected by a majority vote of the City
and County appointed members, and who shall serve as Chairperson of said board. The terms of such members shall be as provided by section 329.12 of
the Iowa Code. The Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the duties and powers established by the Iowa Code. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-10: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
A. With the concurrence of a majority vote, the Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment (the board) may, based upon a written determination from the FAA,
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official and may modify the provisions of this chapter in favor of an
applicant, provided:
1. Any height or use limitation contained in this chapter that is modified by the board shall not result in an obstruction to any aircraft in flight.
2. No use of land shall be permitted that would not be compatible with airport operations.
B. Any application for a special exception to the provisions of this chapter shall include as a part thereof, the written determination of the FAA pertaining to
the application, and no application shall be set for hearing by the board in the absence of such FAA determination. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-11: VARIANCES:
A. Any person desiring to construct or alter any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use property in a manner that would constitute a
violation of this chapter, may apply to the board for a variance from these regulations. The board shall consider no application for a variance to the
requirements of this chapter unless a copy of the application has been submitted to the Airport Commission for their opinion as to the aeronautical
effects of such a variance. If the Airport Commission fails to respond to the board within sixty (60) days from its receipt of the copy of the application,
the board may make its decision in the absence of the Airport Commission opinion. Such variances may be granted by the board only where the literal
application of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship, and are subject to the following:
1. Such variance would not be contrary to the public interest.
2. Such variance would be in the spirit of this chapter and of chapter 329 of the Iowa Code.
3. Such variance shall be granted subject to any reasonable conditions that the board may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter
and of chapter 329 of the Iowa Code.
4. Such variance shall be subject to the requirement that the applicant shall install, operate, and maintain such markings and lighting, at the applicant's
own expense, as may be necessary to indicate to aircraft operators the existence of an airport obstruction as determined by the board.
5. Such variance shall be subject to the reservation of the right of the City and the airport, at their own expense, to go onto applicant's property to
install, operate, and maintain thereon such FAA approved markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to operators of aircraft the existence of
an airport obstruction.
B. Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment may appeal such decision, pursuant to the provisions of the
Iowa Code. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-12: ENFORCEMENT:
Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the building official or Zoning Administrator, or such person(s) as the building
official or Zoning Administrator shall, from time to time, direct. However such duties of enforcement and administration shall not include any of the powers
herein delegated to the Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-13: EQUITABLE REMEDIES:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 155/358
The City or the airport may, pursuant to section 329.5 of the Iowa Code, maintain an action in equity to restrain and abate as a nuisance the creation,
establishment or maintenance of an airport hazard, in violation of any provision established by this chapter, on any property, whether within or without the
territorial limits of the City. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-14: PROHIBITED ACTS:
Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or alter any structure, use any land, or grow any tree in violation of the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-15: PENALTIES:
Each violation of these regulations shall constitute a misdemeanor and the perpetrator thereof, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day a violation occurs or continues to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-16: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
In the event of any conflict between regulations contained in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be
with respect to height of structures or trees, use of structures or land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall prevail. (Ord.
09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-17: APPENDICES:
Appendix I
The controlling Federal authority for the Mason City Municipal Airport is:
Federal Aviation Administration, Central Region
Office of the Manager, Airports Division
901 Locust
Kansas City, MO 64106-2641
Appendix II
Notice of proposed construction or alteration, FAA Form 7460-1 shall be sent to:
Express Processing Center
Federal Aviation Administration
Southwest Regional Office
Air Traffic Division Airspace Branch, ASW-520
2601 Meacham Boulevard
Fort Worth, TX 76137-0520
Or may be filed electronically using the internet at: https://oeaaa.faa.gov/oeaaa/external/portal.jsp. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
Title 8
PUBLIC SAFETY AND POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
8-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a paid Fire Department of the City which shall consist of the Chief of the Fire Department and such other officers and
firefighters as are necessary to man the equipment for the proper extinguishing of fires, pursuant to section 364.16, Code of Iowa. There shall be
established within the Fire Department the following bureaus, namely:
Division of Fire Operations
Division of Fire Prevention and Code Enforcement
Division of Emergency Medical Services
(1953 Code § 32-1; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 92-5, 2-18-1991; 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 156/358
8-1-2: APPOINTMENTS:
A. All appointments of the Fire Department shall be made by the Chief of the Fire Department with the approval of the City Council, in accordance with
chapter 400, Code of Iowa, relating to the civil service laws and the rules and regulations of the Mason City Civil Service Commission, pursuant to title
2, chapter 1 of this Code. (1953 Code § 32-2; amd. 1985 Code)
B. All firefighting personnel appointed to or employed by the Fire Department shall, on or before completion of the probationary period, live within a ten
(10) mile radius of the City limits. (1985 Code)
8-1-3: CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT:
As set out in section 400.13, Code of Iowa, the Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed by the City Administrator, subject to the approval of the
City Council, and shall hold office thereafter, or until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. The Chief shall have had a minimum of five (5) years'
experience in a Fire Department, or three (3) years' experience in a Fire Department and two (2) years of comparable experience or educational training.
Any person who becomes Chief of the Fire Department shall be allowed to transfer all rights the person may have acquired under chapter 410 or 411,
Code of Iowa, including employer contributions during the person's years of service in a City, employee contributions, and interest, to the retirement
system of the City that hires the person as Chief. Such person shall also transfer the number of years served as seniority toward other benefits provided
by the City which hires the person. If the Chief is relieved of that position, the person shall be entitled to remain in the department for which the person was
Chief at a position commensurate with the person's civil service status, even if this means that the City must create a position for the person to fill until a
regular position becomes vacant. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be responsible for the discipline, control and efficiency of the department and
shall have authority over all members of the department and the assignments thereof. The Chief shall have full control over all apparatus, equipment, tools
and other property belonging to the Fire Department. (Ord. 94-16, 7-19-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
8-1-4: BATTALIONS:
The Fire Department shall be divided into three (3) shifts, to be known as "battalions", designated as first, second and third battalions. One (1) battalion
shall be on duty from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. one day to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the next day, and shall be known as the duty battalion. Two (2)
battalions shall be off duty from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. one day to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the next day, and shall be known as off duty battalions. (Ord.
1128, 10-5-1970)
8-1-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Chief of the Fire Department, with the approval and consent of the City Administrator, shall make all the rules and regulations for the government of
the department. The Chief of the Fire Department shall also keep such records as will accurately show the activities of the department and the members
thereof. (1953 Code § 32-5; amd. 2017 Code)
8-1-6: CONTROL OF FIRES:
The Chief of the Fire Department, or in his absence at a fire, the ranking officer present thereat, shall have full control and command at all fires and of all
persons present in the vicinity of such fires; he shall have authority to summon any and all persons present to aid under his direction in the extinguishment
of any fire, in removing of personal property from burning buildings or any other building; he shall have the power to cut off gas, to cut off electric wires,
etc., in the vicinity of the fire, or to blow up or to cause to be blown up or otherwise dispose of any building or structure for the purpose of checking the
progress of any fire. He shall have authority to suppress all tumult or disorder at a fire and to require any person to leave the vicinity of the fire. (1953 Code
§ 32-6)
8-1-7: CALLING OF OFF DUTY BATTALIONS:
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have the power to call the off duty battalion and to call outside aid from other cities at any time he deems it
necessary. (1953 Code § 32-7)
8-1-8: OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT:
The Chief of the Fire Department may assign to any employee or firefighter, on his off duty time, any work similar to his duties as employee or firefighter.
For the purposes of pension and retirement rights, injuries, disabilities or death suffered while on such assigned work shall be considered as being
suffered in line of duty. (1953 Code § 32-8; amd. 1985 Code)
8-1-9: IMPERSONATION OF FIREFIGHTERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person not a member of the Fire Department to wear any cap, badge or other insignia or any part of the uniform of a member of
the Fire Department. (1953 Code § 32-10)
8-1-10: REPORTS:
The Chief of the Fire Department shall make monthly and annual reports to the City Administrator of such data and information as may be required by the
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 157/358
Mayor. In his annual report, the Chief of the Fire Department shall include a detailed statement of the condition of the apparatus and property in the
custody of the department, together with his recommendations for the improvement of the department. (1953 Code § 32-11; amd. 2017 Code)
8-1-11: FIRES OUTSIDE CITY:
A. Duties At Municipal Airport: The jurisdiction of the City, for fire prevention and fire protection and the giving of other emergency assistance, is hereby
extended to the Municipal Airport, and the Chief of the Fire Department is hereby authorized and directed to cause inspections to be made of property
thereon, and to enforce fire prevention regulations thereat, to fight fires and give other emergency assistance thereto in the same manner as within the
corporate limits of the City. (1953 Code § 33-1)
B. Aid To Other Communities: The Chief of the Fire Department, or in his absence the person acting in his place and stead, is hereby authorized, when
called upon by a community having an organized Fire Department, to send to the relief of such community such personnel and equipment from the Fire
Department of the City as in his judgment may be spared from the City at that time for such purpose. This subsection shall not require the Fire
Department to answer calls from such communities, but the answering of such calls shall be in the discretion of the Chief of the Fire Department or, in
his absence, a person acting in his place and stead. (1953 Code § 33-2; amd. 2017 Code)
C. Aid Outside Communities: The Chief of the Fire Department or, in his absence, the person acting in his place and stead is hereby authorized to answer
calls for emergency assistance within Cerro Gordo County and within the limits of counties adjacent to Cerro Gordo County, and to communities having
an organized Fire Department, and to send to the relief thereof such firefighters and equipment from the Fire Department of the City as, in his
judgment, may be spared from the City at that time for such purpose. This subsection shall not require the Fire Department to answer such calls, but
the answering of such calls shall be in the discretion of the Chief of the Fire Department or, in his absence, a person acting in his place and stead.
(1953 Code § 33-3; amd. Ord. 92-5, 2-18-1991; 2017 Code)
D. Contracts For Aid: The Chief of the Fire Department, or in his absence the person acting in his place and stead, is hereby authorized when called upon
by any person or other municipality with whom the City has heretofore contracted or with whom the City may hereafter contract to provide fire
protection or other emergency assistance, to send to the relief of such person or other municipality such firefighters and equipment from the Fire
Department of the City as, in his judgment, may be spared from the City at that time for such purpose. This subsection shall not require the Fire
Department to answer such calls from such persons or other municipalities, but the answering of such calls shall be in the discretion of the Chief of the
Fire Department or, in his absence, a person acting in his place and stead. (1953 Code § 33-4; amd. Ord. 92-5, 2-18-1991)
E. Pension, Retirement Privileges: All firefighters and equipment of the Fire Department, while engaged in answering calls provided for in this section, shall
be considered as being in the service of the City and acting in the course of their employment and in the line of duty. Firefighters, while answering such
calls, shall have the same rights, privileges and protections as though answering calls within the corporate limits of the City, including rights to pension
and retirement fund privileges. (1953 Code § 33-5; amd. Ord. 92-5, 2-18-1991)
ARTICLE A. CITY OPERATED AMBULANCE SERVICES
8-1A-1: RATES ESTABLISHED:
Rates for ambulance service shall be established from time to time as set forth by the City Council in resolution form. (Ord. 06-13, 5-16-2006)
8-1A-2: CITY ADMINISTRATOR'S AUTHORITY TO ADJUST:
The City Administrator is hereby authorized and empowered, in the City Administrator's discretion, to make adjustments in the rates and charges to be
fixed for City ambulance service in such cases where the need for such ambulance service is required to repeatedly transport a person of limited financial
means. The City Administrator shall have the authority to require proof of the financial status of a person seeking the benefits of this section for such
service. (Ord. 06-13, 5-16-2006)
8-1A-3: TRANSPORT SERVICE AGREEMENTS:
The City Administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into agreements with any authorized officials or Governing Body to provide
emergency ambulance transport service. Such agreement shall be reduced in writing and signed before any such service is rendered and shall provide
that such official or Governing Body shall guarantee the payment of fees. All service authorized by County officers shall be billed directly to the County
Sheriff's Office. (Ord. 06-13, 5-16-2006)
Chapter 2
POLICE DEPARTMENT
8-2-1: ORGANIZATION:
Pursuant to section 372.14, Code of Iowa, there is hereby established the Mason City Police Department consisting of the Chief of Police, Captains,
Lieutenants, Sergeants, police officers, clerks and other employees, the number of any rank to be determined by the City Council. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011)
8-2-2: APPOINTMENTS:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 158/358
All appointments to the Police Department, except that of the Chief of Police, shall be made by the Chief of Police with the approval of the City Council in
accordance with chapter 400, Code of Iowa, relating to the civil service laws and the rules and regulations of the Mason City Civil Service Commission,
pursuant to title 2, chapter 1 of this Code. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
8-2-3: CHIEF OF POLICE:
As set out in section 400.13, Code of Iowa, the Chief of Police shall be appointed by the City Administrator, subject to the approval of the City Council, and
shall hold office thereafter, or until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the discipline, control and
efficiency of the department and shall have authority over all members of the department and the assignments thereof. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011)
8-2-4: DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
The Chief of Police shall have the general management, supervision, control and direction of all members of the Police Department, police radio system
and of all property belonging to or appertaining to the Police Department. He shall be the executive head of the Police Department. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011)
8-2-5: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep a record of arrests made by any member of the Police Department, whether such arrest is made under
the provisions of this Code or under the laws of the State of Iowa, which record shall show the offense for which the arrest was made, by whom made and
the disposition of the charge. He shall make such periodical reports requested. He shall supervise the collection and accounting of all parking fees, fines
for overtime parking and other parking violations collected by or through the Police Department or Parking Enforcement Bureau for and on behalf of the
City Clerk. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
8-2-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Chief of Police shall have power and it shall be his duty to promulgate orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of
the Police Department, not inconsistent with law or the provisions of this Code, and shall see to the enforcement thereof. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011)
8-2-7: DISCIPLINE:
The Chief of Police may peremptorily suspend, demote or discharge any member of the department for neglect of duty, disobedience of orders,
misconduct or failure to properly perform his duties. Such actions will be in accordance with applicable laws, policies, and current collective bargaining
agreement. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011)
8-2-8: EXTRA DUTY ASSIGNMENT:
The Chief of the Police Department may assign to any employee or police officer, on his off duty time, any work similar to his duties as employee or police
officer. For the purposes of pension and retirement rights, injuries, disabilities or death suffered while on such assigned work shall be considered as being
suffered in line of duty. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011)
8-2-9: POWERS AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and of every member of the Police Department to preserve the peace, to enforce the laws of the State and the
provisions of this Code, to protect persons and property, to guard the public health, to prevent crimes and to arrest persons offending against the laws of
the State, the provisions of this Code or the lawful orders of the police. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011)
8-2-10: RESERVE POLICE FORCE:
A. Force Created: There is hereby created and established the Mason City reserve police force as provided by chapter 80D, Code of Iowa, and subject to
the regulations therein contained. The reserve police force shall serve until abolished by the City Council.
B. Membership: Membership in said reserve police force shall be as prescribed in said reserve's bylaws, rules and regulations and shall be subject to the
approval of the Chief of Police and City Council. The Chief of Police may, from time to time, prescribe such other bylaws, rules and regulations as they,
in their sole discretion, may deem to be desirable. All rules, regulations or bylaws of said reserve shall be approved by the Chief of Police.
Members of the reserve shall serve at the discretion of the Chief of Police and shall be removed and discharged from said reserve at any time upon
violation of any bylaw, rule or regulation prescribed as aforesaid or upon recommendation of the reserve police executive council.
Members of the reserve shall be subject to lawful orders of a member of the Mason City Police Department.
Members of the reserve shall be considered employees of the City during those periods when they are performing police duties as authorized and
directed by the Chief of Police or his designee, and they shall receive a salary of one dollar ($1.00) per year. However, said reserve members shall not
be entitled to benefits or obligations of police retirement benefits or civil service. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 159/358
Chapter 3
GENERAL OFFENSES
8-3-1: BARBED WIRE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use barbed wire for the purpose of constructing any fence or of enclosing any tree, ornament, lot, park or plot of
ground except as follows:
A. Where said fences or enclosures exist at the time of passage of this section, used in agricultural situations permitted by zoning, City Council approval
shall be required to construct a new fence or replace an existing fence.
B. In industrial and commercial installations, when used atop a security type fence where said barbed wire is at least six feet (6') above ground level.
C. In other special areas as approved by the City Council.
The use of barbed wire shall not be permitted where it projects over street rights-of-way or over other private property. (Ord. 1363, 6-21-1976)
8-3-2: CEMETERIES; PROTECTION OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully destroy, mutilate, deface or remove any gravestone, monument or other structure in a cemetery or to mutilate,
cut, injure or destroy any fence, railing, tree, shrubbery, flowers or lawn in a cemetery, or to walk or drive in any cemetery except upon the walks and
drives therein provided, or to use any cemetery for any disrespectful or improper purposes. It shall also be unlawful for any person to enter or be within the
cemetery grounds from nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 10-17, 10-5-2010)
8-3-3: DEAD ANIMALS; HAULING OF:
Pursuant to title 4, chapter 2, article A of this Code, it shall be unlawful to haul, drag or otherwise transport any dead animal or portions of such animal
through the streets of the City without having the same in a covered, watertight container. (1985 Code)
8-3-4: DEFACING OR INJURING NOTICES OR PUBLIC SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, tear down, deface, injure or destroy, or interfere with any notice, proclamation, publication, placard, traffic
sign, signal or device, street name or number or house number or railway crossing sign or signal or sign posted or placed by authority of the City or under
license therefrom at any time before such notice, proclamation, publication, placard or sign shall have expired. (1985 Code)
8-3-5: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except Federal, State, County and Municipal law enforcement officers in the performance of duty or training, to shoot or
discharge any firearm or air gun except when authorized and permitted by the Chief of Police after investigation for the following purposes:
A. The lawful activity of a person or firearm organization upon premises which are safe for said activity and which will not interfere with the peaceful use
and enjoyment of adjacent property.
B. To abate a nuisance caused by birds or animals upon the property owned or rented by said applicant.
All persons discharging firearms within the Municipality for the purposes set forth in subsections A and B of this section must have the written permit to
discharge said firearm(s) at the time of discharge or, when issued to a firearm organization, said permit must be displayed in a conspicuous place when
said activity is being conducted. The permits shall be nonassignable and may only be used for the purposes and at the time specified therein. (Ord.
1430, 3-20-1978)
8-3-6: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for a person to do or permit any of the following:
A. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or near any lawful assembly of persons; provided, that participants in athletic contests may
engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport. (1985 Code)
B. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence, public building, or hospital which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof.
(1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
C. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by
another.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 160/358
D. Without lawful authority or color of authority, the person disturbs any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the meeting
or assembly.
E. By words or action, initiates or circulates a report or warning of fire, epidemic or other catastrophe knowing such report to be false or such warning to be
baseless.
F. Without authority or justification, the person, group or assemblage of persons obstructs any street, sidewalk, highway or other public way with the intent
to prevent or hinder its lawful use by others. (1985 Code)
8-3-7: DISTRIBUTION OF BILLS, POSTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or attach, paint, print or write any placard, notice, poster, bill, advertisement, announcement, picture or sign on
any pole, post, fence, hydrant, bridge, wall, building, window, structure, sidewalk, tree or any public property, nor shall the same be placed upon any such
privately owned property without first having secured the consent of the owner or person controlling such privately owned property. It shall also be unlawful
to scatter or throw upon any street, sidewalk or other public place any bills, pictures, notices or advertisements.
It shall also be unlawful for any person to throw, place, deposit or in any manner attach any bills, paper, cards, samples or other advertising matter in or on
any automobile or vehicle while such automobile or vehicle is standing or is parked upon any public street, alley or parking lot within the City, except that
this provision shall not apply to legal notices as provided by law. (1953 Code § 28-60)
8-3-8: CONSUMER FIREWORKS:
The purpose of this section is to regulate the sale, use, or exploding of consumer fireworks within the City. All sales, use, and exploding of consumer
fireworks shall conform to Iowa Code section 727.2, the requirements of this section, and all other applicable requirements of this Code.
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS: Shall have the same meaning as defined in Iowa Code section 727.2.
FIRE MARSHAL: An inspector appointed by the Office of the State Fire Marshal, or, if so designated by the State Fire Marshal's Office, the City Fire
Marshal.
PERMANENT BUILDING: A structure enclosed within interior walls and having a roof, built, erected and framed of a combination of materials for the
support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: A tent, canopy, stand, converted metal container, or similar enclosure that is not permanently affixed to the land, which is
not intended for permanent use, and is erected for the purpose of retail sales of consumer fireworks.
B. Sales; General Requirements:
1. Conformance With State And Local Law: All sales of consumer fireworks shall conform to the requirements of Iowa Code section 727.2, title 12,
"Zoning Regulations", of this Code, and all other applicable sections of this Code.
2. Application: Prior to establishing any sales outlet for consumer fireworks, an application on a form supplied by the Fire Department shall be
submitted, along with all required attachments, and the initial inspection fee, to the City Fire Marshal. Attachments shall include:
a. Proof Of License: Proof of licensing from the Office of the State Fire Marshal.
b. Proof Of Liability Insurance: Proof of liability insurance, separate from the building property insurance, covering all aspects of consumer fireworks
sales for a minimum amount per occurrence of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and a minimum aggregate amount of two million dollars
($2,000,000.00).
c. Site Plan: All initial applications for establishment of a consumer fireworks sales outlet shall include a detailed site plan, drawn to a measurable
scale, showing the location of all permanent buildings on the site and the location of any temporary structures erected for sales of consumer
fireworks.
d. Emergency Contacts: The applicant shall submit a completed emergency contact information form for fireworks sales from the Mason City Fire
Department.
e. Transient Merchant License: Except for non-temporary sales and wholesale operations, all applicants shall provide proof of application for a
transient merchant license from the City Clerk.
3. Review: All initial applications for sales of consumer fireworks shall be reviewed and determined to be in compliance by the Development Review
Committee, as created in title 12, chapter 7 of this Code prior to establishment of the sales outlet or erection of any temporary structure. Upon
determination that the application is complete, the Fire Marshal shall forward the application to the Development Review Committee. The
Development Review Committee shall determine whether the request for retail sales of consumer fireworks is in compliance with the requirements of
the State Code, this section and all other applicable requirements of this Code.
a. Compliance: All sales shall comply with Iowa Code section 727.2. Location of sales, storage of consumer fireworks, and setbacks of temporary
structures shall comply with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards, as adopted by State Code, and with the International Fire
Code, as adopted by the City, as well as with all applicable City zoning and building ordinances.
b. Sales In A Permanent Building:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 161/358
(1) Sale of consumer fireworks within a permanent building are allowed only within a building constructed and intended for use as a commercial or
retail/service form within the Z4, Multi-Use District, or an industrial form within the Z6, Industrial District, as set forth in section 12-8-3, table 2,
subsections D and J of this Code; however, sales of consumer fireworks may not be conducted within any part of a self storage building, or a
building containing a tavern function; and further provided that all other requirements of applicable State and local codes are met.
(2) Only the initial application to establish sales of consumer fireworks shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee to determine that
sales will be in compliance. However, any expansion of the building or expansion onto additional properties shall not commence until the
Development Review Committee has reviewed the expansion and determined it to be in compliance.
c. Sales In A Temporary Structure:
(1) Sales of consumer fireworks in a temporary structure shall be permitted only upon property within the Z6 Industrial District, as designated by
title 12 of this Code.
(2) The initial application for sales in a temporary structure shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee to determine that sales will
be in compliance. When future inspections by the Fire Marshal identify that a change in the location of fireworks sales, display or storage,
setback of temporary structures, or other material change from the approved plan has occurred, the Fire Marshal shall order sales to cease until
a revised plan has been reviewed by the Development Review Committee and determined to be in compliance.
4. Inspections: Upon determination that all application and review requirements are complete, the City Fire Marshal shall notify the applicant and
schedule an inspection.
a. Sales of consumer fireworks within a permanent building shall be inspected annually.
b. Sales of consumer fireworks from a temporary structure shall be inspected after erection of the temporary structure for each season in which sales
will be conducted, but prior to any sales.
c. If a transient merchant license is required, the operator shall present a copy of the license to the Fire Marshal upon the initial inspection.
5. Violations: Should the Fire Marshal find any violation of this section, State Code or other applicable codes or ordinances, sales shall immediately
cease. Sales may not resume until the violation has been corrected and the Fire Marshal has determined that the operation is in full conformance.
6. Renewal:
a. Permanent Building: An emergency contact information form and transient merchant license, if applicable, for sales of consumer fireworks in a
permanent building shall be renewed annually. The Fire Marshal shall inspect the premises to determine that the sales conducted therein continue
to comply with State and local codes.
b. Temporary Structures:
(1) A consumer fireworks permit for a temporary structure shall expire on the date that the temporary structure is removed, or July 8 of each year,
whichever is sooner.
(2) Each such temporary structure must be removed by July 15 of each year.
(3) If the permit holder wishes to reestablish sales in a temporary structure at the same location the next year, the applicant shall obtain a new
updated permit or license from the State Fire Marshal's Office, as required by State Code. The application and review process for the
reestablished temporary structure sales shall be the same as required for the original application.
7. Revocation: The Fire Marshal may revoke the approval at any time due to false or fraudulent information during the application and inspection
process, or any violation of State or local requirements.
8. Inspection Fees: Inspection fees shall be set by resolution approved by the City Council.
C. Dates Of Permitted Sales:
1. All sale dates and requirements shall conform to the required City Code. Consumer fireworks may only be sold during those periods allowed under
the applicable Iowa Code.
2. Sales within a permanent structure or building shall be allowed between June 1 and July 8 and from December 10 until January 3.
3. Approved temporary structure or stand sales shall be allowed between June 13 and July 8. (Ord. 18-11, 11-20-2018)
D. Fireworks; Dates Of Exploding, Discharge And Use: No person shall explode or discharge a consumer fireworks device outside the following dates and
hours:
1. July 3 through July 4, from the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. until eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
Exemption: Except as provided in subsection G, "Sanctioned Fireworks Shows And Displays", of this section.
E. Prohibited Discharge: Fireworks may not be set off on public property that includes cemeteries and parks.
F. Location Restrictions: Fireworks, when set off, must be more than two hundred (200) yards from hospitals, hospice care centers, and nursing homes.
(Ord. 18-13, 12-4-2018)
G. Sanctioned Fireworks Shows And Displays: A special fireworks permit may be obtained from the Fire Department for display of fireworks by a display
operator or operators certified by the Pyrotechnics Guild International, outside the above listed dates for a public event approved by Fire Chief or the
City Council.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 162/358
H. Other Use: Use of pistols, canes, cannons or other appliances using blank cartridges shall only be used for bona fide athletic purposes, permitted
displays, or other uses approved by Fire Chief or the City Council. (Ord. 17-10, 6-20-2017)
I. Property Control/Penalty:
1. A person who uses a consumer firework in violation of subsection D of this section; or any person who is an owner, occupant, tenant, or otherwise
having any possessory control, individually or jointly with others, of any premises who either sponsors, conducts, hosts, invites or permits the use of
consumer fireworks on said premises which is in violation of subsection D, E or F of this section, and is the intentional result of, or within the
reasonable expectations of, the person or persons having such possessory control is deemed to be in violation of this section.
2. Violation of this section shall be a Municipal infraction punishable by a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Alternatively, violation of this
section can be charged by a peace officer of the City as a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 18-12, 12-4-2018)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-14 - MOBILE VENDORS . Go to new ordinance.
8-3-9: FORTUNE TELLERS, PALMISTS, CLAIRVOYANTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the business of or act as a fortune teller, palmist, clairvoyant or phrenologist, or to tell fortunes, practice
phrenology, palmistry or clairvoyancy. (1953 Code § 28-78)
8-3-10: GAMES IN STREET:
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in any game or sport on any street, highway or public grounds within the business section of the City, or to
use any street, avenue, sidewalk or public grounds within the City for such purpose in such a manner as to interfere with traffic or travel thereon, or to
continue such use in any event contrary to the orders of any police officer. (1953 Code § 28-58; amd. 1985 Code)
8-3-11: INHALATION OF TOXIC VAPORS PROHIBITED:
No person shall knowingly smell or inhale the fumes of toxic vapors for the purpose of causing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration,
stupefaction, or dulled senses of the nervous system, or possess, buy, or use any such substance for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate
this section. But this section does not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.
As used in this section, the term "toxic vapors" means the following substances or products containing such substances: acetone, alcohols (methyl,
isopropyl, propyl, or butyl), aliphatic acetates (ethyl, methyl, propyl, or methyl cellosolve acetate), allyl isothiocyanate, benzene, butane, carbon
tetrachloride, cyclohexane, ether, freons (Freon 11 and Freon 12), hexane, methyl ethyl ketone, methyl isobutyl ketone, methylene chloride, naphtha,
nitrous oxide, perchlorethylene, propane, toluene, trichloromethane, trichloroethylene, or xylene, or other chemical substance capable of causing similar
effects upon the human body. Evidence that a container, or a similar container, if the label is missing, lists one (1) or more of these substances is prima
facie evidence that the substance in such container contains toxic vapors and emits the fumes thereof. (Ord. 11-12, 9-20-2011)
8-3-12: LITTER, DEPOSIT OF:
A. Litter Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, leave or permit to remain upon any street, alley, stream or public place, or upon any
privately owned property any litter, debris or refuse of any kind, including, but not limited to, cigarette butts, garbage, paper, cardboard, cans, bottles,
tacks, wires, nails, discarded glassware, floor covering, building material, clothing, ashes, brush; such as straw, weeds and tree trimmings, except that
the owner may deposit the same upon his premises when confined in a proper working receptacle with a tight fitting cover except that it shall be lawful
for such litter, debris and refuse to be properly transported and discarded at the Cerro Gordo County landfill.
B. Fine: Any person convicted of violating this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable by a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
C. Exception: Property owners or tenants who create a nuisance upon property under their control would be subject to the provisions of the nuisance
ordinance. (Ord. 08-13, 9-16-2008)
8-3-13: SKATEBOARDS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable rules and regulations for the use and operation of skateboards, and to establish areas
where the use and operation of same are prohibited for the protection, safety and general welfare of the public in the City.
B. Definitions: For use within this section, the following terms are defined:
BUSINESS: Any property open to the public upon which activities of a commercial or retail nature are routinely conducted.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: That area bounded by and including all streets which lie between Connecticut Avenue on the east, Jefferson Avenue on the
west, Fourth Street South on the south and Fifth Street North on the north.
SKATEBOARDS: A foot, motor or wind propelled vehicle consisting of a board equipped with two (2) or more wheels tandem and guided by the user or
rider standing on same and pushing same with foot power or operating with motor or wind power.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 163/358
C. Use; Restrictions: The riding or use of skateboards within the corporate limits of the City shall be subject to the following:
1. No person shall ride or use a skateboard at any time on any street, sidewalk, plaza area or public parking lot in the business district.
2. No person shall ride or use a skateboard on a street in a residential district or area which runs parallel to a hard surface sidewalk.
3. No person shall ride or use a skateboard in a publicly owned parking lot.
4. All persons using or riding skateboards within the City shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and shall give an audible signal before overtaking
and passing a pedestrian using the same sidewalk.
5. All persons using or riding a skateboard on any street or alley shall:
a. Observe all traffic regulations, laws, and ordinances.
b. Stay as near to the side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same
direction.
6. No person shall use or ride a skateboard on privately owned parking lots unless written permission has been obtained from the owner(s).
7. No person shall use or ride a skateboard on any sidewalk abutting a business. (Ord. 90-9, 6-4-1990)
8-3-14: OBSTRUCTING USE OF STREET, SIDEWALK, ALLEY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to shovel, rake, throw, place or deposit any snow, leaves or other material or thing onto any public street or sidewalk so
as to hinder or obstruct the regular use of such street, alley or sidewalk to its full width by vehicular or pedestrian traffic. (1953 Code § 57-3; amd. Ord.
904, 11-19-1962; 1985 Code)
8-3-15: OBSTRUCTING VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the visibility at any street intersection by placing any vehicles, trailers, equipment or machinery, or by
shoveling, raking, throwing, blowing or depositing any snow, leaves or other materials onto a public street, sidewalk, alley or parking so as to obstruct the
view of persons regularly using such streets for vehicular traffic. (1953 Code § 57-3; amd. Ord. 904, 11-19-1962; 1985 Code)
8-3-16: PARADES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to inaugurate, cause, lead or participate in any parade, celebration or demonstration upon any street, avenue or public
grounds unless a written permit for such parade, celebration or demonstration shall first have been obtained from the Chief of Police; provided, however,
that such permit shall not protect any person from prosecution for or conviction of disorderly conduct or for the violation of any of the provisions of this
Code on account of conduct during the course of such parade or procession. (1953 Code § 28-12)
8-3-17: PERMITTING DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any quarreling, fighting or unusual noise or affray, or any act or conduct prohibited in any house or upon any
premises owned, occupied, possessed or controlled by such person, in such a manner as to disturb the peace of others or the public quiet of the
neighborhood. (1953 Code § 28-2)
8-3-18: POISON FOOD:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any poison food or substance on any street, alley or other public or private grounds in such a way that it may
endanger human life or the life of any domestic animal, except that it shall be lawful to set poison on one's own premises for the purpose of ridding the
same of vermin. (1953 Code § 28-30)
8-3-19: PUBLIC PROPERTY, PRIVATE PROPERTY; DEFACING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure or destroy, or to assist or abet in defacing, injuring or destroying, any public building, bridge, pavement,
sidewalk, drain, sewer or any other public property or improvement, or to cut, hack, injure or destroy, or to assist or to abet another in cutting, hacking,
injuring or destroying, any pole, wire, tree, fence, railing, building or other property not owned by such person. (1953 Code §§ 28-36, 28-37; amd. 1985
Code)
8-3-20: RADIO INTERFERENCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or be responsible for the operation of any machine, apparatus or equipment generating or causing high
frequency oscillations such as to interfere with radio reception or broadcasting, without first providing for the elimination of such interference insofar as it is
possible. (1953 Code § 28-79)
8-3-21: SHOOTING, THROWING MISSILES:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 164/358
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any missile, dart, shaft, slingshot, stick, stone or ball in such a manner as to hit, injure, or endanger
any person, window or other property. (1953 Code §§ 28-65, 28-67; amd. 2017 Code)
8-3-22: STREETS, INJURY TO PAVED OR OILED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or propel any tractor, engine or other vehicle having cleats, spurs or other nonslipping devices upon its wheels
upon any paved or oiled streets, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive, drag or propel any vehicle or other heavy object on or across any of the
paved or oiled streets in such a manner as to injure or deface such street. (1953 Code § 28-42)
8-3-23: STREET MATERIALS, TAKING OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to take or appropriate to his private use any dirt, stone or other material or thing from any street, alley or public ground,
or from any other premises, unless consent of the owner has been first obtained. (1953 Code § 28-56)
8-3-24: STREET GUARDS, REMOVAL OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down, remove or carry away any fence, railing or other guard placed about any excavation, hole or pile of dirt,
rock or other material or to remove or carry away or extinguish the light of any lantern or other light which has been set as a warning at any excavation,
hole or pile of material. (1953 Code § 28-33)
8-3-25: STREETS, REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drag, scrape or grade the surface of any public street or portion thereof, or to place any oil, gravel or any other type of
surfacing material upon any public street or portion thereof, or perform any maintenance or repair upon any public street or portion thereof without having
first obtained written permission from the City Council. (Ord. 1018, 9-5-1967)
8-3-26: SURVEY MARKS, STAKES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, disturb, destroy, move or remove any survey marks or stakes, bench or grade marks or monuments
placed upon any public or private place for the purpose of fixing grades, locating streets or marking boundary lines or for any other purpose. (1953 Code
§ 28-35)
8-3-27: URINATING AND DEFECATING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally urinate or defecate upon any public street, public sidewalk or other public property or within public view
upon private property. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to prohibit any person from urinating or defecating in any public or private restroom.
(Ord. 1674, 3-21-1983)
8-3-28: BOW AND ARROW HUNTING; PUBLIC PROPERTY, PRIVATE PROPERTY; ARCHERY RANGES:
A. Permit: It shall be unlawful for anyone to hunt with a bow and arrow inside the City limits except when a permit has been obtained from the Chief of
Police after investigation and submission of proof of possession of all applicable State licenses and game stamps and submission of written consent
from the owner(s) or person(s) in control of said private property; or, if upon public property, written consent of the proper authority. The Mayor, subject
to the approval of the City Council, shall have the authority to sign the written consent for use of bow and arrows upon City owned public property.
Exception: Properties under the jurisdiction of the Parks and Recreation Board.
Each permit shall be for a period stated on its face, but not longer than the duration of any single bow hunting season. (Ord. 89-34, 12-18-1989, eff. 1-
11-1990)
Permits issued by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources as part of a Deer Management Zone Program will be valid for the duration of the
program, as stated on the permit face. (2017 Code)
B. Archery Ranges: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or shoot a bow and arrow within the City limits for any other purpose; unless upon an
archery range for which a permit has been obtained from the Chief of Police. (Ord. 89-34, 12-18-1989, eff. 1-11-1990; amd. 2017 Code)
C. Archery Range Permits Issued By Chief Of Police: Permits for the operation of an archery range shall be issued by the Chief of Police for a period of
not to exceed one (1) year; only upon submission of satisfactory proof or investigation by the Chief establishing that such activity can be carried on at
the particular location in reasonable safety and so as not to interfere with the peaceable use and enjoyment of adjacent property.
All persons using bow and arrows within the Municipality for the purposes set forth above must have the written permit to discharge said arrows at the
time of discharge, or when issued for an archery range, said permit must be displayed in a conspicuous place when said activity is being conducted.
The permits shall be nonassignable and may only be used for the purpose(s) and at the time(s) specified therein. (Ord. 89-34, 12-18-1989, eff. 1-11-
1990)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 165/358
Chapter 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
BEEKEEPING: Apicultural activities, which includes raising bees in one (1) or more hives, boxes or colonies occupied by bees and using the honey
produced, but not including commercial honey processing or honey warehousing.
LIVESTOCK: Any animal customarily kept by humans for the purpose of providing food, fiber or work, including, but not limited to, cattle and other bovines,
horses, mules, donkeys and other equines, goats and other caprines, swine, hogs and other porcines (except oriental potbellied pigs as outlined below),
and chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys and other poultry, but excluding bees. (Ord. 14-11, 9-16-2014)
8-4-2: KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, raise or harbor livestock in any zoning district other than the Z1 Agricultural District and the Z7-2 and Z7-4
Specific Use Districts, in accordance with the requirements of title 12 of this Code. (Ord. 14-11, 9-16-2014)
B. Notwithstanding the above, an oriental potbellied pig shall not be considered livestock and may be kept as a companion animal in accordance with
article A of this chapter, provided:
1. The animal's tusks must be trimmed and maintained in a manner that no tusk appears outside of the mouth of the pig when the mouth is closed;
2. All oriental potbellied pigs must be neutered or sterilized.
3. Oriental potbellied pigs kept as companion animals may not exceed a total weight of two hundred fifty (250) pounds. Pigs of any breed or type that
exceed two hundred fifty (250) pounds shall be considered livestock. (Ord. 14-11, 9-16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
8-4-3: FEEDING OF GARBAGE TO LIVESTOCK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed table scraps, garbage or partially spoiled or decayed vegetable or animal matter to any livestock. (Ord. 14-11, 9-
16-2014)
8-4-4: KEEPING OF RABBITS OR POULTRY:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or raise more than a combined total of twenty five (25) rabbits, chickens or other poultry in any Z2 Sub-Urban
District or Z3 General Urban District, except where the occupant shall be in possession of at least two (2) acres of ground for the carrying on of farming
or poultry raising operations.
B. Where permitted, rabbits or poultry shall be kept within enclosures set back at least ten feet (10') from any lot line and at least thirty five feet (35') from
any residence on adjoining property or City right-of-way. (Ord. 14-11, 9-16-2014)
8-4-5: BEEKEEPING:
Beekeeping shall be allowed in the Z1, Z2 or Z3 Zoning Districts with the following restrictions:
A. The minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;
B. Maximum number of hives allowed is two (2) hives in Z2 and Z3 Districts and ten (10) hives in Z1 District;
C. Hives shall be located in the rear yard and a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from property lines;
D. A flight path barrier shall be located in front of the hive(s), consisting of a six foot (6') fence that is one hundred percent (100%) opaque, or a similar
structure or planting not less than six feet (6') in height of sufficient density to create an opaque or nearly opaque barrier;
E. A source of water accessible to the bees must be provided on the property. (Ord. 14-11, 9-16-2014)
8-4-6: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
It shall be the duty of any person keeping or raising livestock, rabbits, poultry or bees to keep the pens, yards, hives or boxes wherein such livestock,
rabbits, poultry or bees are confined in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 14-11, 9-16-2014)
ARTICLE A. COMPANION ANIMALS
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 166/358
8-4A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations regarding the treatment and control of companion animals in the City of Mason City in order to protect
public safety while providing for recreation and enjoyment of our pets. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
ANIMAL: A nonhuman vertebrate.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: Any person designated by the City Administrator to enforce the regulation of animals, as outlined in this Code.
AT LARGE: Any animal off the premises of its owner. An animal shall not be deemed at large if the animal is under the direct control of its handler, and:
A. The animal is on the owner's property or on other private property with the property owner's consent, or confined within a yard. The confinement
mechanism or structure must be sufficiently constructed to contain the animal. If the animal is restrained on private property using a tie out, the tie
out line shall not be long enough to allow the animal to interfere with the lawful use of public right-of-way; or
B. The animal is confined in a cage or motor vehicle; or
C. The animal is restrained by a leash of sufficient strength to restrain the animal, not exceeding six feet (6') in length, held by a person competent to
restrain and control the animal; or
D. While in a City park, all ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to the exclusion, control or restraint of animals are obeyed, including within a
City designated dog park; or
E. The animal is a draft animal engaged in drawing vehicles or conveyances; or
F. The animal is a certified police canine, rescue dog or tracking dog acting on behalf of a public safety agency in the performance of its duties, or is
engaged in approved training or a public demonstration of its skills; service dog; certified therapy dog; or
G. The animal has been approved to participate in a parade or other event approved by the City Council; or
H. The animal and its owner are actively engaged in obedience training. Such training is prohibited on City streets, sidewalks, and in City parks (see
park rules, subsection 5-2-2O of this Code), except in a City designated dog park.
ATTACK: To approach in a hostile or aggressive manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear serious injury to self or property.
CANINES: All members of the dog family including the canids, both male and female, whether altered or not.
CITY ANIMAL SHELTER: The facility maintained by the City of Mason City for temporary domicile of companion animals that have been collected by an
enforcement officer when found stray, abandoned, or at large; or are considered dangerous or vicious; or have been relinquished.
COMPANION ANIMAL: An animal kept primarily for a person's company, service or protection, as opposed to working animals, sport animals, livestock,
and laboratory animals, which are kept primarily for performance, agricultural value, or research.
CONSTANT RESTRAINT: Fixed confinement.
DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMAL: An animal is deemed to be vicious when it meets any one (1) or more of the following:
A. Attacks, bites or claws any person while the person is on public property or lawfully on private property, including the property of the owner of the
animal.
B. Without provocation, bites, claws or otherwise injures, kills, or participates in injuring or killing any domesticated animal or fowl kept as a pet, as
livestock, or for companionship or service when the attacking animal is off the property which its owner or custodian owns, rents, or otherwise
controls.
C. Notwithstanding the above, an animal shall not be deemed to be vicious as a result of:
1. Attacking or causing injury to any person who, at the time of the attack or injury, was committing a wilful trespass or was committing or attempting
to commit other criminal conduct while upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of that animal; or
2. Attacking or causing injury to any person who was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 167/358
3. Defending or protecting its owner, keeper or handler from an unjustified attack or assault.
4. Causing injury or death to another animal if it was defending itself from an unprovoked attack by another animal.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE: Any animal control officer, City animal shelter operators, employee of the City of Mason City, Humane Society of North
Iowa staff, and any veterinarian or veterinarian employees who are authorized to sell licenses or perform services on behalf of the City of Mason City.
DOG PARK: A suitably enclosed area, designated by the City, within which dogs are not required to be leashed or otherwise subject to physical restraint,
subject to the rules adopted by the Park Board.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: An animal control officer, City Attorney, Code Enforcement Officer or police officer, under the employ of or under contract to
the City.
EUTHANASIA: The humane destruction of an animal accomplished via a lethal injectable anesthesia that results in instantaneous and painless
unconsciousness and immediate and painless death during the loss of consciousness.
FELINES: All members of the cat family, both male and female, whether altered or not.
IMMEDIATE THREAT: Any threat to the safety of any citizen that could occur momentarily if an animal is not impounded by an enforcement officer.
LICENSE: The annual license obtainable from the City Clerk's Office, or a designated representative, which identifies the animal and its owner.
MICROCHIP: A device consisting of a small piece of semiconductor material carrying many integrated circuits, which is implanted under the skin of a
companion animal and which is used to identify the animal and other applicable information. The term microchip shall also refer to the action of implanting
the device.
OWNER: Any person, firm, association or corporation who owns, keeps, shelters or harbors an animal, or otherwise provides care, custody or has
responsibility for the animal on a permanent or temporary basis, or knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by that
person. In the event that the owner of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of that minor shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all
provisions of this article.
PERMIT: To either intentionally or unintentionally allow or fail to take adequate precautions to prevent.
RELINQUISH OR RELINQUISHMENT: The act by an owner to voluntarily give up ownership and control of a companion animal. A relinquished animal
shall be placed in the City animal shelter and disposed in accordance with this article. The animal cannot be considered relinquished unless a signed and
witnessed statement acknowledging the same, on a form created for this purpose, is provided to the enforcement officer. Upon relinquishment, the owner
releases all rights to the animal. A dangerous and vicious animal, even if given up voluntarily, is not considered to be relinquished under this definition.
WITHOUT PROVOCATION: Aggressive conduct initiated by any animal or aggressive conduct by an animal that is not in self-defense or in response to
aggressive conduct by any other animal or person. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
8-4A-3: ANIMAL CONTROL:
A. The City Administrator shall designate an animal control officer and may designate any City department with the authority to enforce the provisions of
this article and chapter 351, Code of Iowa. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
B. When the animal control officer is off duty, the duties and responsibilities of the animal control officer may be assumed by an enforcement officer as
defined herein. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
8-4A-4: RABIES VACCINATION:
All animals kept within the City, brought into the City for shows, exhibitions, or performance, or in transit, shall be vaccinated against rabies, as follows:
(Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
A. Every owner of a canine, feline or other companion animal susceptible to rabies shall obtain a rabies vaccination for the animal. It shall be unlawful for
any person to own or have an animal in his/her possession, six (6) months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. The rabies
vaccination required by this article shall be an injection of antirabies vaccine approved by the Iowa State Department of Agriculture. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-
2014; amd. 2017 Code)
B. This requirement does not apply to animals in transit that are continuously held in secure cages and animals assigned to research, production of
biologics, and licensed animal care shelters or similar facilities. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-5: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. License: Owners of all canines and felines over six (6) months of age, except those exempted in this section, shall obtain a license from the City Clerk
or from a designated representative agreeing to sell license tags on behalf of the City. Companion animals other than canines and felines residing in
the City of Mason City may be licensed, at the discretion of the owner.
B. Vaccination Required: Before a license is issued for any animal, the owner shall present a certificate of vaccination signed by a licensed veterinarian
that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 168/358
C. Expiration And Renewal: The license shall expire one (1), two (2) or three (3) years from date of purchase, depending on the expiration of the rabies
vaccination. If the license is purchased from a veterinarian, the license shall be due and payable on the same day as the vaccination is acquired. If the
license is purchased from the City Clerk, or a designated representative, it shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days of the vaccination date. City
licenses shall be renewed for one (1), two (2) or three (3) years, depending on the expiration of the rabies vaccination, so long as the animal is living
and kept within the City.
D. Fee: The license fee shall be established by resolution approved by the City Council. A lower license fee shall be established for animals that have
been neutered or spayed. Every owner claiming a neutered or spayed animal shall furnish the veterinarian's certificate showing that the animal for
which the license is sought has had the appropriate operation.
E. Issuance Of License: Upon payment of the license fee, the City Clerk, or designated representative, shall issue to the owner a license containing a
description of the animal, the name of its owner and his/her place of residence. A record of each license issued shall be kept on file in the City Clerk's
Office as a public record. A numbered tag displaying the year in which it expires shall be delivered to the owner. The license tag shall be securely
fastened to a collar or harness which shall be worn by the animal.
F. Transfer Of Ownership: When the permanent ownership of an animal is transferred, the license may be transferred by the City Clerk by notation on the
license record, giving name and address of the new owner.
G. Transfer Of Animals Licensed Elsewhere: When an animal licensed in another Municipal jurisdiction is permanently transferred to Mason City, the
owner shall provide proof of the previous license and proof of current rabies vaccination to the City Clerk. Any tag issued by the prior licensing
jurisdiction shall be discarded. The Clerk shall issue a new license tag that shall expire upon expiration of the current rabies vaccination. If the rabies
vaccination is not current, the owner shall obtain the required vaccination prior to transfer of the license. The Clerk shall note on the license record that
the newly issued license tag effects a transfer of a license from another jurisdiction. The Clerk shall collect a transfer fee according to the fee schedule
adopted by the City Council.
H. Transfer Or Removal Of License Tag Prohibited: A license tag issued for one (1) animal shall not be transferable to another animal. The removal of a
license tag from an animal prior to the expiration of the license, by any person who is not the owner thereof or the agent of such owner, shall be
punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
I. Exemptions To License Requirements: The following animals are exempt from licensing requirements:
1. A certified police canine, rescue dog or tracking dog acting on behalf of a public safety agency in the performance of its duties.
2. Kennel animals that are kept or raised solely for the bona fide purpose of sale in State or Federally licensed kennels and which are kept under
constant restraint. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-6: RABIES AND LICENSE TAGS:
A. All canines and felines over the age of six (6) months shall wear a collar or harness to which a current and valid rabies vaccination tag and current City
license tag is attached. This requirement shall not apply to animals being exhibited or trained at a kennel club show, cat show or similar event or while
being transported to and from the event, if the animal is properly controlled and the owner or trainer possesses documentation of valid vaccination and
licensing.
B. Any animal found without a collar or harness upon which the rabies and license tags are attached, or found without the rabies and/or license tag
attached to its collar or harness, shall be deemed unlicensed until proof of license and/or vaccination is shown by its owner and the required collar or
harness with valid tags attached is properly worn by the animal. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-7: RIGHT TO CAPTURE OR KILL AN ANIMAL:
A. It shall be lawful for any person to capture for impoundment any at large animal for which a license is required. Upon capture, the person shall promptly
notify the Police Department or an enforcement officer of the capture.
B. It shall be lawful for any person to kill an animal, whether licensed and wearing a collar with license tag attached or unlicensed, when such animal is
caught in the act of worrying, chasing, maiming or killing any domestic animal or fowl, or when such animal is attacking or attempting to bite a person.
(Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-8: IMPOUNDING AND RECLAMATION OF ANIMALS:
A. Impoundment: An animal may be impounded in the City animal shelter when any one (1) or more of the following apply:
1. An animal is found at large, whether tame or feral.
2. An animal is not wearing a valid rabies vaccination tag, and current City license tag.
3. An animal is not receiving the proper standards of care as outlined in this article, or is tortured or otherwise mistreated in such a manner that the
enforcement officer may reasonably determine that the health or life of the animal is endangered.
4. An animal is deemed to be dangerous or vicious, according to section 8-4A-10 of this article.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 169/358
5. An animal has been determined by a veterinary professional to be feral or wild. Such animals shall be euthanized.
6. An animal that has been relinquished (as defined herein) by the owner to an enforcement officer, provided that the owner has signed a form
designed for this purpose and witnessed by the enforcement officer, acknowledging that the owner has relinquished ownership and all rights to the
animal and has no further claim on the disposition of the animal.
B. Surrender: Any person holding an animal within the City limits that is subject to impoundment under this section shall surrender the animal to the
enforcement officer.
C. Notice And Reclamation Period:
1. Notice Period: Within two (2) business days of impoundment, notice shall be given that the animal is in the custody of the City to the owner, where
known, by verbal contact, personal service, e-mail with return receipt required, or United States certified mail with return receipt required.
a. The date and time that the owner received notification shall be recorded by the designated representative serving the notice.
b. If the animal has been relinquished, no notice is required.
2. Reclamation Period: The reclamation period shall be no more than seven (7) days and shall begin upon the date and time that the owner received
notification of impoundment; provided, however, that if the owner's name or the owner's reliable contact information cannot reasonably be
determined after two (2) business days of impoundment, the animal will be held in the City animal shelter for no more than five (5) additional
calendar days. In no case, however, shall the last day of the reclamation period fall on a day that the shelter is closed to the public; in such a case,
the last day shall be the next day that the shelter is open.
3. Contact To Be Made: If the owner cannot be contacted within two (2) business days as stated in subsection C1 of this section, the enforcement
officer or designated representative shall attempt to determine ownership and contact information, to the extent reasonable, during the remaining five
(5) day reclamation period. If an owner is not or cannot be contacted within the five (5) day period, the animal may be disposed according to
subsection I of this section.
D. Reclamation Not Permitted: The following animals may not be reclaimed:
1. A dangerous or vicious animal, as determined by this article.
2. An animal that is not reclaimed within the reclamation period stated in this section, or within a City granted extension, as permitted in subsection F of
this section.
3. An animal that has been released for adoption according to the requirements of this article.
4. An animal that was relinquished. The relinquishment form, signed by the owner and witnessed by the enforcement officer, shall be kept on file.
5. An animal that is not currently licensed, vaccinated, or microchipped, unless such services are performed by a designated representative in the City
animal shelter, with all costs thereof paid for by the owner.
6. An animal for whom all costs of apprehension, impoundment and reclamation have not been paid by the owner.
E. Reclamation Permitted: An owner may reclaim an impounded animal if:
1. The animal is reclaimed within the reclamation period after receiving notice that the animal is in the custody of the City, or before expiration of any
extension granted by the City beyond the reclamation period; provided, however, that the last day does not fall on a day that the shelter is closed to
the public, in which case the last day shall be the next day that the shelter is open.
2. All costs of apprehension, impoundment, veterinary care (if provided) and any other costs outlined in this section have been paid.
3. Proof of rabies vaccination as required by this article and proof of current City license are provided; all impounded animals without proof of rabies
vaccination or current City license must have these services completed by a designated representative at the City animal shelter at the owner's
expense, before the animal will be released to the owner.
4. Proof is provided that the animal is microchipped; if the animal was not microchipped prior to impoundment, a microchip shall be implanted by a
designated representative and the costs thereof shall be paid by the owner prior to reclamation.
F. Time Extension: The animal control officer, for good and verifiable cause, may extend the reclamation period for up to three (3) additional days.
1. If the final day of the extension falls on a day when the shelter is not open to the public, the final day shall be the next day that the shelter is open.
2. The owner, if known, and the staff of the City animal shelter shall be notified of any extension.
3. If the animal control officer believes that there is cause to continue to hold the animal beyond the allowed three (3) day extension, he/she may
request the City Administrator to allow an additional extension of no more than ten (10) calendar days, provided that the last day does not fall on a
day that the shelter is not open to the public, in which case the last day may be extended to the following day that the shelter is open.
4. If the animal is reclaimed at any time, the cost of boarding and any other care shall be charged during any extension and shall be paid before the
animal is released.
G. Cruelty Or Neglect: In cases of animal cruelty or neglect, the City may seek remedies available to ensure the animal is not returned to an owner
incapable of or unwilling to provide proper care of the animal.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 170/358
H. Fees: Reclamation fees shall be determined by resolution adopted by the City Council. The reclamation fee shall increase for each reclamation after the
initial reclamation. Reclamation fees shall be lower if the animal has been previously microchipped.
I. Disposition Of Unclaimed Animals: If an animal is not reclaimed within the reclamation period as outlined above, including any approved extension, or if
an animal is not permitted to be reclaimed as required by this section, it may be placed for adoption or be euthanized.
1. An animal that is relinquished may be disposed before the reclamation period has passed, at such time determined by the animal control officer.
However, before the relinquished animal may be euthanized, the City Administrator shall review the case and make a determination, after
investigation, as follows:
a. Consultation with the animal control officer;
b. Consultation with a veterinary professional or other designated representative (other than the animal control officer) with knowledge of the animal
in question;
c. Review of any circumstances that may lead to a claim against the City; and
d. Determination that proper procedure has been followed.
2. If, in the opinion of a designated licensed veterinarian, the animal is too sick or injured to keep humanely for the designated reclamation period, the
animal may be euthanized before the reclamation period has passed.
3. Any animal placed for adoption shall thereafter be under the control of the adoption agency, and the City shall accept no further liability or
responsibility for the animal.
J. Sick Or Injured Animals: When an enforcement officer reasonably believes an animal taken into custody for impoundment is sick or injured, it shall be
taken to a licensed veterinarian for examination, treatment and care as soon as possible. The costs thereof shall be included in the cost of
impoundment at the owner's expense.
K. Ownership:
1. Disputes: After impoundment and during the reclamation period or any City granted extension, if the shelter is contacted by more than one (1)
individual or party making a reasonable claim of ownership of an impounded animal, the claimants shall be notified of the requirements of this
subsection.
a. All claimants must provide a written claim addressed to the City, stating the basis of the claim of ownership, any documents proving ownership,
and including reliable contact information.
b. Disputes or competing claims of ownership by any two (2) or more individuals or parties of an animal that has been impounded shall be resolved
by the disputing parties within the reclamation period or before expiration of any extension granted by the City. If such disputes are not resolved
within said time frame, the City may dispose of the animal as stated in subsection I of this section.
c. Questions of ownership shall be considered a civil matter and will not be decided or adjudicated by the City, except as stated in subsection K2 of
this section. Competing claimants may circumvent City disposition under this article only if an injunction is granted by a court of competent
jurisdiction, in which case ownership of the animal shall be determined by the court. The prevailing owner shall be responsible for all costs related
to extended boarding, services performed, and any other fees and penalties, prior to release of the animal.
2. Proof Of Ownership: For the purposes of this section, if ownership is disputed or claimed by multiple parties, a person may be identified as the owner
via any one (1) or more of the following, at the discretion of the City Administrator after investigation, shall be determined to be the owner, and the
animal will be released to that individual or party:
a. Due to scanning of an implanted microchip;
b. Listed on the City license for the animal;
c. Via records of multiple visits to a veterinarian;
d. A receipt of purchase;
e. Proof of adoption;
f. Registration with a certified kennel club or breed;
g. Upon the order of a court of competent jurisdiction;
h. Other reliable means of determining ownership. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
8-4A-9: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
A. At Large Animals: No owner, handler or keeper of any animal shall permit their animal to be "at large" as defined in section 8-4A-2 of this article at any
time, whether the animal is licensed or not.
B. Exemptions: The following listed dogs are exempt: a certified police canine, rescue dog or tracking dog acting on behalf of a public safety agency in the
performance of its duties, or is engaged in approved training or a public demonstration of its skills; service dog; certified therapy dog.
C. Special Exemption For Dog Parks: A dog shall be permitted to run without restraint within the enclosed area of a designated dog park; provided, that
the dog's owner or other person responsible for the dog remains within the enclosed area of the dog park and exercises appropriate supervision and
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 171/358
control over the dog at all times. Dogs and their owners/handlers shall obey the rules for the dog park adopted by the Park Board. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-
2014)
8-4A-10: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. Dangerous Or Vicious Animal Ownership: It shall be unlawful to own, keep, shelter, or harbor any "dangerous or vicious animal" as defined in section 8-
4A-2 of this article. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
B. Investigation And Notice: When the animal control officer or designated enforcement officer determines, after investigation, that an animal is dangerous
or vicious, the animal control officer or designated enforcement officer shall notify the owner or possessor by certified mail with signature, or by hand
delivery, of the status of the animal within five (5) business days of the completion of the investigation.
1. The notice shall instruct the owner or possessor of the animal that it is unlawful to own, keep, shelter or harbor a dangerous or vicious animal and
that doing so is punishable under the provisions of this article. The notice shall further inform the owner or possessor of the appeal rights set forth in
this article.
2. For reasons of public health and safety, failure to provide notice as outlined above if the enforcement officer is unable to determine the name and
location of the owner after reasonable investigation shall not prevent the City from taking a dangerous or vicious animal into custody.
C. Impoundment Of Dangerous And Vicious Animals:
1. Custody:
a. If the animal is at large, the enforcement officer may take the animal into custody immediately and notify the owner or possessor in the fashion
described above.
b. If the animal is not at large, the enforcement officer, or designee, may take the animal into custody at the time of delivery of the notice or at any
time thereafter. The owner shall surrender the animal to the enforcement officer.
c. If it is not reasonably possible to capture or restrain the animal, it may be destroyed in a reasonable manner as provided by applicable law.
d. The disposition of a dangerous and vicious animal shall be subject to the requirements of this section, even if the owner voluntarily surrenders the
animal.
2. Impoundment: The animal shall be impounded at the City animal shelter for at least ten (10) calendar days to allow the owner or possessor of the
animal to exercise appeal rights, as set out below.
3. If Owner Cannot Be Contacted: If, after reasonable investigation, the name and contact information of the owner cannot be determined within ten
(10) calendar days after the animal has been impounded, the animal shall be euthanized.
4. Appeal: The owner of an animal determined to be dangerous or vicious may appeal such determination in writing, delivered or mailed to the City
Administrator within ten (10) calendar days from the date that the animal is taken into custody.
a. If an appeal is initiated, no action may be taken against the animal until the City Administrator has ruled on the appeal.
b. The City Administrator may consult with a veterinary professional or other designated representative with knowledge of the animal in question.
c. The City Administrator shall determine if the actions of the enforcement officer are founded, in which case the appeal is denied and the animal
shall be declared dangerous or vicious.
5. Appeal Granted: If the City Administrator determines that the action of the enforcement officer is unfounded, the animal may be reclaimed as
outlined in subsection 8-4A-8E of this article, including licensing, rabies vaccination and microchipping as needed. The owner or possessor of the
animal shall be responsible for all costs of impoundment.
6. No Appeal Filed, Or Appeal Denied: If no appeal is pursued, or if the appeal is denied, the animal shall be euthanized, unless such action is
restrained by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
8-4A-11: REPORT OF ANIMAL BITE; SUSPECTED OR CONFIRMED RABIES; CONFINEMENT:
A. It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal which has bitten or attacked a person, or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack, to
immediately report this bite or attack to an enforcement officer. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
B. Any animal that has bitten any person shall be confined in a place designated by the animal control officer for a period of ten (10) calendar days, at the
owner's expense. The enforcement officer may monitor the animal as necessary during the confinement period. Unless the animal is suspected of, or
has been confirmed to be, suffering from rabies, after that time period, the animal may be released to the owner; provided, that the animal has been
duly licensed, vaccinated and microchipped under the provisions of this article.
C. If the enforcement officer is provided with a copy of a current valid rabies vaccination certificate for the animal, the animal control officer may, at his/her
discretion, permit the animal to be confined by the owner, on the owner's property or other site, if the owner can assure the animal will be confined
within a secure site for the entire ten (10) calendar days. The animal control officer shall be permitted to inspect the site to determine it is secure, at the
animal control officer's request. The animal may not leave the premises for any reason during the ten (10) day period.
1. The animal shall be on a leash and attended at all times whenever outside of an enclosed building.
2. Failure of an animal's owner or keeper to comply with these confinement requirements shall cause the animal to be impounded immediately, as
outlined in section 8-4A-8 of this article and the owner shall be subject to penalties as provided in this article. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014; amd. 2017
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 172/358
Code)
D. If a physician (in the course of treating a human victim of a bite), enforcement officer or veterinarian suspects that an animal is suffering from rabies,
this information shall be reported immediately to the animal control officer. The animal shall be taken into custody by the enforcement officer and
examined by a licensed veterinarian before being confined as outlined above. The animal shall be reexamined prior to coming out of quarantine. All
associated costs shall be paid by the owner.
E. Any animal exhibiting symptoms consistent with rabies shall be humanely euthanized and tested for rabies by an authorized diagnostic laboratory at the
owner's expense. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-12: GENERAL ANIMAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Disturbing The Peace: A person or owner shall not harbor an animal that howls, barks, whines, bays or makes sound of any kind or nature that disturbs
the peace and quiet of the vicinity for a duration of more than fifteen (15) minutes (whether consecutive or not) in any twenty four (24) hour period.
B. Harassment: The owner of any animal shall not permit the animal to attack, harass, bite, scratch or otherwise injure or place in fear of injury any person
or animal on public or private property who has a legitimate reason to be thereon.
C. Molesting Of Animals: A person may not wilfully molest, provoke or mistreat an animal while it is confined on its owner's premises. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-
2014)
D. North Iowa Band Festival: During the North Iowa Band Festival, it is unlawful for a companion animal to be along the parade route.
E. Companion Animals In Public Parks: The City Council may, by resolution, prohibit companion animals from being present on any City right-of-way, City
owned property, or in any designated public park during any sanctioned special event. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
F. Exempted Dogs: The following listed dogs are exempt from the above requirements: a certified police canine, rescue dog or tracking dog acting on
behalf of a public safety agency in the performance of its duties, or engaged in approved training or a public demonstration of its skills; service dog;
certified therapy dog.
G. Microchip Removal: No person, other than a licensed veterinarian, may attempt to remove a microchip that has been implanted in an animal. A
microchip may be removed by a veterinarian only when necessary for the health of the animal or for repair, replacement or upgrading of the microchip.
(Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-13: STANDARDS OF CARE:
Any owner or keeper of any animal shall not abandon the animal or cease to provide companion animal care requirements as listed in this section. An
owner shall arrange a competent, reliable person to provide the following requirements in the owner's absence. The following requirements shall be
sufficient to meet specific health requirements of the animal. Failure to comply with any standard shall be a violation of this article. Any person keeping an
animal shall:
A. Provide sufficient wholesome food at intervals and quantities appropriate for the species, suitable for the physical health and age of the animal. Food
shall be served in a clean receptacle or container.
B. Provide adequate shelter for an animal, appropriate to the species:
1. When kept outdoors, a tangle free, structurally sound, weatherproof and properly ventilated shelter providing access to shade and shelter from
exposure to weather conditions;
2. When kept indoors, a shelter that is properly ventilated and illuminated and sufficiently regulated by heating or cooling to protect the animal from
extremes of temperature, and to provide for its health and comfort.
C. Provide reasonable access to a supply of clean, fresh, potable water in a sanitary manner. If potable water is not accessible to the animal at all times, it
shall be provided daily, for such duration and of sufficient quantity as appropriate for the species.
D. Provide adequate sanitation via periodic cleaning or sanitizing indoor and outdoor facilities, and any area where the animal is confined or restrained to
remove excreta and other waste materials and dirt.
E. Provide adequate space, appropriate for the species, whereby primary enclosures and housing facilities are securely constructed and properly
maintained to provide sufficient space and confinement while allowing freedom of movement.
F. Provide adequate veterinary care during the life of the animal. All animals shall be provided with proper immunizations and preventive healthcare,
including parasite control.
G. Keep the animal cleaned and provide proper grooming as appropriate for the species. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 173/358
8-4A-14: TRAPPING AND POISONING:
A. Humane live box traps are the only approved means of trapping nuisance animals and/or birds with the exception of instant kill snap traps designed for
small rodents. Use of the following traps are prohibited: cannibear traps, snare traps, steel jaw traps, leghold traps, spring traps, or any similar device
designed to catch and hold the animal by the leg or other part of the body, or which is likely for any reason to cause injury, pain and suffering before
death.
B. It shall be unlawful to poison or attempt to poison any animal, except the use of retail rodent poison intended to poison small rodents inside buildings.
C. Certified or licensed exterminators as set out in chapter 206, Code of Iowa are exempted from these requirements. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-15: ANIMAL WASTE DISPOSAL:
A. Any person who walks or takes an animal upon public property, public right-of-way, parks, school grounds, playgrounds or the private property of
another person, shall immediately clean up, remove and properly dispose of solid waste excreted or deposited upon such public or private property.
This section shall not apply to animals participating in any parade or similar event approved by the City Council.
B. It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to keep an animal or animals in such a manner that allows the accumulation of solid waste to become a
detriment to or menace to the health of the animal, or an annoyance or health hazard to humans. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-16: PENALTIES:
Any person or other entity violating any regulation in or any provision of this article, or of any amendment or supplement thereto, shall be:
A. Guilty of a simple misdemeanor, as outlined in section 903.1 of the Iowa Code, which is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) or by imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days; or
B. Guilty of a Municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first and single offense, seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for any second offense and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent and additional offense.
C. The charge of either a simple misdemeanor or a Municipal infraction, or both, shall be determined by the enforcement officer filing the citation.
D. Each separate violation of this article, and each day such violation continues, constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 5
INOPERABLE VEHICLES
8-5-1: PURPOSE:
It is hereby declared that the parking, dismantling, or storage of inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts upon public or private property within the corporate
limits of the City is a threat to the public health, welfare and safety and constitutes a nuisance. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall govern the interpretation of this chapter:
CITY: The City of Mason City.
DISMANTLE: To take apart; disassemble; tear down.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE: Any vehicle that has any one (1) of the following characteristics:
A. Any vehicle that does not display current State registration.
B. Any vehicle with a broken, or missing windshield, missing window, headlight, or any other missing glass.
C. Any vehicle with a broken, loose, or missing fender, door, bumper, hood, roof, steering wheel, trunk lid, muffler or tailpipe.
D. Any vehicle that is the habitat of rats, mice, snakes or any other vermin or insects.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 174/358
E. Any vehicle that lacks an engine, one (1) or more wheels, or other parts that render the vehicle inoperable, such as a truck without an engine or a
trailer missing a wheel.
F. Any vehicle that does not have all tires inflated.
G. Any vehicle that is not capable of moving in both forward and reverse gears.
PARKING: The placement on public or private property of any vehicle or vehicle part for any period of time not exceeding forty eight (48) hours.
PERMIT: To allow or fail to prevent.
PERSON: Any firm, person, partnership or corporation.
STORAGE: The placement on public or private property of any vehicle or vehicle part for any consecutive period of time exceeding forty eight (48) hours.
VEHICLE: Any implement of conveyance designed or used for the transportation of people or materials on land, water, or air, including, but not limited to,
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, snowmobiles, boats, airplanes, helicopters, tractors, trailers, campers, motor homes, wagons, etc.
VEHICLE PART: An individual component or subassembly of a vehicle. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-3: VIOLATION DECLARED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, dismantle, or store any inoperable vehicle or vehicle part or to permit the parking, dismantling, or storage of any
inoperable vehicle or vehicle part other than as herein provided by section 8-5-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-4: OWNER OF MOTOR VEHICLE OR VEHICLE PARTS PRIMA FACIE RESPONSIBLE:
The owner of any inoperable vehicle or vehicle part is prima facie responsible for the parking, dismantling, or storing of such vehicle or vehicle part upon
public or private property in violation of this chapter. Any owner, occupant or person in possession of real property within the City upon which one (1) or
more inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts are found is prima facie responsible for permitting such parking, dismantling, or storage of any inoperable vehicle
or vehicle part upon such property in violation of this chapter. No person shall be charged with more than one (1) violation of this chapter for any one (1)
vehicle. The owner of an inoperable vehicle or vehicle part and the owner of real estate upon which such inoperable vehicle or vehicle part are found may
both be charged.
Each day the owner of an inoperable vehicle or vehicle part and the owner, occupant or person in possession of real property within the City is found in
violation of this chapter and permits the violation to continue after the notice period provided in section 8-5-6 of this chapter shall be a new violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-5: NOTICE:
Upon discovery of any inoperable motor vehicle or vehicle part stored upon private property within the corporate limits of this City, any police officer, or
other City officer, official or employee having authority or responsibility for enforcement of any provisions of this Code, may notify in writing the owner of
said motor vehicle or vehicle part, and the owner of the property upon which it is parked, dismantled, or stored that:
A. The motor vehicle or vehicle part constitutes a violation under the provisions of this chapter.
B. The owner must abate the violation by removing or repairing same in accordance with the terms of section 8-5-6 of this chapter.
C. Failure to remove or repair same shall be sufficient cause for removal and disposal by the City and assessment of costs.
In the alternative, the City may cause to be issued to the owner of the vehicle or vehicle part, or to the owner of the property on which the vehicle or
vehicle part is found, a citation for a Municipal infraction setting forth the violation of this chapter and seeking an order of removal on conviction.
The notice provided by this section relates only to the abatement of a violation of this chapter and is not an element of a violation; provided, however, that
a second and/or any subsequent citation shall not be issued until after the notice provided herein. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-6: DUTY OF OWNER TO REMOVE OR REPAIR:
The owner of the inoperable vehicle or vehicle part which violates the provisions of this chapter, or the owner of the property upon which it is parked,
dismantled, or stored, shall, within ten (10) days after service of a written notice from any police officer, or other City officer, official or employee having
authority or responsibility for enforcement of any provisions of this Code, remove or repair same. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-7: ABATEMENT:
If the owner of an inoperable vehicle or vehicle part or the owner of the property upon which it is parked, dismantled, or stored, shall fail to remove or
repair same in accordance with the requirements of section 8-5-6 of this chapter, any police officer, or other City officer, official or employee having
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 175/358
authority or responsibility for enforcement of any provisions of this Code, may abate such violation by causing same to be towed to a place of safekeeping
and the cost of the towing and storage shall be charged to the owner of the vehicle or vehicle part, or to the owner of the property upon which it was
parked, dismantled, or stored. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-8: AUCTION SALE:
Inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts impounded by the City may be sold at auction as provided in section 321.89, Code of Iowa, for motor vehicles
otherwise impounded. All revenues derived from the sale of inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts, however, shall accrue to the City. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-
2003)
8-5-9: INTERPRETATION:
Where any other ordinance of the City is more stringent or more restrictive than the requirements set forth herein, or any ordinance of the City affords any
other remedy, nothing herein shall be construed to waive or limit the use of and/or compliance with the provisions of such other ordinance. (Ord. 03-21, 10-
21-2003)
8-5-10: VIOLATION:
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may be charged as a Municipal infraction or a misdemeanor. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-11: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts parked, stored, or dismantled:
A. Within a garage or other fully enclosed building;
B. Within a fully enclosed vehicle;
C. On the premises of a business operating in a properly zoned area, when necessary to the operation of said business, as authorized under the zoning
ordinance of the City. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
Chapter 6
NOISE CONTROL
8-6-1: PURPOSE, SCOPE AND DECIBEL MEASUREMENT:
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent excessive sound which is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare and to the quality of life in the City
of Mason City.
B. This chapter shall apply to the control of all noise originating within the limits of the City of Mason City.
C. The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards
Institute. The instruments shall be maintained in calibration and good working order. A calibration check shall be made of the system at the time of any
noise measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise source. The microphone during
measurement shall be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured noise. A windscreen for the
microphone shall be used when required. The measurement shall be an A-weighted, slow response sound level. (Ord. 87-21, 10-5-1987; amd. 2017
Code)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
All terminology used in this chapter and not defined in this section shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL: The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level is
designated dB(a) or dBA.
CALIBRATION CHECK: Operators of a sound level meter may certify the accuracy of meter by either witnessing the integrity seal on the meter is intact
and that the device has a current certificate of calibration from an outside sound meter testing lab; or, using a sound calibrator with the meter before
enforcement sampling to verify the device is functioning properly. The sound calibrator emits a test sound at specific dB level(s) to compare sound level
meter readings.
DECIBEL (dB): A logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure often used in describing the amplitude of sound.
EMERGENCY WORK: Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, work to restore public utilities or
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 176/358
infrastructure, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent danger.
NOISE: A sound, especially one that is loud or unpleasant or that causes disturbance.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICE: The same as the Mason City Police Department and shall have the responsibility of enforcing this chapter.
NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any sound which endangers the welfare, safety or health of a human being, or disturbs a reasonable person of normal
sensitivities, or devalues or injures personal or real property by exceeding authorized limits.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, corporation or officer thereof.
REASONABLE OPERATION: Use of construction, power tools, lawn and garden equipment with a legitimate, timely purpose that minimizes disruption to
nearby persons; not used to cause annoyance or excessive disruption.
SOUND: A temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical quantity, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and
rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distant points.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output or display meter, and
weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels in decibels when properly calibrated or currently certified to be working correctly and the
instrument is of type 2 or better, which complies with American National Standards Institute Standard 1.4-1971 or its successor.
SOUND PRESSURE: The instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as
produced by sound energy.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL: Twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of
twenty (20) micronewtons per square meter (120 x 10-6N/m2). The sound pressure level is denoted Lp or SPL and is expressed in decibels. (Ord. 87-21,
10-5-1987; amd. 2017 Code)
8-6-3: EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency. This includes testing and authorized use of outdoor
warning sirens, and authorized use of emergency vehicle warning devices. Private audible alarms may be tested once per day for a maximum duration
of thirty (30) seconds between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. False or overly sensitive audible alarms that cause a
noise disturbance are not exempt under provisions of this chapter.
B. The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
C. Activities of temporary duration, permitted by law, and for which a valid noise permit has been issued by the Noise Control Office.
D. Reasonable operation of construction equipment, domestic power tools, lawn and garden equipment between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M.
E. Nonprofessional athletic contests on school property, school band practice, and school band performances between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M.
F. Funeral or memorial events of limited duration to include, but not limited to: the playing of trumpets or bagpipes, discharge of blanks during a gun volley
salute, etc.
G. Rail and air transportation and public mass transportation vehicles.
H. The emission of sound in connection with authorized band festival related activities, or authorized activities conducted on the County Fairgrounds
during the annual North Iowa Fair and Exposition.
I. The emission of sound in the performance of authorized law enforcement or military operations.
J. The emission of sound in the discharge of weapons or in fireworks displays approved by the City Council or County Board of Supervisors; or when
lawfully allowed by City ordinance.
K. The emission of sound in the reasonable operation of snow removal equipment and street cleaning equipment regardless of time of day.
L. Organized racing events on the County Fairgrounds property in such a manner that the sound level resulting from such operation exceeds ninety (90)
dBA for any period of time during such operation. Sound levels which exceed the limits herein described at the real property boundary of the receiving
land use shall be deemed a noise disturbance. Said organized racing events must end by ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and not start before ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. (Ord. 87-21, 10-5-1987; amd. 2017 Code)
8-6-4: NOISE DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 177/358
No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, except as permitted, any noise disturbance as defined in this chapter, or any noise in
excess of the limits for such noise established in this chapter. (Ord. 87-21, 10-5-1987)
8-6-5: MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS BY ZONED LAND USE:
A. No person shall engage or participate in the making and creating of an excessive or unusually loud sound within the City heard and measured in the
manner prescribed in subsection 8-6-1C of this chapter, and below, except when done under and in compliance with a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter.
B. It shall be the duty of persons in a position of ownership, possession or control of premises to prevent such premises from being the site of activities
producing sound levels in excess of what is permitted under this chapter. Failure or refusal to perform such duty shall constitute a violation of this
section.
C. It shall be the duty of persons in positions of leadership or responsibility with respect to unincorporated associations, groups, gatherings and
assemblages of people to prevent such from causing or making sound levels in excess of what is permitted under this chapter. Failure or refusal to
perform such duty shall constitute a violation of this section.
D. For the purpose of determining and classifying any sound as excessive or unusually loud, the following test measurement and requirements are to be
applied:
1. The sound shall be measured at the edge of the City street or alley right-of-way reasonably appearing to be nearest to the source of the sound, or if
in a park zoned area, approximately fifty feet (50') from the source of the sound. When a complaint is received, a measurement may also be taken at
a location on the property where the complaining party was disturbed.
2. The sound shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard design and quality operated in the "A" slow response weighing scale.
3. A sound measured or registered in excess of the maximum permitted levels according to the following table, is declared to be excessive and
unusually loud and is unlawful:
Neighborhood Zoned
Characteristics Maximum Permitted
Residential:
Between 7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. 60
Between 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. 50
Commercial or agricultural 65
Industrial 80
Park 65
(Ord. 87-21, 10-5-1987; amd. 2017 Code)
8-6-6: NOISE PERMITS:
A. Application: Applications for a permit for relief from the provisions of this chapter may be made to the Noise Control Office, or a duly authorized
representative, pursuant to the following procedure:
1. All permits must be applied for in writing during normal business hours stating what devices are to be employed, where they are to be employed, on
what date(s) and at what times of day they are to be used, the nature of the sounds to be produced or amplified and the number of people in
attendance, and the persons responsible for the activity. Sufficient lead time must be given to the Noise Control Office to research permit application
and consult with neighboring property owners who may be impacted if a noise permit is issued.
2. Permits granted shall state with reasonable specificity the date(s), location(s), time(s), nature of the sound, devices permitted, number of people in
attendance, and the persons responsible for the activity. Permits are not transferable. The permit shall be conspicuously displayed on or near main
sound producing object or main entrance.
3. Permits shall not be arbitrarily or unreasonably withheld nor shall the free expression of ideas or lawful speech be restrained, but sound and noise
producing conduct having no communicative value and serving only to unreasonably disturb and disrupt the enjoyment of residences and normal
pursuits shall be restrained.
4. The Noise Control Office may prescribe any conditions or requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or the
surrounding neighborhood.
5. Approved noise permits may be revoked at any time by Noise Control Office if permittee or guests fail to comply with permit requirements. Permit
fees are nonrefundable in this case.
6. Denied permits may be appealed to the City Administrator or designee within fourteen (14) calendar days of a permit denial.
B. Permit Application Fees:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 178/358
1. Permit application fee for twenty four (24) hours or less is twenty five dollars ($25.00) each.
2. Permit application fee for one (1) day through seven (7) days is forty dollars ($40.00) each.
3. The Noise Control Office has discretion to waive or reduce a permit fee for a registered charitable or nonprofit organization.
C. Maximum Sound Levels: When a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter, the sound levels listed in the following table shall be the maximum
levels permitted:
Sound Level Limit In dBA Duration
80 24 hours
83 12 hours
86 6 hours
89 3 hours
90 1.5 hours
The above stated duration for each sound level shall not be exceeded. The sound level shall be measured in the same manner as set out in section 8-6-5
of this chapter. (Ord. 87-21, 10-5-1987; amd. 2017 Code)
8-6-7: MOTORIZED VEHICLES:
A. No person shall operate the engine providing motive power, or an auxiliary engine, of a motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating
of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more for a consecutive period longer than twenty (20) minutes while such vehicle is standing and located within
one hundred fifty feet (150') of property zoned and used for residential purposes except where such vehicle is standing within a completely enclosed
structure. This section shall not apply to delivery or pickup vehicles that require the operation of the engine to unload or load their vending loads. (Ord.
87-21, 10-5-1987)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or for the owner to cause or permit to be operated within the public right-of-way in this City, any motor
vehicle which emits a noise in excess of the dBA level established in this section.
1. The maximum allowable noise levels for motor vehicles shall be seventy five (75) dBA measured at a distance of twenty five feet (25').
2. This section applies to the total noise from a motor vehicle and shall not be construed as limiting or precluding the enforcement of any other
provisions of this chapter.
3. No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle or any other noise abatement device of a motor vehicle or operate any such vehicle or
device in this City in a manner that the noise emitted by the motor vehicle is above that emitted by the vehicles as originally manufactured. Muffler
cutouts, bypasses, or other devices which increase sound emitted shall be unlawful.
4. The sound shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard design and quality operated on the "A" slow response weighting scale. (Ord. 87-
21, 10-5-1987; amd. 2017 Code)
8-6-8: POWERS AND DUTIES OF NOISE CONTROL OFFICE; ENFORCEMENT:
The Noise Control Program established by this chapter shall be implemented, administered, and enforced by the Noise Control Office. (Ord. 87-21, 10-5-
1987; amd. 2017 Code)
8-6-9: UNLAWFUL USE OF ENGINE AND COMPRESSION BRAKES:
The use of any engine brake, compression brake, dynamic braking device, or mechanical exhaust device to brake or slow any motor vehicle that results in
excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle, except for the aversion of imminent danger, is prohibited. Emergency vehicles are exempt
from the application of this section. (Ord. 06-025, 9-19-2006)
Chapter 7
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
8-7-1: PURPOSE:
In order to reduce the danger to public health, safety and welfare from the spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated to establish
responsibility for the removal and cleanup of spills within the City limits. (Ord. 89-25, 10-2-1989)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 179/358
For the purpose of this chapter, these words have the following meanings:
CLEANUP: Actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify, analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove or dispose of a hazardous substance.
HAZARDOUS CONDITION: Any situation involving the actual, imminent, or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance onto the land,
into water, or into the atmosphere, which creates an immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety or to the environment. For purposes of this
chapter, a site which is a hazardous waste or hazardous substance disposal site is a hazardous condition.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE: Any substance or mixture of substances that presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not limited
to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an irritant or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other means.
Hazardous substance may include any hazardous waste identified or listed by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under
section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous material designated by the Secretary of
Transportation under the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: The party, whether the owner, agent, lessor, tenant, in charge of the hazardous substance or hazardous wastes being stored,
processed, or handled, or the owner or bailee transporting hazardous wastes or substances whether on public ways or grounds or on private property
where the spill would cause danger to the public or to any person or to the environment.
TREATMENT: A method, technique, or process, including neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition
of a hazardous substance so as to neutralize it or to render the substance nonhazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable for storage,
or to reduce it in volume. Treatment includes any activity or processing designed to change the physical form or chemical composition of hazardous
substance to render it nonhazardous. (Ord. 89-25, 10-2-1989; amd. Ord. 96-3, 1-15-1996)
8-7-3: CLEANUP REQUIRED:
Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance or waste or a
constituent of the hazardous waste or substance may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including
groundwaters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to
an acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to
begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based
on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice setting a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup or that the City will proceed to procure cleanup
services and setting forth a reasonable estimate of the costs of cleanup and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup, including,
but not limited to, equipment rendered unserviceable; personnel costs, including overtime; disposal costs; and any other costs associated therewith. If the
bill for those services is not paid within thirty (30) days, the City may proceed after service of notice, either by certified mail or one (1) publication in the
local newspaper and hearing before the City Council, to obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the City to
finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the Council and immediately seek any State or Federal funds available for said cleanup. (Ord. 89-25, 10-2-
1989)
8-7-4: NOTIFICATION:
The Fire Department shall be notified immediately when an unauthorized discharge becomes reportable under State or Federal regulations. The Fire
Department shall notify law enforcement officials and the Emergency Management Coordinator, and shall file the required reports at the State and Federal
level. (Ord. 96-3, 1-15-1996)
8-7-5: POLICE AUTHORITY:
If the circumstances reasonably so require, the Chief of Police of the Police Department or his representative, may:
A. Evacuate persons, even from their homes, to areas away from the site of a hazardous condition; and
B. Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a hazardous condition beyond which no person shall cross. (Ord. 89-25, 10-2-1989)
8-7-6: CITY LIABILITY:
The City shall not be liable for any losses occurring due to any hazardous condition created which may be claimed by any person, firm, or corporation.
(Ord. 89-25, 10-2-1989)
8-7-7: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision, section, or subsection of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and/or a Municipal infraction
and may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor or a Municipal infraction, or both. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 89-25,
10-2-1989)
Chapter 8
NUISANCE PROPERTY
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 180/358
8-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide City officials with legal tools and procedures to discourage, abate, prevent and punish the use of private
residential or commercial property such that a nuisance related to the use of said property is encouraged, allowed or created. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-2: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall
not affect the remainder of this chapter. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-3: INTERPRETATION:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the singular number
shall include the plural and the plural number shall include the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive; the word "person"
includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-4: EXCLUSIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to active and operating industrial, manufacturing, and agricultural and food processing facilities. This exclusion does not
prevent the applicability of other zoning, nuisance, or other ordinances and statutes to such facilities and activities. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-5: DEFINITIONS:
ABATE: To permanently eliminate.
AUTHORIZED VERIFICATION OFFICER: A Mason City police officer, a Mason City fire inspector, a Mason City building or housing inspector, a Mason
City Code Enforcement Officer, or a Cerro Gordo County health inspector.
BUILDING MATERIALS: Any material, including, but not limited to, lumber, brick, concrete, plaster, plaster board, gutters, floor coverings, or other similar
substances accumulated as a result of repairs, remodeling, or additions to existing buildings, or construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing
structures.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The City Administrator and designees including, but not limited to, attorneys appointed to represent the City.
ENVIRONMENTAL OR SOLID WASTE VIOLATION: Violation of any portion of State Statutes or County or City ordinances regarding environmental or
solid waste regulations.
FOUNDED: That a call for service resulted in the written verification to the City Administrator by an authorized verification officer on a form approved by
the City Administrator that nuisance activity has occurred or that a nuisance condition exists.
INTERESTED PARTY: A property owner, tenant or contract purchaser, or a spouse, family member, or housemate thereof.
NUISANCE: Anything defined as a nuisance by State law or County ordinance of Cerro Gordo County, by any part of this chapter, by any other ordinance
of the City of Mason City, or whatever else poses an unreasonable threat to health or safety, interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property in
an unreasonable manner, or causes annoyance or distress to a reasonable person of normal sensitivities. In addition, but without limitation, the following
are declared to be nuisances:
A. The erecting, continuing, or using of any building or property for the exercise of any activity which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, offensive
smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property of individuals or the public.
B. The storage, placing, keeping, or leaving of building materials, appliances, furniture, machinery, equipment, trailers or other similar personal property
or fixtures outside of a dwelling or accessory building on residential lots so as to impair the residential character and/or property value of the
surrounding lots or neighborhood. This definition shall not apply to boats, camping trailers, or similar recreational vehicles which are not otherwise
junk vehicles under this Code.
PERMITTEE: A person whose presence on the property in issue where the interested party suffers, allows, or consents to, or whose presence the
interested party acquiesces to by failing to remove or prevent the presence of.
PROPERTY: Any privately owned property and that which is affixed, incidental or appurtenant, or a particular rental unit on such property.
PROPERTY OWNER: The record titleholder of legal title as shown by the records of the County Auditor or County Recorder, unless there exists a contract
purchaser of record, in which case it means the contract purchaser.
RESIDENTIAL LOT: A lot of record within the City that has been zoned to include, or which is allowed by law to include, single-or multi-family residential
structures.
SECURE STRUCTURE: Any structure, whether or not occupied, with effective walls, roofs, windows, doors and locks so as to prevent unauthorized entry
or infestation by animals or infiltration of weather conditions. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-6: PROPERTY NUISANCES:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 181/358
A property nuisance exists:
A. When one (1) or more of the following acts are committed upon a property, or within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the nearest point on the
property, by an interested party or their permittee(s):
1. Manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance in violation of Iowa Code chapter 124;
2. Kidnapping as defined in Iowa Code chapter 710;
3. Arson as defined in Iowa Code chapter 712;
4. Burglary as defined in Iowa Code chapter 713;
5. Robbery as defined in Iowa Code chapter 711;
6. Sex abuse as defined in Iowa Code chapter 709;
7. Terrorism as defined in Iowa Code section 708.6;
8. Wilful injury as defined in Iowa Code section 708.4;
9. Sexual exploitation of a minor in violation of Iowa Code section 728.12;
10. Felony gambling in violation of Iowa Code chapter 725;
11. Felony criminal mischief as defined in Iowa Code chapter 716;
12. Animal fighting in violation of Iowa Code chapter 717D.
B. When two (2) or more of the following acts are committed within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months upon, or within one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500'), of a property, by an interested party or their permittee(s):
1. Possession of a controlled substance in violation of Iowa Code chapter 124;
2. Any weapons violation as defined in Iowa Code chapter 724 or Iowa Code section 483A.36 or section 8-3-5 of this title;
3. Riot as defined in Iowa Code section 723.1;
4. Serious or aggravated misdemeanor criminal mischief as defined in Iowa Code chapter 716;
5. Prostitution as defined in Iowa Code section 725.1;
6. Serious or aggravated misdemeanor assault as defined in Iowa Code chapter 708;
7. Serious or aggravated misdemeanor theft as defined in Iowa Code chapter 714;
8. Misdemeanor gambling as defined in Iowa Code chapter 725;
9. False imprisonment as defined in Iowa Code section 710.7;
10. Failing to keep a secure structure;
11. An unpermitted or illegal use under the Mason City zoning ordinance;
12. Discharge of or hunting with a bow and arrow in violation of section 8-3-28 of this title;
13. Violation of Cerro Gordo County ordinance 51 regarding social hosts and underage consumption;
14. A social gathering constituting a disorderly premises or nuisance gathering in violation of the Mason City nuisance gathering ordinance.
C. When three (3) or more of the following acts are committed within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months upon a property, or within one thousand
five hundred feet (1,500') of the property, by an interested party or their permittee(s):
1. City, County or State Health Code violations;
2. City, County or State environmental or solid waste violations, including, but not limited to, violations of title 4 of this Code;
3. Simple misdemeanor criminal mischief in violation of section 716.6 of the Iowa Code;
4. Simple misdemeanor assault in violation of chapter 708 of the Iowa Code;
5. Disorderly conduct in violation of section 8-3-6 of this title or permitting disturbing the peace in violation of section 8-3-17 of this title;
6. Criminal trespass in violation of chapter 716 of the Iowa Code;
7. Criminal sale or use of fireworks in violation of Iowa Code section 727.2 or section 8-3-8 of this title;
8. Any violation of chapter 4 of this title regarding animal control;
9. Inhalation of toxic vapors in violation of section 8-3-11 of this title;
10. Urinating or defecating in public in violation of section 8-3-27 of this title;
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 182/358
11. Any violation of chapter 5 of this title regarding inoperable vehicles;
12. Any violation of Iowa Code section 124.414 regarding the manufacture, delivery, sale or possession of drug paraphernalia.
D. Any other condition on, or activity carried on within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of any part of the property, and participated in, or permitted
or contributed to by, the owner, permittee, or interested party, that otherwise constitutes a "nuisance" as defined in section 8-8-5 of this chapter.
The above references to provisions of the Iowa Code, Cerro Gordo County ordinances, or this Code should not be interpreted to mean that a
prosecution or conviction of the specific charge is a necessary prerequisite to an action under this chapter nor shall it be interpreted to mean that proof
of the action, or any element thereof, beyond a reasonable doubt is required. (Ord. 13-23, 7-16-2013)
8-8-7: PROHIBITION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The creation or maintenance of a "nuisance" as defined in this chapter is prohibited and the City of Mason City may take actions to abate any "nuisance"
as defined in this chapter by the procedures set out below. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-8: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
The City Administrator or designee will make every reasonable effort to contact the private property owner in order to gain permission to enter a property
to investigate reports of nuisance activities or conditions. If unsuccessful in contacting the owner, the City Administrator or designee is authorized to enter
and remain upon private property to the extent reasonably necessary for the purpose of investigating reports of nuisance activities or conditions based
upon a founded report from an authorized verification officer. The investigation may include locating, identifying and documenting evidence related to the
reported nuisance activity or condition. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-9: NOTICE TO ABATE:
When the City Administrator has received founded reports of nuisance conditions or activities such that a specific property can be identified as a nuisance
property under the provisions of this chapter, the City Administrator may cause to be served a written notice to abate the nuisance, directed to the property
owner and other interested person responsible for the nuisance condition, as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-10: NOTICE TO ABATE; CONTENTS:
A. A notice to abate shall contain:
1. A description of the nuisance;
2. The location of the nuisance;
3. The dates that the nuisance(s) were documented;
4. Identification and address of each person causing, creating or allowing the nuisance;
5. An order for abatement requiring the property owner or interested person or permittee to consent to one (1) of the following alternatives, with the
approval of the City Administrator:
a. Agree to take all necessary steps and actions to completely and permanently abate the nuisance within the required time frame; or
b. Submit to the City Administrator a plan for abatement containing specific and substantive steps designed to eliminate the current nuisance and to
prevent future recurrence of the nuisance. The plan must be submitted to the City Administrator within twenty (20) days of the date the order for
abatement is mailed or personal service is completed. The plan may be modified or rejected by the City Administrator and resubmitted as directed
by the City Administrator. Any plan finally approved by the City Administrator shall become a part of the order for abatement; or
c. Consent by the property owner to an occupant violation with a placard on the property, or the affected unit thereof, prohibiting occupation of the
property or individual unit until reinspection of the property or unit, with reinspection to occur within three (3) business days after the request from
property owner for reinspection; or
d. Consent by the property owner to an owner/interested person violation with the surrender of the rental dwelling permit for the property, or the
affected unit thereof, with no reinstatement until reinspection and reapplication. Said reapplication may be denied if the property owner has not
taken sufficient steps to prevent the reoccurrence of the nuisance condition. After approval of the reapplication, the reinspection will occur within
three (3) business days after the request from property owner for reinspection;
6. The period of time in which the actions are to be completed;
7. A statement of the terms regarding appeal hearing;
8. A statement that:
a. If the nuisance is not completely and permanently abated within the required time period; and
b. If a plan for abatement has not been approved and completely implemented by the owner/interested person within the time period in the approved
plan; and
c. If an occupant violation, with surrender of the rental dwelling permit, has not been consented to by the owner and the nuisance abated within the
required time period; and
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 183/358
d. If an owner/interested person violation, with surrender of the rental dwelling permit, has not been consented to by the owner and the nuisance
abated within the required time period,
then the City may abate the nuisance with costs assessed against the owner and/or the interested person and/or against the property as a
property tax, and/or the City may suspend or revoke any and all permits affecting the applicable property issued by the City or City staff, and/or the
City may seek a court order finding a Municipal or criminal violation and ordering abatement.
B. The notice to abate may also contain:
1. A statement that the property owner shall be assessed the cost of police response for all founded nuisance incidents that occur following the date of
the notice to abate. Upon demonstration by the property owner that all reasonable and warranted steps to prevent or resolve the issue(s) giving rise
to the nuisance have been taken in good faith, the assessment for the cost of police response may be withdrawn. The assessment for the cost of
police response shall terminate at the end of one (1) year if the founded nuisance incidents during that year do not meet or exceed the criteria for a
problem area "nuisance" as defined in section 8-8-5 of this chapter. If applicable, when the criteria for a problem area nuisance is met or exceeded
for two (2) consecutive years following an abatement notice, the rental dwelling permit may be revoked for the affected property or unit with
reinstatement only after reinspection and reapplication.
2. For nuisances pertaining to debris or environmental violations, a statement that the City will no longer issue further written warnings and all violations
must be corrected within twenty four (24) hours otherwise the City will clean up any solid waste at the property owner's cost.
3. A statement that any failure to abate the nuisance described in the notice, and within the stated time frame, may result in the suspension of any
wine, beer or liquor permit or license held by the owner or interested party. (Ord. 13-23, 7-16-2013)
8-8-11: NOTICE TO ABATE; SERVICE:
The notice shall be sent by certified mail to the property owner and any other interested persons. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-12: FINAL ORDER TO ABATE AND IMPOSITION OF PENALTY:
No sooner than twenty (20) days following the issuance of the notice to abate, the City Administrator or designee shall issue a final order to abate
containing a description of the nuisance, the location of the nuisance, the dates that the nuisance(s) were documented, the identification of the person(s)
causing, creating or allowing the nuisance, and the actions that are required to abate the nuisance and the time frame in which the actions are to be
completed. The final order may also contain any penalty or directions for other enforcement or abatement actions that are authorized under this chapter.
(Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-13: APPEAL AND HEARING:
A. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing before the City Council or before such person or hearing body as the City Council may
designate, as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the City Administrator ordering the
abatement by first class mail postmarked within twenty (20) days from the date of the abatement notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a
nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered.
B. Any penalty imposed for failure to abate a nuisance, other than a Municipal infraction and simple misdemeanor citation, shall provide for an opportunity
to request a hearing before the City Council, or such person or hearing body as it may designate, as to whether the penalty is warranted. A request for
a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the City Administrator ordering the abatement by first class mail postmarked within twenty (20) days
from the date of the final abatement order, or it will be conclusively presumed that the abatement required and the penalty imposed are warranted.
(Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-14: EMERGENCY:
If it is determined by the City Administrator that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing presence of a nuisance that constitutes a threat to one (1)
or more individuals or to the public, the City may perform any action reasonable designed to abate such nuisance without prior notice or hearing. The City
shall assess the costs as provided in sections 8-8-15 and 8-8-16 of this chapter and subject to the provision of section 8-8-15 of this chapter, after notice to
the property owner under the applicable provisions of sections 8-8-9 through 8-8-11 of this chapter, and opportunity for hearing as provided in section 8-8-
17 of this chapter. (Ord. 13-23, 7-16-2013)
8-8-15: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
If the person notified to abate a nuisance neglects or fails to abate as ordered, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping an accurate
account of the costs incurred in the abatement of the nuisance. The itemized account of the costs shall be filed with the Finance Director or his designee
who may pay any outside expenses on behalf of the City. The salvage value, if any, of any item or items constituting a nuisance which is so abated by the
City, shall be retained by the City to be applied against costs. In the event the salvage proceeds exceed the costs, any such excess shall be paid to the
former owner of the property, upon proof of such ownership. If ownership is not proved within sixty (60) days of the disposal of the property, then the
excess portion of the payment shall be applied to the City's General Fund. In addition, the City, by order of the City Administrator, may suspend or revoke
any and all permits affecting the applicable property issued or granted by the City or City staff, and/or the City may seek a court order finding a Municipal
or criminal violation and ordering abatement. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-16: EXPENSES; COLLECTION:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 184/358
The Clerk shall mail a statement of the total expense incurred, minus any salvage value, to the person or persons who have failed to abide by the notice to
abate, demanding payment of the expense. Subject to the provisions of section 8-8-15 of this chapter, if the amount shown by the statement has not been
paid by the person within thirty (30) days, it shall then be collected with, and in the same manner as, special taxes, as provided in Iowa Code section
384.59(2). (Ord. 13-23, 7-16-2013)
8-8-17: EXPENSES; HEARING:
Any person notified pursuant to section 8-8-16 of this chapter who objects to the amount of expense demanded from him may have a hearing before the
Finance Committee of the City Council, or such other person or hearing body as it may designate. The hearing shall be limited to the question of the
reasonability of the amount of expense demanded. A request for hearing must be in writing and filed with the City Administrator within ten (10) days after
the date of the Finance Director or designee's demand for payment. Any collection actions will be stayed upon the filing of a request for hearing until a final
determination by the committee. The determination of the committee shall be conclusive, and shall be communicated in writing to the objector. The City
Clerk shall then proceed in the manner set forth in Iowa Code section 384.59(2), taking into account any modifications by the committee in the amount of
expense due. (Ord. 13-23, 7-16-2013)
8-8-18: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It is unlawful for any person to:
A. Create or maintain or allow a "nuisance" as defined in this chapter.
B. Fail to abate within the time period originally prescribed by the notice to abate described in section 8-8-10 of this chapter, or such additional time period
as may be designated pursuant to the appeal process outlined in section 8-8-13 of this chapter, any "nuisance" as herein defined after having been
ordered to do so by written notice and/or order to abate under the provisions of sections 8-8-9 through 8-8-12 of this chapter.
C. Resume or allow the resumption of a nuisance after having been ordered to abate the nuisance by a written notice or final order to abate under the
provisions of sections 8-8-9 through 8-8-12 of this chapter.
D. Otherwise hinder, delay, or interfere with the City Administrator in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
E. Terminate a lease agreement with or otherwise retaliate against a tenant because that tenant complained or otherwise notified the police or City official
about nuisance activities at the owner's premises. (Ord. 13-23, 7-16-2013)
8-8-19: PENALTIES:
The following are penalties that may be imposed for violating this chapter. These possible penalties may be imposed in addition to, and not in lieu of, any
sanctions specified in an abatement plan or order otherwise entered pursuant to this chapter.
A. A violation of this chapter may be punished as a simple misdemeanor in accordance with the penalties set forth in the Iowa Code.
B. A violation of this chapter may be punished as a Municipal infraction with a scheduled fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first offense, five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second offense, and seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a third or subsequent offense.
C. A violation of this chapter may be punished by revocation or suspension of any license or permit, affecting the subject property, issued by the City of
Mason City or by City staff, in the discretion of the City Administrator and with the approval of the City Council.
D. Each day a violation persists shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
Chapter 9
NUISANCE GATHERINGS AND DISORDERLY PREMISES
8-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings ascribed:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: As defined in Iowa Code chapter 123.
DISORDERLY PREMISES: Any premises that constitutes a threat to public peace, health, safety or general welfare of the public by constituting the source
of:
A. Persons engaging in fighting or threatening violent or tumultuous behavior;
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 185/358
B. Unreasonable noise as defined as a "noise disturbance" in chapter 6 of this title or noise which is otherwise prohibited in said chapter;
C. Hazardous or offensive conditions such as, but not limited to, solid waste violations, public urination, public defecation, and indecent exposure.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of two (2) or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social function or other activity on public
or private property whether indoors or outdoors.
HOST: To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, control or overtly permit a gathering or event. Mere knowledge that an event or gathering is occurring is insufficient
to constitute host status; but presence at the gathering or event combined with right of possession or control of the premises upon which the event or
gathering is occurring is presumed to satisfy host status.
NUISANCE GATHERING: An event or gathering that constitutes, or results in the occurrence of two (2) or more illegal activities at or as a result of the
event or gathering at the premises, including, but not limited to, the following:
A. Noise in violation of chapter 6 of this title;
B. Public disturbances, assaults, brawls, fights, indecent exposure, public urination or public defecation;
C. Unlawful sale, furnishing, or consumption of an alcoholic beverage or public intoxication;
D. Unlawful deposit of solid waste in violation of title 4 of this Code or section 8-3-12 of this title;
E. Criminal mischief in violation of chapter 716 of the Code of Iowa;
F. Criminal trespass in violation of chapter 716 of the Code of Iowa;
G. Unlawful sale, manufacture, or possession of any controlled substance;
H. Any violation of Iowa Code section 124.414 regarding the manufacture, delivery, sale or possession of drug paraphernalia;
I. Violation of Cerro Gordo County ordinance 51 regarding social host and underage consumption;
J. Violation of section 8-3-6 of this title regarding disorderly conduct;
K. Criminal sale or use of fireworks in violation of Iowa Code section 727.2 or section 8-3-8 of this title;
L. Driving any motorized vehicle or other self-propelled machine resulting in a crash, property damage, personal injury, reckless driving, or otherwise in
a careless, dangerous or reckless fashion within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the closest point on the property at issue.
PREMISES: Any house, residence, yard, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, park, business, or other place of assembly, private or public,
whether owned, leased, or used with or without permission or compensation.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual under the age of twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord. 13-16, 5-7-2013)
8-9-2: HOSTING OF DISORDERLY PREMISES OR NUISANCE GATHERING PROHIBITED:
No person shall host a disorderly premises or nuisance gathering. A person or persons who own the property where the disorderly premises or nuisance
gathering occurs or the person or persons in possession or control of the premises where the disorderly premises or nuisance gathering takes place, or
the person or persons in possession or control of the location of the nuisance gathering, may each, jointly and severally, be charged with violating this
section whenever any premises owner, occupant, tenant or other person having a possessory interest or control hosts, sponsors, conducts, suffers or
permits an event or gathering that at any time of the event or gathering becomes a disorderly premises or nuisance gathering. However, any owner,
occupant, tenant or other person having a possessory interest or control who requests assistance from the police to prevent a gathering from becoming a
disorderly premises or nuisance gathering prior to the police receiving complaints related to the event or gathering being a disorderly premises or nuisance
gathering shall not be considered to be in violation of this section. This exemption is only valid for one (1) occurrence per property in any calendar year.
(Ord. 13-16, 5-7-2013)
8-9-3: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates this chapter may be charged with a simple misdemeanor or a Municipal infraction punishable by a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than the maximum fine allowed for a single misdemeanor or a Municipal infraction under Iowa law.
B. The penalty provided herein may be imposed in addition to any penalty that may be imposed for any other criminal offense or Municipal violation arising
from the same incident. (Ord. 13-16, 5-7-2013)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 186/358
8-9-4: POLICE SERVICE FEE:
A police service fee may be imposed whenever a police officer or other Police Department representative has given notice to a person who hosts a
disorderly premises or nuisance gathering that a second response based upon a disorderly premises or nuisance gathering complaint within the next
twenty four (24) hours may result in the assessment of a police service fee. The imposition of a police service fee is in addition to the authority of the police
to otherwise take enforcement action to control the disorderly premises or nuisance gathering by ordering dispersal, making arrests or issuing citations.
The person or persons responsible for any disorderly premises or nuisance gathering for which there was a second or subsequent police response after
the provision of notice of the applicability of public service fees shall be liable to the City for the police service fees to defray the reasonable cost incurred
in any subsequent police response, jointly or severally. The Chief of Police or designee shall cause appropriate billings to be made through the Finance
Department. If the City's attempt to collect the police service fee is unsuccessful, the City may bring an action to recover the police service fee, including
reasonable attorney fees, against any person responsible for paying the debt or the debt may be turned over to a collection agency and any fees charged
by the agency shall be added to the debt. (Ord. 13-16, 5-7-2013)
Title 9
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC DEFINITIONS
9-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the definitions detailed in section 321.1, Code of Iowa, are adopted in full by the City and incorporated as part of this title, in
addition to the following:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles, ambulances, and emergency vehicles owned by the United
States, this State, any subdivision of this State, or any Municipality of this State, and privately owned vehicles as are designated or authorized by the
Director of Transportation under Iowa Code section 321.451.
BICYCLE: A device having two (2) wheels and having at least one (1) saddle for the use of a rider which is propelled by human power.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway when fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of three
hundred feet (300') or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
CROSSWALK: That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections. Any
portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrians crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
DRIVER OR OPERATOR: Every person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle upon a highway.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and not operated upon rails. The term "car" or "automobile" shall be synonymous with the term
"motor vehicle".
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time, whichever shall be in
current use in this City at the time.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, placed or erected by
authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS: Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a parking lot, public street, avenue or alley except when the operator is
temporarily stopping for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers, or loading or unloading merchandise, or an
involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle or in compliance with a duly authorized order from
a peace officer.
PARKING LOT: Real estate purchased, leased or otherwise acquired for the use as a parking lot or other off street parking area for the parking of vehicles.
PARKWAY: A continuous area of public land comprising a way of approach or access for pedestrian or park vehicular passage, and which shall be
improved with paths, drives, plantings or other recreational features in a parklike atmosphere.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. Where the term "person" is used in connection with the registration of a
motor vehicle, it shall include any corporation, association, partnership, company, firm, or other aggregation of individuals which owns or controls such
motor vehicle as actual owner, or for the purposes of sale or for renting, whether as agent, salesperson, or otherwise.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: Municipal agency responsible for enforcing State and local laws, detecting and preventing crime, and maintaining the peace
within the City limits of Mason City.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 187/358
POLICE OFFICER: Officers authorized to enforce laws or to make arrests.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and use for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property upon cars, operated upon stationary rails.
RAILROAD TRAIN: An engine or locomotive with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business, suburban, or school district where forty percent
(40%) or more of the property upon such highway for a distance of three hundred feet (300') is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use
for business.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SAFETY OR DEADMAN THROTTLE: A device which, when pressure is removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be
disengaged from the driving tract.
SCHOOL DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including the highway for a distance of two hundred feet (200') in either direction from a school
ground.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
SNOWMOBILE: Any self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow, ice or natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or runners.
STANDING: Any stopping of a vehicle whether occupied or not.
STOP: Complete cessation of movement. When prohibited, means any stopping of a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to public use as
a matter or right for purposes of vehicular traffic.
SUBURBAN DISTRICT: All other parts of the City not included in the business, school or residence districts.
THROUGH STREET: Every highway or portion thereof at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to stop
before entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in this title or such entrances are controlled by a peace officer or traffic
control signal.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel.
VEHICLE: Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway. (Ord. 11-14, 9-20-2011)
Chapter 2
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
9-2-1: POLICE ADMINISTRATION TRAFFIC CONTROL AUTHORITY:
There is hereby established in the Police Department a Traffic Division, to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible
to the Chief of Police. It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the Police Department, to enforce
the street traffic regulations, to make arrests for traffic violations, and to investigate accidents and to carry out the duties specially imposed upon said
division by this chapter and the traffic regulations of this Code. The Engineering Department has the authority to designate roadway, marking, and
regulatory features related to traffic control upon the City's streets. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-2: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS:
Administrative Officers of the City shall conduct analyses of accidents, devise remedial measures and cooperate with other City officials in the
development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-3: STREET, ALLEY OR SIDEWALK CLOSURE:
A. Individuals are not allowed to close or partially block a City street, alley or sidewalk without prior approval from the Engineering Department. Public
safety and/or City operations and maintenance personnel may temporarily block streets, alleys or sidewalks for official purposes only.
B. A traffic control plan shall be submitted and approved by the Engineering Department at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the closure of any street,
alley or sidewalk. The traffic control plan must show the proposed area of the closure including the type and locations of all traffic control devices. The
requested dates of closure and the contact information for a person responsible for the signage shall be provided. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011; amd. 2017
Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 188/358
9-2-4: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
It shall be the duty of the Engineering Department to install or supervise the installation of all traffic control devices. The Engineering Department shall
operate and maintain traffic control devices when and as required under the traffic regulations of this City and may require the placing and maintenance of
such additional traffic control devices as may be deemed necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic regulations of this City or under State law, or to
guide or warn traffic. All traffic control devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the Iowa Department of Transportation. All
traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of State law or this title shall be official traffic control devices. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-
2011)
9-2-5: CROSSWALKS, SAFETY ZONES, TRAFFIC LANES:
The Engineering Department is hereby authorized to:
A. Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is particular
danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as may be deemed necessary.
B. Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as may be deemed necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
C. Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as may be deemed advisable, consistent with the traffic regulations. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-6: NO TURN MARKERS:
The Engineering Department is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn and
shall place proper signs at such intersections. The Engineering Department is hereby authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to
intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to
or be other than as prescribed by law or provisions of this Code. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-7: LOADING ZONES:
The Engineering Department is hereby authorized to determine the location of loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the
same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-8: QUIET ZONES:
The Engineering Department shall have authority to temporarily establish a zone of quiet upon any street where a person is seriously ill if requested so to
do by the written statement of at least one (1) registered physician certifying to its necessity. Said temporary zone of quiet shall embrace all territory within
a radius of two hundred feet (200') of the building occupied by the person named in the request of said physician. Said temporary zone of quiet and any
other zone of quiet declared by any ordinance shall be designated by the Engineering Department by placing at a conspicuous place in the street a sign or
marking bearing the words "quiet zone". (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-9: PUBLIC CARRIER STANDS:
The Engineering Department is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops and taxicab stands and standards for other passenger common
carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as shall be determined to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to
the public, and every bus stop, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-10: THROUGH HIGHWAYS, STOP OR REDUCED SPEED INTERSECTIONS:
Whenever any provision of this Code designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the Engineering Department to place and maintain a
stop sign on each and every street intersection or through street or that portion thereof described and designated as such by any provision of this Code.
(Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-11: HAZARDOUS INTERSECTIONS:
The Engineering Department is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets
and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to any such stop intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place
where a stop is required. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
9-2-12: WEIGHT LIMIT, EXCEPTIONS; EMBARGO ESTABLISHED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle having a gross weight in excess of an established weight as set by the City Engineer for a public
way. The exception is City vehicles providing essential services such as snow removal and garbage collection.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 189/358
A. Streets to which weight limitations have been established at twenty thousand (20,000) pounds are as follows:
Birch Drive from North Illinois Avenue to Fourth Street Southeast.
Cerro Gordo Way from Garfield Avenue to Fourth Street Southwest.
North Adams Avenue from Twelfth Street Northwest to Sixteenth Street Northwest.
North Jefferson Avenue from Twelfth Street Northwest to Sixteenth Street Northwest.
North Madison Avenue from Twelfth Street Northwest to Sixteenth Street Northwest.
North President Avenue from Twelfth Street Northwest to Seventeenth Street Northwest.
North Washington Avenue from Twelfth Street Northwest to Seventeenth Street Northwest.
South Hampshire Avenue from Twelfth Street Southeast to Nineteenth Street Southeast.
South Massachusetts Avenue from Twelfth Street Southeast to Nineteenth Street Southeast.
First Street Northwest from west line of North Pierce Avenue to east line of East Parkridge Drive and Winnebago Way from east line of East Parkridge
Drive to north line of Fourth Street Southwest (Highway 18 west).
Sixth Street Southeast from South Massachusetts Avenue to South Carolina Avenue.
Eleventh Street Southwest from Federal Avenue to Washington Avenue.
Fourteenth Street Northwest from North Federal Avenue to North Quincy Avenue.
Fifteenth Street Northwest from Federal Avenue to Quincy Avenue.
Sixteenth Street Northwest from North Federal Avenue to North Quincy Avenue. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
B. Bridges to which weight limitations have been established are as follows:
1. Bridge on Willowbrook Drive between Brook Terrace and Meadow Lane, weight limitation established at twelve thousand (12,000) pounds.
2. Bridge on Twelfth Street Northwest between the north and south North Taft Avenue intersections, weight limitation established at twenty (20) tons for
straight trucks, twenty four (24) tons for truck plus semitrailer, and twenty four (24) tons for truck plus double trailer combinations; maximum load limit
of twenty four (24) tons for all vehicles. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
C. The Engineering Department is hereby ordered to post appropriate signs on said designated public ways giving notice of said weight limit.
D. Weight restrictions established on streets, avenues or alleys should not be applicable to the driving or operation of any such truck or commercial vehicle
upon the streets, avenues or alleys designated if such driving or operation is necessary in the conduct of a business in order to reach destinations
abutting such designated street or if the destination cannot be reached except by driving on such designated street nor shall this restriction be
applicable to emergency vehicles responding to an emergency call. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-13: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
9-3-1: REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC LAWS:
A. Required Obedience: State Statute entitled "Provisions Refer to Highways - Exception" is Iowa Code section 321.228 and any revisions thereto.
B. Obedience To Police: State Statute for obedience to peace officers is Iowa Code section 321.229 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-2: CARELESS DRIVING:
State Statute for careless driving is Iowa Code section 321.277A and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-3: ACCIDENTS AND REPORTS:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 190/358
A. Leaving Scene Of Traffic Accident: State Statute for leaving scene of traffic accident (vehicle damage only) is Iowa Code section 321.262 and any
revisions thereto.
B. Striking Unattended Vehicle: State Statute for striking unattended vehicle is Iowa Code section 321.264 and any revisions thereto.
C. Striking Fixtures Upon Highway: State Statute for striking fixtures upon a highway is Iowa Code section 321.265 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-4: OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
State Statute for obedience to official traffic control devices is Iowa Code section 321.256 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-5: OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
State Statute for official traffic control signal guidelines is Iowa Code section 321.257 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-6: STOP REGULATIONS:
A. Stop Intersections: State Statute for vehicles entering stop intersections is Iowa Code section 321.322 and any revisions thereto.
B. Stop Required At School Crossings: The Engineering Department may authorize schools to extend or roll out temporary stop signs when school is in
session to control traffic near school crossings. Every driver of a motor vehicle, bicycle, snowmobile or other vehicle capable of being operated on City
streets shall stop at every such sign, or at a clearly marked stop line before crossing the crosswalk nearest to him, or before entering the intersection,
except when otherwise directed by a police officer. (2017 Code)
9-3-7: BICYCLES, ANIMALS OR ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES:
State Statute for bicycles, animals or animal drawn vehicles is Iowa Code section 321.234 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-8: ACTS PROHIBITED ON FULLY CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES:
State Statute for acts prohibited on fully controlled access facilities is Iowa Code section 321.366 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-9: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lights:
1. Headlamps On Motor Vehicles: State Statute for headlamps on motor vehicles is Iowa Code section 321.385 and any revisions thereto.
2. Rear Lamps: State Statute for rear lamp requirements is Iowa Code section 321.387 and any revisions thereto.
3. When Lighted Lamps Required: State Statute regarding when lighted lamps required is Iowa Code section 321.384 and any revisions thereto.
4. Lamps On Parked Vehicles: State Statute for lamps on parked vehicles is Iowa Code section 321.389 and any revisions thereto.
B. Mufflers: State Statute for mufflers is Iowa Code section 321.436 and any revisions thereto.
C. Brake Requirements: State Statutes for brake requirements are Iowa Code sections 321.430 and 321.431 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-10: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
A. Turning At Intersections: State Statute for turning at intersections is Iowa Code section 321.311 and any revisions thereto.
B. Left Turns, Yielding Right-Of-Way: State Statute for left turns, yielding right-of-way is Iowa Code section 321.320 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-11: OVERTAKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Overtaking Vehicle:
1. State Statute for overtaking vehicle on the left is Iowa Code section 321.299, paragraph 1, and any revisions thereto.
2. State Statute for requirements for a vehicle being overtaken is Iowa Code section 321.299, paragraph 2, and any revisions thereto.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 191/358
B. Limitations On Overtaking On The Left: State Statute for limitations on overtaking on the left is Iowa Code section 321.303 and any revisions thereto.
C. Overtaking And Passing: State Statute for overtaking and passing is Iowa Code section 321.302 and any revisions thereto.
D. Prohibited Passing: State Statute for prohibited passing is Iowa Code section 321.304, paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-12: PARADES AND PROCESSIONS:
No parades or processions excepting forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of this State, and the forces of the Police and Fire
Departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other regulations
as are set forth herein which may apply. (2017 Code)
9-3-13: OPERATION OF VEHICLES RESTRICTED:
A. Limitation On Backing: State Statute for moving vehicle backward on highway is Iowa Code section 321.323 and any revisions thereto.
B. Emerging From Alley, Driveway: State Statute for stop before crossing sidewalk from private drive or alley is Iowa Code section 321.353 and any
revisions thereto.
C. Entering Through Highway, Stop Intersections: State Statute for entering through highways is Iowa Code section 321.321 and any revisions thereto.
D. Driving On Right Hand Side: State Statute for driving on right hand side of roadway and exceptions is Iowa Code section 321.297 and any revisions
thereto.
E. Meeting And Turning Right: State Statute for meeting and turning right is Iowa Code section 321.298 and any revisions thereto.
F. Following Too Closely: State Statute for following too closely is Iowa Code section 321.307 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-14: YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY:
A. General Restrictions: State Statute for entering through highways is Iowa Code section 321.321 and any revisions thereto.
B. Directional Right-Of-Way: State Statute for entering intersections from different highways is Iowa Code section 321.319 and any revisions thereto. (2017
Code)
9-3-15: OPERATION WITHOUT REGISTRATION:
State Statute for operation without registration is Iowa Code section 321.98 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-16: FRAUDULENT USE OF REGISTRATION:
State Statute for fraudulent use of registration is Iowa Code section 321.99 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-17: SIGNALS REQUIRED:
A. When Signals Required: State Statute for when signals required is Iowa Code section 321.314 and any revisions thereto.
B. Continuous Signals: State Statute for signal continuous is Iowa Code section 321.315 and any revisions thereto.
C. Signal To Stop Or Decrease Speed: State Statute for signal to stop or decrease speed is Iowa Code section 321.316 and any revisions thereto.
D. Signals Given By Hand And Arm Or Signal Device: State Statute for signals given by hand and arm or signal device is Iowa Code section 321.317 and
any revisions thereto.
E. Method Of Giving Hand And Arm Signals: State Statute for method of giving hand and arm signals is Iowa Code section 321.318 and any revisions
thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-18: ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC, CHANGE OF LANES:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 192/358
State Statute for roadways laned for traffic, change of lanes, is Iowa Code section 321.306 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-19: RESTRICTED AND PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Moving Another Vehicle: State Statute for moving other vehicles is Iowa Code section 321.359 and any revisions thereto.
B. Projecting Loads On Passenger Vehicles: State Statute for projecting loads on passenger vehicles is Iowa Code section 321.455 and any revisions
thereto.
C. Obstruction To Driver's View: State Statute for obstruction to driver's view is Iowa Code section 321.363 and any revisions thereto.
D. Putting Debris On Highways: State Statute for putting debris on highway is Iowa Code section 321.369 and any revisions thereto.
E. Opening And Closing Vehicle Doors: No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is
reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer
than necessary to load or unload passengers.
F. Safety Belts And Harnesses: State Statute for safety belts and harnesses, use required is Iowa Code section 321.445 and any revisions thereto.
G. Child Restraint Devices: State Statute for child restraint devices is Iowa Code section 321.446 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-20: DRIVERS' LICENSES:
A. Operators Licensed: State Statute for operators licensed is Iowa Code section 321.174 and any revisions thereto.
B. Operation Of Motor Vehicle With Expired License: State Statute for operation of motor vehicle with expired license is Iowa Code section 321.174A and
any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-21: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. (2017 Code)
Chapter 4
SPEED REGULATIONS
9-4-1: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
Any person operating a motor vehicle on a street or highway within the City limits of the City of Mason City shall operate said vehicle at a speed in
accordance with, and not in excess of, the speed restrictions established by Iowa Code section 321.285 and any subsequent revisions thereto, except as
specifically modified below. The following shall be the lawful speeds except as herein modified, and any speed in excess thereof shall be unlawful:
15 miles per hour:
Birch Drive, from a point where North Illinois Avenue intersects, thence easterly and then southerly to a point where Fourth Street Southeast
intersects.
Lime Creek Road, from a point where Nature Center Road intersects, thence east to a point one hundred fifty feet (150') west of the west entrance to
the Lime Creek Nature Center parking lot.
Twenty Third Street Southwest, from a point where South Monroe Avenue intersects, thence west to the eastern border of Frederick Hanford Park.
25 miles per hour:
On roads, streets and alleys within the corporate limits of Mason City that are not classified by this chapter.
30 miles per hour:
Birch Drive, from a point where Fourth Street Southeast intersects, thence southerly and easterly to the south City limits.
North Kentucky Avenue, from a point where East State Street intersects, thence north to a point where Twelfth Street Northeast intersects.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 193/358
North Pierce Avenue, from a point two hundred fifteen feet (215') north of the Meadow Lane intersection, thence north to a point where Twelfth Street
Northwest intersects. Exception: When the school zone beacon lights are flashing, speed limit is reduced to twenty five (25) miles per hour.
South Kentucky Avenue, from a point where Fourth Street Southeast intersects, thence south to a point one hundred feet (100') south of Nineteenth
Street Southeast intersection.
South Monroe Avenue, from a point four hundred feet (400') south of Seventh Street Southwest intersection, thence north to a point where Fifth
Street Southwest intersects.
South Taft Avenue, from a point where Nineteenth Street Southwest intersects, thence south to the south City limits.
Fifteenth Street Southwest, from a point where South Federal Avenue intersects, thence west to a point where South Monroe Avenue intersects.
Nineteenth Street Southwest from one thousand six hundred feet (1,600') east of South Pierce Avenue to two hundred feet (200') west of Pierce
Avenue.
35 miles per hour:
North and South Taft Avenue, from a point where Nineteenth Street Southwest intersects, thence north to a point where Twelfth Street Northwest
intersects.
North Illinois Avenue, from a point six hundred sixty feet (660') north of East State Street intersection, thence north to a point where Twelfth Street
Northeast intersects.
South Eisenhower Avenue, from a point where Fourth Street Southwest intersects, thence south to a point where Ninth Street Southwest intersects.
South Iowa Avenue, from a point where Fourth Street Southeast intersects, thence south to a point where Eleventh Street Southeast intersects.
South Monroe Avenue, from a point four hundred feet (400') south of Seventh Street Southwest intersection, thence south to a point where
Nineteenth Street Southwest intersects.
South Pierce Avenue, from a point where Ninth Street Southwest intersects, thence south to a point where Fifteenth Street Southwest intersects.
Eleventh Street Southeast, from a point where South Iowa Avenue intersects, thence east to the east City limits.
Twelfth Street Northeast, from a point where North California Avenue intersects, thence east to the east City limits.
Twelfth Street Northeast, from a point where North Ohio Avenue intersects, thence east to a point two thousand six hundred feet (2,600') east of
North Illinois Avenue intersection.
Twelfth Street Northwest, from a point where North Eisenhower Avenue intersects, thence west to the west City limits.
Fifteenth Street Southwest, from a point where South Monroe Avenue intersects, thence west to a point where South Taft Avenue intersects.
Nineteenth Street Southeast from a point where South Virginia Avenue intersects, thence east to South Kentucky Avenue.
Nineteenth Street Southwest from South Federal Avenue to one thousand six hundred feet (1,600') east of South Pierce Avenue.
Nineteenth Street Southwest, from two hundred feet (200') west of South Pierce Avenue to two-tenths (2/10) of a mile west of the Taft Avenue
intersection. Exception: When school lights are flashing, speed limit is reduced to twenty five (25) miles per hour.
Thirty Fifth Street Southeast, from a point where South Federal Avenue intersects, thence east to the east City limits.
45 miles per hour:
College Drive, from a point where Fourth Street Southeast intersects, thence north to a point two thousand two hundred ninety feet (2,290').
North and South Eisenhower Avenue, from a point where Twelfth Street Northwest intersects, thence south to a point where Fourth Street Southwest
intersects.
South Eisenhower Avenue, from a point where Ninth Street Southwest intersects, thence south to a point where Nineteenth Street Southwest
intersects.
South Kentucky Avenue, from a point one hundred feet (100') south of the Nineteenth Street Southeast intersection, thence south to the south City
limits.
South Pierce Avenue, from a point where Nineteenth Street Southwest intersects, thence south to a point two thousand six hundred forty feet
(2,640') south of the Nineteenth Street Southwest intersection.
Ninth Street Southwest, from a point where South Taft Avenue intersects, thence west to a point where South Eisenhower Avenue intersects.
Twelfth Street Northeast, from a point two thousand six hundred feet (2,600') east of the North Illinois Avenue intersection, thence east to a point
where North California Avenue intersects.
Twelfth Street Northwest, from a point two hundred fifteen feet (215') west of North Pierce Avenue intersection, thence west to a point two hundred
seventy five feet (275') west of the western portion of North Taft Avenue intersection.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 194/358
Nineteenth Street Southwest, from a point two-tenths (2/10) of a mile west of the Taft Avenue intersection, thence west to a point nine hundred fifty
feet (950') west of Country Club Drive intersection.
55 miles per hour:
North and South California Avenue, from the south City limits, thence northerly to the north City limits.
North Eisenhower Avenue, from a point where Twelfth Street Northwest intersects, thence north to the north City limits.
South Eisenhower Avenue, from a point where Nineteenth Street Southwest intersects, thence south to the south City limits.
South Pierce Avenue, from a point two thousand six hundred forty feet (2,640') south of Nineteenth Street Southwest intersection, thence south to a
point where Forty Third Street Southwest intersects.
Twelfth Street Northwest, from a point two hundred seventy five feet (275') west of the western portion of North Taft Avenue intersection, thence west
to a point where North Eisenhower Avenue intersects.
Nineteenth Street Southwest, from a point nine hundred fifty feet (950') west of Country Club Drive intersection, thence west to the west City limits.
Forty Third Street Southwest, from a point where South Federal Avenue intersects, thence west to the west City limits. (Ord. 13-01, 1-15-2013)
9-4-2: CONTROL OF VEHICLES; REDUCED SPEED:
Any person operating a motor vehicle on a street or highway within the City limits of the City of Mason City shall at all times operate the vehicle in
accordance with Iowa Code section 321.288 and any subsequent revisions thereto. (Ord. 13-01, 1-15-2013)
9-4-3: SPEED LIMITS ON IOWA HIGHWAY 122:
The following speeds on the following portions of said primary Iowa Highway 122 within the City shall be lawful speeds except as herein modified, and any
speed in excess thereof shall be unlawful, as follows:
30 miles per hour:
From the intersection of South Massachusetts Avenue, thence westerly to a point four hundred feet (400') west of the intersection of South Monroe
Avenue.
35 miles per hour:
From a point four hundred feet (400') west of the intersection of South Monroe Avenue, thence west to a point five hundred feet (500') west of the
intersection of South Grover Avenue.
From a point one thousand fifty feet (1,050') east of the intersection of South Illinois Avenue, thence west to the intersection of South Massachusetts
Avenue. Exception: When the school zone beacon lights are flashing, speed limit is reduced to twenty five (25) miles per hour within the school zone.
40 miles per hour:
From a point five hundred feet (500') west of the intersection of South Grover Avenue, thence west to a point one thousand seven hundred feet
(1,700') east of the intersection of South Roosevelt Avenue and Village Green Drive.
45 miles per hour:
From a point one thousand fifty feet (1,050') east of the intersection of South Illinois Avenue, thence east to a point one thousand eight hundred fifty
feet (1,850') west of the intersection of Farmstead Square. Exception: When the school zone beacon lights are flashing, speed limit is reduced to
thirty five (35) miles per hour within the school zone.
50 miles per hour:
From a point eight hundred feet (800') east of the intersection of South Yorktown Pike, thence west to a point one thousand eight hundred fifty feet
(1,850') west of the intersection of Farmstead Square.
From a point one thousand seven hundred feet (1,700') east of the intersection of South Roosevelt Avenue and Village Green Drive, thence west to
the west City limits.
55 miles per hour:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 195/358
From the east City limits, thence west to a point eight hundred feet (800') east of the intersection of South Yorktown Pike. (Ord. 13-01, 1-15-2013)
9-4-4: SPEED LIMITS ON U.S. HIGHWAY 65:
The following speeds on the following portions of said primary U.S. Highway 65 within the City shall be lawful speeds except as herein modified, and any
speed in excess thereof shall be unlawful, as follows:
25 miles per hour:
From the intersection of Eighth Street Southwest/Southeast, thence north to the intersection of Sixth Street Northwest/Northeast.
30 miles per hour:
From the intersection of Sixth Street Northwest/Northeast, thence north to the intersection of Seventeenth Street Northwest/Northeast.
35 miles per hour:
From the intersection of Twenty Seventh Street Southwest, thence north to the intersection of Eighth Street Southwest/Southeast.
45 miles per hour:
From a point five hundred fifty feet (550') south of the intersection of Twenty Seventh Street Southwest, thence north to the intersection of Twenty
Seventh Street Southwest.
From the intersection of Seventeenth Street Northwest/Northeast, thence north to a point three hundred thirty feet (330') north of the intersection of
Nature Center Road.
55 miles per hour:
From a point three hundred thirty feet (330') north of the intersection of Nature Center Road, thence northerly to the north City limits.
From the south City limits, thence north to a point five hundred fifty feet (550') south of the intersection of Twenty Seventh Street Southwest. (Ord.
13-01, 1-15-2013)
Chapter 5
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLES
9-5-1: OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLES:
A registered all-terrain or utility terrain vehicle may be operated on City streets that are subject to speed limits of thirty five (35) miles per hour or less
within the City limits of Mason City under the following conditions:
A. The operation of the vehicle is for snow removal purposes on private driveways and sidewalks.
B. The operation of the vehicle on City streets is strictly for transportation to and from the site of the snow removal and the vehicle shall be equipped with a
functioning blade or snowblower at all times during operation.
C. The all-terrain vehicle/utility terrain vehicle and the driver of said vehicle shall meet all State requirements for the legal operation of the vehicle. (Ord.
13-33, 12-17-2013)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE OR ATV: A motorized flotation tire vehicle with not less than three (3) low pressure tires, but not more than six (6) low pressure
tires, that is limited in engine displacement to less than nine hundred (900) cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to less than one thousand (1,000)
pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY/LIABILITY COVERAGE: Any of the following:
A. An owner's policy of liability insurance which is issued by an insurance carrier authorized to do business in Iowa to or for the benefit of the person
named in the policy as insured, and insuring the person named as insured and any person using an insured motor vehicle with the express or implied
permission of the named insured against loss from liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of an
insured motor vehicle within the United States of America or Canada, but subject to minimum limits, exclusive of interest and costs, in the amounts
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 196/358
specified in section 321A.21 or specified in another provision of the Code, whichever is greater.
B. A bond filed with the department pursuant to section 321A.24.
C. A valid statement issued by the Treasurer of State pursuant to section 321A.25 attesting to the filing of a certificate of deposit with the Treasurer of
State.
D. A valid certificate of self-insurance issued by the department pursuant to section 321A.34.
UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLE OR UTV OR OFF ROAD UTILITY VEHICLE OR ORV: A motorized flotation tire vehicle with not less than four (4) low
pressure tires, but not more than eight (8) low pressure tires, that is limited in engine displacement to less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic
centimeters and in total dry weight not more than two thousand (2,000) pounds and that has a seat that is bucket or bench design, not intended to be
straddled by the operator and steering wheel or control levers for control. Off road utility vehicle does not include dune buggies, golf carts, go-carts or
minitrucks. (Ord. 13-33, 12-17-2013)
9-5-3: PROOF OF REGISTRATION, CURRENT FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND AGE FOR OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN
VEHICLES:
No person shall operate an ATV on any public street or alley unless the operator possesses the following documents. The operator must carry these
documents when operating the all-terrain vehicle:
A. Evidence that the ATV is registered according to Iowa law and that such registration is current. The owner/operator shall maintain such registration.
B. Evidence that the operator is at least eighteen (18) years of age, and possesses a valid Iowa driver's license.
C. Proof of current financial responsibility/liability in accordance with section 321.20B of the Code of Iowa. The owner/operator shall maintain such
financial responsibility.
D. UTVs are not currently required to be registered with the Iowa DNR but when registration of UTVs is required, owners shall maintain proof of
registration. (Ord. 13-33, 12-17-2013)
9-5-4: STREETS DESIGNATED FOR OPERATION:
All-terrain vehicles and utility terrain vehicles may be operated upon the roadway portion of all streets within the City limits except as hereinafter prohibited
by ordinance. (Ord. 13-33, 12-17-2013)
9-5-5: PROHIBITED OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle upon a public street as permitted by this chapter except in strict
accordance with the following provisions:
A. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle upon any portion of a street except the roadway portion thereof.
B. Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle upon any street shall drive upon the most right hand lane of the roadway available for
traffic or as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking another vehicle stopped in that lane or
proceeding in the same direction.
C. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle upon a street in excess of a maximum speed of thirty five (35) miles per hour, or
than is reasonable or proper under all existing circumstances.
D. An all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle may make a direct crossing over a street, including a street which constitutes an extension of a State or
Federal primary highway within the City limits, but no person shall make a direct crossing of any such street with the all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain
vehicle unless:
1. The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a
quick and safe crossing;
2. The all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle complies with all traffic regulations;
3. The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; and
4. When crossing a divided street, the crossing shall be made only at an intersection of such street with another street.
E. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle except in compliance with all other ordinances of the City, which pertain to the use,
operation and parking of motor vehicles, unless otherwise expressly provided by this chapter or except those which, by their nature, have no
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 197/358
application to the operation of all-terrain vehicles or utility terrain vehicles. All ordinances of the City which pertain to the use, operation and parking of
motor vehicles are incorporated herein by reference as though the same were fully set forth herein.
F. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or
property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto.
G. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics, habit forming drugs or
psychoactive drugs whether prescribed or not prescribed.
H. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle at any time on a street without the required headlight and taillight being lighted
during the operation of such all-terrain vehicles or utility terrain vehicles. (Ord. 13-33, 12-17-2013)
9-5-6: PROHIBITED AREAS OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle within the City:
A. Upon any portion of a street other than the roadway portion thereof;
B. Upon any portion of a street which constitutes an extension of a State or Federal primary highway within the City limits, except as otherwise herein
provided with respect to the permitted crossing of such streets;
C. Upon public property other than the roadway portion of permitted streets except as otherwise specifically permitted by ordinance of the City or by rule or
regulation of the Park Board of the City;
D. Upon any private property without the specific permission of the owner of such property or the person in control of such property or upon public property
owned by the State or any other governmental subdivision other than the City without the specific permission of the State or any such governmental
subdivision. (Ord. 13-33, 12-17-2013)
Chapter 6
PARKING ENFORCEMENT BUREAU
9-6-1: BUREAU CREATED:
The Police Chief shall establish a Parking Enforcement Bureau to assist him with clerical work on parking violations and traffic cases. The Chief of Police
shall be in charge of the bureau which shall be open at such hours as he may designate. (Ord. 12-15, 12-18-2012)
9-6-2: DUTIES OF BUREAU:
The following duties are hereby imposed upon the Parking Enforcement Bureau:
A. It shall collect parking fees, keep sufficient records of the same, account for the same and transmit the same to the City Clerk, all as prescribed by
section 8-2-5 of this Code.
B. It shall collect fines for overtime parking violations and parking violations other than overtime parking violations, keep sufficient records of the same,
account for the same and transmit the same to the City Clerk, all as prescribed by section 8-2-5 of this Code.
C. It shall keep records of all traffic violations of which each person has been guilty during the preceding twelve (12) months whether such guilt was
established in court or indicated by the record of the Parking Enforcement Bureau.
D. If a notice of fine for a parking violation, in a form prescribed by section 9-10-16 of this title, has been given by placing the original or copy thereof in
plain sight on the windshield of the vehicle, and the fine is not paid as prescribed in such notice and as established by this Code, the bureau shall
cause such violation to be filed against the registered owner thereof who shall be prima facie responsible for said violation. It shall be a misdemeanor
for any person to permit or allow a motor vehicle to be parked in violation of the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 12-15, 12-18-2012)
9-6-3: BUREAU RECORDS:
The Parking Enforcement Bureau shall keep records of all notices of fines issued within the City and all fees and fines collected by the Parking
Enforcement Bureau under the provisions of this chapter. Such records shall be maintained so as to show all types of violations, final disposition, and the
totals of each. (Ord. 12-15, 12-18-2012)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 198/358
Chapter 7
OFF STREET PARKING
9-7-1: PARKING SPACES:
The Mason City Engineering Department is hereby authorized and directed to mark off individual parking spaces on all parking lots, said parking spaces to
be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the surface or curbing of the parking lot. At each space so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle in such a way that said vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated. (Ord. 12-16, 12-18-2012)
9-7-2: PARKING TIME LIMITS:
Parking or standing of a vehicle in a designated public or leased parking space shall be lawful for a period of time and for such fee as may be fixed by the
City Council. Where no parking time limit is prescribed, it shall be unlawful for any person to leave, abandon or park any vehicle on any public parking lot
for a period of time exceeding twenty four (24) hours. It shall also be unlawful to park any vehicle in a leased parking space in a public parking lot if the
vehicle does not display a current leased parking permit issued by the City for that vehicle on their front dash. Any vehicle parked in violation of this section
or parked in violation of any other ordinance, regulation or lawful police order of the City is hereby found and declared to constitute an obstruction to the
public parking lot areas, and a public nuisance and may be issued a parking violation notice of fine and/or removed in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 10 of this title, as they apply to the removal of vehicles from public streets, avenues or alleys. (Ord. 12-16, 12-18-2012)
9-7-3: TRUCK PARKING:
No vehicle used primarily for the transportation of property, and no vehicle used primarily for commercial transportation of persons, shall park in or upon
any parking lot unless said vehicle is of such length and width as to park within the designated lines of the parking space. (Ord. 12-16, 12-18-2012)
9-7-4: ONE-WAY TRAFFIC:
The entrances, drives and exits to any of the off street parking lots shall be designated as one-way traffic lanes as the Engineering Department shall
designate. The Operations and Maintenance Department is hereby authorized and directed by the Engineering Department to post signs on said
entrances, drives and exits of parking lots designated one-way traffic as deemed necessary. When one-way traffic signs are in place on any public parking
lot, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle thereon except in the direction indicated by said posted signs. (Ord. 12-16, 12-18-2012)
9-7-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 12-16, 12-18-2012)
Chapter 8
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
9-8-1: STREETS OR ALLEYS DESIGNATED:
The following streets, avenues, alleys, or parts thereof, are hereby made one-way streets, avenues and alleys, or parts thereof, and vehicles shall be
driven only in the direction hereinbelow indicated for such streets, avenues, alleys, or parts thereof: (Ord. 15-08, 8-4-2015)
A. Northbound:
Delaware Avenue from Fourth Street Southeast to Fifth Street Northeast.
Frank Lloyd Wright Way from First Street Southwest to West State Street.
North-south alley between Delaware Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue from First Street Northeast to Second Street Northeast.
South Massachusetts Avenue from Sixth Street Southeast to Fifth Street Southeast.
Fourth Street Southeast from Federal Avenue to Delaware Avenue. (Ord. 15-08, 8-4-2015; amd. 2017 Code)
B. Southbound:
Washington Avenue from Fifth Street Northwest to Fourth Street Southwest.
C. Westbound:
Fifth Street south from South Massachusetts Avenue to South Madison Avenue.
Eleventh Street Northeast "A" Alley from Pennsylvania Avenue to Twelfth Street Northeast.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 199/358
D. Eastbound:
Third Street Southeast from Indiana Avenue to Illinois Avenue.
Fourth Street Southwest from President Avenue to Federal Avenue.
Sixth Street south from South Madison Avenue to South Massachusetts Avenue. (Ord. 15-08, 8-4-2015)
9-8-2: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1985 Code)
Chapter 9
BICYCLES
9-9-1: EFFECT OF REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. These regulations applicable to bicycles shall
apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-2: BICYCLE LICENSE PROCEDURES:
Mason City residents may license their bicycles at the Police Department during normal business hours.
A. Application: Application for a bicycle license and license tag may be made upon a form provided by the Police Department and shall be made in person
at the Police Department.
B. Inspection: Police Department staff reserve the right to examine the bicycle in order to verify ownership and accuracy of information before issuing a
bicycle license.
C. Issuance Of License: Upon receiving proper application, Police Department staff are authorized to issue a bicycle license. Staff shall not issue a license
for any bicycle when he or she knows or has reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession of such
bicycle. The Police Department shall keep a record of the numbers of each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom
issued and a brief description of the bicycle licensed. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-3: REMOVAL OF TAG/ALTERATION OF SERIAL NUMBER:
No person shall remove a license tag from a bicycle during the period for which issued unless the bicycle is permanently dismantled or the bicycle is no
longer operated upon any street in this City. It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the manufacturer's
serial number of any bicycle. It is unlawful to possess a bicycle in the City whose serial number has been intentionally removed, defaced, or altered to
prevent identification. Bicycles with missing, altered, or obscured serial numbers may be seized by police in an attempt to verify ownership. Police
Department staff have discretion to allow verified legitimate bicycle owners to retain their bicycle if they have reported their bicycles stolen to police
contemporaneous to the recovery of reported but altered bicycle. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-4: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP:
Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the new owner may, upon proper application and verification from the prior owner, have said tag
reassigned to the new applicant/owner. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-5: RENTAL AGENCIES:
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is equipped as required by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-
2013)
9-9-6: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY:
Bicycle regulations are subject to all applicable motor vehicle and traffic regulations as established by Iowa Code section 321.234 and any subsequent
revisions thereto. The City has enacted additional specific bicycle regulations by local authority under Iowa Code section 321.236 and any subsequent
revisions thereto. Sections in this chapter without a specific reference to an Iowa Code section are the additional local bicycle regulations in effect. (Ord.
13-19, 6-4-2013)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 200/358
9-9-7: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
Bicycle riding and seating regulations are established by Iowa Code section 321.234 and any subsequent revisions thereto. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-8: SPEED AND STOPPING REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. Speed and stopping regulations
are established by Iowa Code section 321.285 and any subsequent revisions thereto. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-9: PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY REQUIREMENTS:
Stop requirements before crossing a sidewalk, and related right-of-way to pedestrians is established by Iowa Code section 321.353 and all subsequent
revisions thereto. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-10: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any other vehicle upon a roadway. It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle upon
the public roadways of the City to tow or attach any wheeled cart or extension to the bicycle unless the attached object is specifically manufactured for
such use and utilized according to the manufacturer's instructions. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-11: CARRYING ARTICLES:
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one (1) hand upon the handlebar.
(Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-12: PARKING IN BUSINESS DISTRICT:
It shall be unlawful to park any bicycle upon the sidewalks, except in designated areas or stands, or in areas where the parking of automobiles is
prohibited. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-13: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS:
No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. The City Engineering Department is hereby authorized to erect signs on any
sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon and when such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same. Whenever any person
is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing
such pedestrian. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-14: LAMPS AND REFLECTORS:
Lamp and reflector regulations are established by Iowa Code section 321.397 and any subsequent revisions thereto. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-15: AUDIBLE SIGNAL:
Bicycle siren and whistle regulations are established by Iowa Code section 321.434 and any subsequent revisions thereto. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
Chapter 10
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
9-10-1: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED; NO SIGNS REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided for in this section, no signs shall be required to make it illegal to stop, stand or park a vehicle contrary to the provisions of
this section. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with traffic or in compliance with instructions of a police
officer or traffic control device in any of the following places:
A. On a sidewalk.
B. In front of a public or private driveway or alley.
C. Within an intersection.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 201/358
D. On a crosswalk.
E. Within ten feet (10') upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a street.
F. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy five
feet (75') of said driveway entrance when properly signposted.
G. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
H. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a curb or street.
I. On the parking area of any street or between the outside edge of any privately owned property and the curb line or traffic portion of a street.
J. On any street in such manner that the vehicle is headed other than in the direction of traffic or with the right hand wheels of said vehicle more than
eighteen inches (18") adjacent from the edge of the right hand curb.
K. Upon any street unless a different parking time limit is required, for a period of time exceeding forty eight (48) hours. Vehicles must be moved at least
twenty feet (20') in distance during each forty eight (48) hour time period in order to avoid penalty under this subsection.
L. On any street in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than fifteen feet (15') of the width of the roadway portion of any street
for free movement of vehicular traffic.
M. Upon any street for a commercial vehicle; implements of husbandry; semitractor, semitrailer or combination thereof; two (2) or four (4) wheel trailer;
motorized home; travel trailer; pickup coach; school bus, or school bus converted for recreational or other purposes; for more than four (4) consecutive
hours unless, however, the parking of any of the above is necessary to services being performed or operations being carried on upon adjacent or
nearby premises. Two (2) or four (4) wheel trailers properly attached to a passenger vehicle are subject to the forty eight (48) consecutive hour rule in
subsection K of this section.
The City Engineer or his designee, upon request, may permit parking of any of the above for a period of up to twenty four (24) hours, provided all other
provisions of this Code are complied with.
N. Within five feet (5') of a fire hydrant. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-2: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES; SIGNS REQUIRED:
Where signs are erected prohibiting stopping, standing or parking at any time, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle at any time on any such street
or portion of street as indicated by said signs. The Mason City Engineering Department shall direct the Operations and Maintenance Department to install
appropriate signs upon order of the City Council. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-3: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS, OR BY NONPERMITTED VEHICLES;
SIGNS REQUIRED:
Where signs are erected prohibiting stopping, standing or parking during certain hours or by nonpermitted vehicles, no person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle, or allow a vehicle to remain parked, upon such street or portion of such street during the hours when such is prohibited, or without continuously
displaying a valid and readily visible City issued parking permit for that section. The Mason City Engineering Department shall direct the Operations and
Maintenance Department to install appropriate signs upon order of the Administrator.
Where temporary signs are erected at least eight (8) hours prior to the start of a project prohibiting stopping, standing or parking during certain periods for
the purpose of snow removal, tree removal, street repairs or excavating, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, or allow a vehicle to remain parked,
upon such street or portion of such street during the hours signs are in place. (Ord. 19-4, 5-21-2019)
9-10-4: PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS; SIGNS REQUIRED:
Where signs are erected limiting the time for which a vehicle may be parked, then no person shall park a vehicle upon such street or portion of street for a
longer duration than specified by such sign. The Mason City Engineering Department shall direct Operations and Maintenance Department to install
appropriate signs upon order of the City Council. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-5: STANDING FOR LOADING PURPOSES:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or
material in any place marked as a loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such loading zone are effective, and then only for a period
not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 202/358
9-10-6: BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS:
The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus or taxicab stand, respectively,
except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping and parking
regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle,
other than a bus in a bus stop or a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that
a driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-7: UNLAWFUL PARKING:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
A. Displaying it for sale;
B. Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-8: INDIVIDUAL PARKING SPACES:
The Mason City Engineering Department shall designate the individual parking spaces upon each street or public parking lot by lines or other appropriate
markings painted upon the lot, curb or street. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such line or marking or to park any vehicle in such position
that it shall not be entirely within the space designated by such lines or markings. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-9: VEHICLES TO BE REMOVED OR DISABLED:
Any vehicle parked upon any public street, avenue, alley or Municipal parking lot in violation of any provision of this chapter may be removed by the Chief
of Police or other designated official to any off street parking area or to a public or private garage and stored in such off street parking area or public or
private garage or lot until claimed by the owner thereof as hereinafter provided. In the case of vehicles parked in violation of the habitual violator provisions
of this chapter, any police officer or parking enforcement officer of the Police Department may, in lieu of removal, place a locking wheel chock or other
similar device on any wheel or tire of the vehicle to prevent its removal until the owner or operator has appeared before the Parking Enforcement Bureau
as required by section 9-10-22 of this chapter. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-10: NOTICE OF REMOVAL OF VEHICLE:
In the event of removal of a vehicle from any public street, avenue or alley by the Police Department, the officer involved shall take reasonable efforts to
notify the registered owner of said vehicle as soon as possible of the following facts:
A. The fact of removal of said vehicle, together with reasons therefor and the place to which removed;
B. A general description of the vehicle, including license number;
C. The charges for removal and the daily cost of storage of said vehicle.
Notification to the registered owner by phone or in person is sufficient. If unable to contact the registered owner, or, if the vehicle is not reclaimed by the
registered owner within fifteen (15) days of the initial notification, written notification shall be sent by mail. The mailed notice to the owner shall be
addressed to the registered owner as shown by the registration certificate on said vehicle and shall be deposited with postage prepaid, by certified mail
with return receipt requested, in the United States Post Office. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-11: PAYMENT OF COSTS FOR REMOVAL OF VEHICLE:
Before any vehicle so removed and stored shall be reclaimed by the owner or other claimant, he shall satisfactorily identify himself and establish his right,
title or interest to said vehicle and shall pay all costs and charges in connection with the removal and storage of said vehicle and all costs of service of
notice. It shall be unlawful for any person to reclaim such vehicle without first paying all of the costs and charges pertaining to the removal and storage of
said vehicle. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-12: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (Ord. 12-17,
12-18-2012)
9-10-13: COLLECTIONS OF FINES FOR ILLEGAL STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING OF VEHICLES:
It shall be the duty of the Parking Enforcement Bureau to make regular collections of money for violations of this chapter with respect to the stopping,
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 203/358
standing and parking of vehicles and to transmit such funds to the City Clerk, as provided in section 8-2-5 of this Code, after which time the same shall be
deposited with the Director of Finance who shall credit the same as provided for in this Code. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-14: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING VIOLATIONS:
Any person who parks any vehicle in any public place in violation of the terms and provisions of this Code relating to the stopping, standing and parking of
vehicles, shall be guilty of a parking violation. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-15: FINES FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS:
Except where otherwise provided, the fine for a violation of any parking regulation of this chapter shall be as follows:
Violation
Code
Section
Paid
Within
30 Days
Paid
After
30 Days
Failure to properly park in off street public parking space 9-7-1 $ 15.00 $ 20.00
Parking in City parking lot: in excess of posted sign limit, leased parking only, or parked more than 24 hours (if
no sign)
9-7-2 15.00 20.00
Truck parking in off street public lot 9-7-3 15.00 20.00
Restricted parking:
On a sidewalk 9-10-1A
15.00 20.00
Blocking driveway or alley 9-10-1B
15.00 20.00
Within intersection 9-10-1C
15.00 20.00
On a crosswalk 9-10-1D
15.00 20.00
Within 10 feet of traffic control signal 9-10-1E
15.00 20.00
Parking too close to fire station driveway entrance 9-10-1F
15.00 20.00
Parking near street excavation/repair which obstructs traffic 9-10-1G
15.00 20.00
Double parking 9-10-1H
15.00 20.00
Between curb and property line 9-10-1I 15.00 20.00
Headed wrong way or more than 18 inches 9-10-1J
15.00 20.00
Overtime for 48 hour limit 9-10-1K
15.00 20.00
Failure to preserve 15 feet roadway 9-10-1L
15.00 20.00
4 hour limit for commercial vehicles 9-10-1M
15.00 20.00
Parked within 5 feet of fire hydrant 9-10-1N
15.00 20.00
Restricted parking:
No parking signs 9-10-2 15.00 20.00
During certain hours, or fail to display valid City issued parking permit 9-10-3 15.00 20.00
Overtime parking 9-10-4 15.00 20.00
Overtime/loading zone 9-10-5 15.00 20.00
Bus and taxi stops 9-10-6 15.00 20.00
Unlawful parking:
For sale or repair 9-10-7 15.00 20.00
Improper parking:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 204/358
Not within lined space 9-10-8 15.00 20.00
Alternate side parking, snow removal 9-10A-3
15.00 20.00
Prohibited act in residential parking permit district 9-10B-8
15.00 20.00
Persons with disabilities parking 9-10-17
200.00 200.00
Parking in fire lane 9-10-18
15.00 20.00
(Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
9-10-16: PARKING VIOLATION, NOTICE OF FINE:
A. Issuance; Copies: Where a parking violation is observed for which a fine is prescribed by section 9-10-15 of this chapter, a parking notice of fine may be
issued by any officer or parking enforcement employee of the Police Department, any officer or firefighter of the Fire Department or any other City
employee, or official, designated by the City Administrator. Notices of fine shall be issued electronically, or written upon serially numbered sets of
parking notice of fine forms with each copy to be clearly imprinted with the citation complaint number. Copies of the notice of fine forms shall be used
as follows: one (1) shall be used as a notice of fine and shall be delivered to the owner or operator of the vehicle, if present at the time the violation is
observed, or, in the alternative, securely affixed to the vehicle parked in violation of any provision of this Code for which a parking notice of fine is
authorized and one (1) shall be placed on file with the Parking Enforcement Bureau of the Mason City Police Department.
B. Violations: Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this chapter or any
other City ordinance, an officer or designated City employee finding such vehicle may take its registration number and such other information displayed
on the vehicle as may identify its owner or operator and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice of fine, in writing, on a form as provided
herein, for the owner or operator to appear on the charge against him or her at the Parking Enforcement Bureau of the Mason City Police Department
or at the City Clerk's Office as designated in the notice of fine.
C. Form Of Notice Of Fine: The parking notice of fine shall clearly identify: the serial number assigned to the notice; the date, time, and location of alleged
violation; the vehicle make and license plate; the employee's ID number; the alleged parking violation(s); the appropriate fine for the violation ticketed;
and similar instructions on how to respond or deny the parking notice of fine.
YOU MAY ADMIT THE VIOLATION BY PAYMENT OF A FINE OF $15.00 WITHIN 30 DAYS OR $20.00 THEREAFTER. THE FINE FOR PERSONS
WITH DISABILITY PARKING VIOLATIONS ARE $200.00 IF PAID WITHIN 30 DAYS AND $200 THEREAFTER. YOU MAY DENY THIS CHARGE BY
APPEARING AT THE PARKING ENFORCEMENT BUREAU AT THE MASON CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT OR AT THE OFFICE OF THE MASON
CITY CITY CLERK WITHIN 30 DAYS OF ISSUANCE.
Fines may be paid by depositing the correct amount in the envelope and either mailing it or delivery to the Mason City Police Department, 78 South
Georgia, or to the Mason City City Clerk's office, 10 1st St. N.W.
NOTICE: It may be illegal to park a vehicle upon the public streets, highways or parking lots within the City if there are four or more unpaid,
unanswered Notices pending against the owner of such vehicle. Vehicle owners with unpaid notices will be turned over to the County Treasurer for
collection. Vehicle owners with unpaid parking notices may be unable to register their vehicles until fines have been paid.
(Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-17: PARKING AREAS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
There are hereby established disabled parking areas upon the City streets, alleys and Municipal and private parking lots to be administered as follows:
A. A persons with disabilities parking permit shall be displayed in a motor vehicle as a removable windshield placard or on a motor vehicle as a plate or
sticker as provided in Iowa Code section 321L.2 when being used by a person with a disability, either as an operator or passenger. Each removable
windshield placard shall be of uniform design and fabricated of durable material, suitable for display from within the passenger compartment of a motor
vehicle and readily transferable from one vehicle to another. The placard shall only be displayed when the motor vehicle is parked in a persons with
disabilities parking space. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
B. The use of a persons with disabilities parking space, located on either public or private property as provided in Iowa Code sections 321L.5 and 321L.6,
by an operator of a motor vehicle not displaying a persons with disabilities parking permit; by an operator of a motor vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit, but not being used by a person issued a permit or being transported in accordance with Iowa Code section 321L.2,
subsection 1b; or by a motor vehicle in violation of the rules adopted by the State Department of Transportation under Iowa Code section 321L.8,
constitutes improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a misdemeanor for which a scheduled fine shall be imposed upon the
owner, operator, or lessee of the motor vehicle or the person to whom the persons with disabilities parking permit is issued. The scheduled fine for each
violation shall be as established in section 805.8A, subsection 1c of the Iowa Code. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
C. The Mason City Engineering Department shall designate, by appropriate signs, individual parking spaces upon streets, alleys and in Municipal and
private parking lots for vehicles operated by or for disabled persons. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-18: RESTRICTED PARKING IN FIRE LANES:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 205/358
A. No person shall park a vehicle in any place designated by the Fire Department as a fire lane and posted as hereinafter provided, whether such fire lane
be upon publicly owned property or right-of-way or upon privately owned property.
B. A fire lane shall be posted at least every fifty (50) linear feet thereof with signs approximately twelve inches by eighteen inches (12" x 18") in dimension,
which at a minimum shall contain the following language:
FIRE LANE
NO PARKING
A fire lane shall be deemed to encompass that area within a twenty five foot (25') radius of any fire lane signposted pursuant to this section.
C. When an area is posted as a fire lane as provided in subsection B of this section, a presumption shall arise that said area was designated as a fire lane
by or with the authority of the Fire Department. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-19: ACTION REQUIRED UPON NOTICE OF FINE:
The owner or operator of a vehicle alleged to be parked in violation of this chapter shall admit or deny the violation within thirty (30) days of the date of the
notice of fine. A parking violation may be admitted by depositing the correct amount of the fine together with the notice of fine and mailing or by delivery of
the payment to the Office of the City Clerk or to the Parking Enforcement Bureau at the Mason City Police Department. A parking violation may be denied
by appearing in person at the Office of the City Clerk or at the Parking Enforcement Bureau at the Mason City Police Department. If a parking violation is
neither admitted by payment of the specified fine nor denied by appearance at the Office of the City Clerk or at the Parking Enforcement Bureau of the
Mason City Police Department within thirty (30) days of issuance, the violation may be charged by uniform citation in accordance with the laws of Iowa.
More than one (1) parking violation may be alleged in a single citation. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-20: DENIAL OF PARKING VIOLATION AND ASSIGNMENT OF COURT APPEARANCE DATE:
A person who appears at the Office of the City Clerk or at the Parking Enforcement Bureau of the Mason City Police Department may deny the parking
violation charged and may either request a court appearance date or may request an administrative review. If a court appearance date is requested, a
uniform citation shall be issued in accordance with Iowa law and a date provided upon which an appearance and plea to the charges contained in the
parking citation must be entered in the District Court of Cerro Gordo County, Iowa. The Parking Enforcement Bureau shall then cause the citation to be
filed with the Traffic Division of the Office of the Clerk of the District Court for Cerro Gordo County, Iowa. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-21: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
An owner or operator of a vehicle alleged to have been parked in violation of any regulation contained in this chapter may, at the time of appearance at the
Office of the City Clerk or at the Police Department on a notice of fine, request an administrative review of the alleged violation in lieu of a court
appearance. The request must be filed within thirty (30) days of the notice of fine. It shall be on a form approved by the Chief of Police and shall include
the name, mailing address and phone number of the person requesting the review and a statement of the facts upon which a denial of the charge is
based. The request for administrative review may be accepted by either the Office of the City Clerk or the Parking Enforcement Bureau at the Mason City
Police Department. The date of filing shall be noted on the request and shall stop the running of the thirty (30) day period during which the violation may be
admitted by payment of the initial fine amount. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-22: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PANEL; PROCEDURE:
A. An administrative review panel comprised of a Police Department Supervisor, the City Clerk or the City Clerk's designee, and one (1) other City
employee designated by the City Administrator shall meet as needed to review written requests for administrative review. The panel shall rule on all
requests within thirty (30) days of the date the request was filed. The review shall be based on the written reasons stated in the request. A notice of fine
shall be voided by the panel if it finds the parking laws of the City or the State have been erroneously applied and may be voided upon a finding of
exigent circumstances which should excuse a violation of the parking laws of the City.
B. Persons requesting administrative review shall promptly be notified by ordinary mail of the action of the administrative review panel. If the panel
determines the notice of fine should be voided, such action shall be promptly taken by the Parking Enforcement Bureau. If the notice of fine is upheld,
the owner or operator shall be notified of a certain date before which the violation may be admitted by payment of the fine provided if paid before thirty
(30) days. The date shall allow a period of at least thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of fine, not including the period provided for administrative
review, and shall in no case be less than fourteen (14) days from the date of mailing of the notice. The said notice shall also inform the owner or
operator of his or her right to continue to deny the parking violation by requesting a date upon which to appear and enter a plea before the Traffic
Division of the Iowa District Court for Cerro Gordo County in the same manner as if the administrative review had not occurred. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-
2012)
9-10-23: FAILURE TO ADMIT OR DENY:
It is a violation of this section for the owner or operator of a vehicle to which a notice of fine has been issued to knowingly fail to admit or deny the parking
violation as provided in this chapter within thirty (30) days of the date of the violation. A knowing failure or refusal to admit or deny a parking violation
charged by notice of fine may be inferred whenever a written notice of failure to appear or admit one (1) or more notices of fine has been sent by ordinary
mail to the address of the registered owner of the vehicle as shown by the vehicle registration, and the owner or driver has not responded within ten (10)
days, and the notice has not been returned as being undeliverable.
Unpaid parking notices of fine will be forwarded to the Cerro Gordo County Treasurer's Office for collection. Failure to admit or deny a notice of fine may
prohibit the registered owner from renewing his or her vehicle registration until the notice of fine is resolved. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 206/358
9-10-24: HABITUAL VIOLATOR:
A. Habitual Violator Defined: Any person who has allowed four (4) or more parking violation notices of fine issued on a motor vehicle registered in that
person's name to become delinquent and to whom one (1) or more notices required by section 9-10-23 of this chapter has been sent shall be deemed
to be a habitual violator. For purposes of this section, a "delinquent parking notice of fine" is one which has not been paid within thirty (30) days of the
date of the violation and the owner or operator has not appeared within that time to deny the violation as required by this chapter.
B. Illegal To Park On Public Streets Or Lots: It is a violation of this section for any vehicle owned or operated by a habitual violator to be parked or allowed
to remain standing upon any public street, alley or public parking facility in the City.
C. Subject To Removal: A vehicle parked in violation of this section shall be in the status of an illegally parked vehicle and the vehicle may be towed or
removed from the public street or City owned parking lot, and may be temporarily prevented from being removed or moved through the use of a locked
wheel chocking device approved for use by the Chief of Police, as provided by section 9-10-9 of this chapter.
Before any vehicle removed and stored or disabled pursuant to this section may be reclaimed or returned to the registered owner or person having a
legal entitlement to the possession of the motor vehicle, such person shall personally appear in the Office of the Parking Enforcement Bureau of the
Mason City Police Department and pay in full all delinquent parking notices of fine pertaining to such vehicle. The Parking Enforcement Bureau shall,
upon payment of such delinquent parking citation/complaints, provide the registered owner or person having a legal entitlement to possession a written
release to be presented to the towing/impoundment entity which, upon payment of all towing and storing fees by the registered owner or person having
legal entitlement to possession, shall enable the individual to reclaim or redeem the impounded vehicle. If the vehicle has been disabled, the locking
device shall be removed upon payment of all delinquent notices of fine pertaining to such vehicle. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-25: PRESUMPTION AND PENALTY:
For purposes of prosecution under this chapter, if a vehicle is found parked or left unattended in violation of the provisions of this chapter and the identity
of the operator cannot be determined at the scene of the violation, the registered owner thereof shall be prima facie responsible for said violation. (Ord. 12-
17, 12-18-2012)
ARTICLE A. ALTERNATE SIDE PARKING
9-10A-1: APPLICATION OF ARTICLE:
The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of vehicles or unattended vehicles on certain designated streets or parts of streets shall
apply from November 15 to March 31 of the following year unless suspended by the City Administrator. (Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008)
9-10A-2: NOTIFICATION TO THE PUBLIC:
Alternate side parking shall be in effect from November 15 through March 31. The provisions of this article prohibiting parking on parts of streets and alleys
shall become effective on November 15 of each year through March 31 of the year following. The City shall notify the general public of the November 15
effective date each year through public announcement. (Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008)
9-10A-3: PARKING PROHIBITED UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, abandon, or leave unattended any vehicle on any street or alley in violation of the following provisions:
A. Parking shall be prohibited on the odd numbered side of the street after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on an odd numbered day until four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
the following even numbered day.
B. Parking shall be prohibited on the even numbered side of the street after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on an even numbered day until four o'clock (4:00)
P.M. the following odd numbered day.
C. The changeover period shall be between the hours of four o'clock (4:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of each day.
D. Parking shall be allowed on both sides of the streets on each Saturday from four o'clock (4:00) P.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and also on each
Sunday from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) P.M.
Exception: Parking shall be allowed on both sides of the street from four o'clock (4:00) P.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Christmas Eve.
E. On cul-de-sacs bearing consecutive street numbers, parking is prohibited according to the schedule for the street side to which it connects.
F. During alternate side parking, signs prohibiting parking at all times on one (1) entire side of the street only shall not be enforced and alternate side
parking regulations shall be in effect.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 207/358
G. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to permit parking on streets where parking is prohibited on both sides at all times or during
specified hours nor permit parking in areas where parking is otherwise prohibited at all times except as permitted herein.
H. This article shall not apply to Highway 122 and U.S. Highway 65 south of Eighth Street south and north of Fifth Street north, nor to the business district.
(Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008)
I. For purposes of this article, the term "business district" is defined as that area bounded by and including all streets which lie between Connecticut
Avenue on the east, Jefferson Avenue on the west, Fourth Street south on the south and Fifth Street north on the north.
Exception: During normal business hours, parking shall be permitted within one hundred feet (100') of the main entrance of a commercial business
location on the side adjacent to the business. (Ord. 09-02, 2-17-2009)
9-10A-4: SIGNS POSTED:
The provisions of this article shall be in full force and effect throughout the City when signs are posted on primary or secondary roads at or near their
points of intersection with the corporate boundaries of the City stating:
Alternate side parking is in effect November 15 through March 31.
(Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008)
9-10A-5: REMOVAL OF PARKED OR UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
Any vehicle parked or otherwise left unattended in violation of any of the provisions of this article is declared to be a nuisance per se and shall be subject
to removal by the City by means of towing or otherwise. Any removal and resulting storage of such a vehicle shall be at the expense of the owner or
operator thereof as set out in section 9-10-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008)
9-10A-6: SUSPENSION OF ALTERNATE SIDE PARKING:
Alternate side parking shall be in effect from November 15 through March 31 of each year. Alternate side parking may be suspended or terminated by the
City Administrator through a public announcement. (Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008)
9-10A-7: PENALTY:
A. Any police officer of the Mason City Police Department, including any authorized volunteer officers, or the Operations Manager or the manager's
designee shall be authorized to cause the towing of vehicles blocking traffic or parking in violation of this Code. The owner of the vehicle shall pay the
costs of towing and storage occasioned by the removal of the vehicle as provided herein.
B. If a notice of fine for an alternate side parking violation, in a form and manner prescribed by section 9-10-16 of this chapter, has been given in the
manner prescribed in section 9-10-15 of this chapter, and the fine is not paid as prescribed in such notice and as established by this Code, the bureau
shall cause such violation to be filed against the registered owner thereof who shall be prima facie responsible for said violation. It shall be a
misdemeanor for any person to permit or allow a motor vehicle to be parked in violation of the provisions of this Code. The penalty for each violation
shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). (Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008)
9-10A-8: EXTENSION OF ALTERNATE SIDE PARKING:
The City Administrator, Operations Manager or designee may declare a snow emergency through public announcement between April 1 and November 14
of each year. Such public announcement of a snow emergency between April 1 and November 14 shall constitute notice to the general public and all the
provisions of this article shall be in effect until terminated by public announcement. (Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008)
9-10A-9: EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES:
The following streets are hereby designated as emergency snow routes:
First Street Northwest between Monroe Avenue to Pierce Avenue.
Alternate side parking rules in section 9-10A-3 of this article shall not apply to streets designated emergency snow routes. Emergency snow routes shall
be in effect when declared through public announcement by the City Administrator or designee until terminated by public announcement. Parking shall be
prohibited on both sides of the street designated as emergency snow routes when emergency snow routes are in effect. (Ord. 09-02, 2-17-2009)
ARTICLE B. RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT DISTRICTS
9-10B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use within this article, the following words and terms are defined:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 208/358
ENTITLED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor operated vehicle licensed for use on the public roadway that is owned or operated by a resident within the
residential parking district listed on the permit or their guest.
PARKING TAG: A hanging tag that allows a person residing within a residential parking district to park an entitled motor vehicle in that district.
RESIDENT: A person residing within the residential parking districts.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: A contiguous area containing a public street segment between at least two (2) intersecting streets, alleys or private drives
accessing three (3) or more lots abutted by residential property, or residential and nonbusiness property including, but not limited to, schools, parks,
churches, hospitals and nursing homes. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT DISTRICT DESIGNATION:
A. Action to establish a residential parking permit district designation may be made by a petition signed by one (1) adult occupant of each dwelling unit in
the residential district. The signatures must represent at least sixty percent (60%) of the dwelling units in the residential district.
B. Upon receipt of a valid petition, designation of notice shall be sent by regular mail to each residence in the proposed residential permit parking district
informing owner, tenant or party in possession of the date of Council consideration of the resolution. The City Council may adopt a resolution
designating the residential parking permit district.
C. The resolution establishing the residential parking permit district shall include the following:
1. The boundaries of the residential parking permit district; and
2. The days of the week and the hours during which a permit must be displayed; and
3. If the permit restrictions are not intended to be in effect year round, the dates when permit restrictions are effective; and
4. Any other restrictions deemed necessary by the City Council to ensure adequate parking for residents within the district.
D. The effective date of the residential parking permit designation shall be upon publication of the resolution.
E. Detailed records of each residential permit parking district shall be maintained in the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-3: POSTING OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT SIGNS:
Following adoption of a resolution designating a residential parking permit district, signs shall be erected in the designated area indicating the hours which
curbside parking in the residential parking permit district is prohibited, unless the entitled motor vehicle properly displays an authorized parking tag. (Ord.
13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-4: NOTICE TO RESIDENTS OF DESIGNATION OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT DISTRICT:
Following adoption of a resolution to designate a residential parking permit district, the City shall mail the following documents to the residents of every
dwelling within the designated district:
A. A notice of designation that shall inform the residents in the designated district of:
1. The existence, exact location and numerical designation, if any, of the residential parking permit district;
2. The parking restrictions applicable to all motor vehicle curbside parking spaces along streets in the designated area that do not properly display an
authorized parking tag;
3. The procedure to obtain residential parking tag(s).
B. A residential parking permit on which the applicant is to provide the following information for each vehicle to receive residential parking tag(s):
1. The name and residential address of the owner of the vehicle;
2. The signature of the applicant for the residential parking permit;
3. The number of parking tags requested. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-5: ISSUANCE OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT:
A. Residential parking tag(s) shall be issued upon the submission of a completed residential parking permit. Not more than two (2) residential parking tags
shall be issued to each dwelling unit.
B. The residential parking tag shall hang from the interior rearview mirror with the tag number facing the windshield.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 209/358
C. No residential parking tag(s) shall be issued for a vehicle whose owner is not a resident in the designated residential parking permit district.
D. The holder of the residential parking permit shall be the owner of the vehicle receiving the parking tag(s). (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-6: RENEWAL OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT:
A. The residential parking tag(s) shall be renewed annually during the month of July and will expire on July 31 of each year.
B. Upon the residential permit holder's submission of a completed residential parking permit, the holder shall receive new parking tag(s) valid for a one (1)
year period. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-7: EXCEPTIONS:
These provisions shall not apply to clearly marked service or delivery vehicles doing business in the designated residential parking permit district during
the time they are working in the district insofar as they are clearly marked. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-8: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be a violation for any person to:
A. Park an entitled motor vehicle in designated residential parking districts during restricted hours without displaying the proper tag by hanging the tag from
the interior rearview mirror with the tag number facing the windshield.
B. Represent in any manner or form that a motor vehicle is entitled to an authorized parking permit when it is not so entitled. The display of a parking tag
on a motor vehicle not entitled to such a parking tag shall constitute such a representation and shall be a simple misdemeanor.
C. Duplicate, or attempt to duplicate, by any means, a parking tag. It shall also be a violation to display upon any vehicle such a duplicate parking tag.
These shall be simple misdemeanors. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-9: PENALTY:
If a notice of fine for prohibited acts in a residential parking permit district violation, on a form and manner prescribed by section 9-10-16 of this chapter,
has been given in the manner prescribed in section 9-10-15 of this chapter, and the fine is not admitted or denied as prescribed in such notice and as
established by this Code, the bureau shall cause such violation to be filed against the registered owner thereof who shall be prima facie responsible for
said violation. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to permit or allow a motor vehicle to be parked in violation of the provisions of this Code. The
penalty for each violation shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) if paid within thirty (30) days of issuance. After thirty (30) days, the fine increases to twenty
dollars ($20.00).
A violation of prohibited acts in subsections 9-10B-8B and C of this article constitutes a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-10: WITHDRAWAL OF DESIGNATION OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT DISTRICT:
A. Action to withdraw a residential parking permit district designation may be made by a petition signed by one (1) adult occupant of each dwelling unit in
the residential parking permit district. The signatures must represent at least sixty percent (60%) of the dwelling units in the designated district.
B. Upon receipt of a valid petition, the City Council shall set a public hearing on the question of withdrawing the residential parking permit district
designation. A notice shall be sent by regular mail to each residence in the residential permit parking district informing owner, tenant or party in
possession of the date of Council consideration of the resolution potentially withdrawing the residential parking permit district.
Upon completion of the public hearing, the City Council may repeal the resolution designating the residential parking permit district.
C. Following any repeal of the resolution establishing a residential parking permit district, a notice shall be sent by regular mail to each residence in the
residential permit parking district informing owner, tenant or party in possession of the withdrawal of residential parking permit district status.
D. The effective date of withdrawal of the designation shall be upon publication of the repealing resolution. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
Chapter 11
THROUGH STREETS
9-11-1: PURPOSE:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 210/358
For the purposes of this chapter, a "through street" shall mean a street designated as such by the City Council, whereby all vehicles shall stop or yield
right-of-way before entering or crossing the same. (Ord. 12-19, 12-18-2012)
9-11-2: STREETS DESIGNATED:
The following streets and avenues are hereby designated as through streets:
A. Streets:
State Street from Monroe Avenue to Illinois Avenue.
State Street from Taft Avenue to Grover Avenue.
First Street north from Winnebago Way to East State Street.
First Street south from Connecticut Avenue to Delaware Avenue.
First Street south from Washington Avenue to Crescent Drive.
Fourth Street north from Washington Avenue to Carolina Avenue.
Fourth Street south from Monroe Avenue to President Avenue.
Sixth Street south from Garfield Avenue to Monroe Avenue.
Sixth Street south from Kentucky Avenue to Illinois Avenue.
Seventh Street south from Monroe Avenue to Carolina Avenue.
Eighth Street north from Pierce Avenue to Jackson Avenue.
Eighth Street south from Jefferson Avenue to Kentucky Avenue.
Ninth Street north from Carolina Avenue to Hampshire Avenue.
Ninth Street north from Pierce Avenue to Jackson Avenue.
Ninth Street north from Monroe Avenue to Pennsylvania Avenue.
Ninth Street south from east line Bel Air Addition to Illinois Avenue.
Twelfth Street north from Eisenhower Avenue to Federal Avenue.
Twelfth Street north from Elm Drive to California Avenue.
Twelfth Street south from Federal Avenue to Carolina Avenue.
Thirteenth Street north from Federal Avenue to Elm Drive.
Fifteenth Street south from Taft Avenue to Kentucky Avenue.
Seventeenth Street north from Quincy Avenue to Federal Avenue.
Nineteenth Street south from west City limits to Illinois Avenue.
Twenty Third Street south from Monroe Avenue to Federal Avenue.
Twenty Seventh Street south from Federal Avenue to Monroe Avenue.
B. Avenues And Drives:
Benjamin Avenue from Fifteenth Street to Twenty Sixth Street south.
Birch Drive from Hampshire Avenue north to Illinois Avenue north.
California Avenue from north City limits to south City limits.
Carolina Avenue from Fourth Street north to north City limits.
Carolina Avenue from State Street to Nineteenth Street south.
Cerro Gordo Way from Fourth Street south to Garfield Avenue.
College Drive from Fourth Street south to Twelfth Street north.
Crescent Drive from First Street south to Fourth Street south.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 211/358
Eisenhower Avenue from Nineteenth Street south to north City limits.
Garfield Avenue from Fourth Street south to Tenth Street south.
Grover Avenue from Fourth Street south to State Street.
Hampshire Avenue from Twelfth Street north to Seventeenth Street north.
Illinois Avenue from Twelfth Street north to Ninth Street south.
Jackson Avenue from First Street north to Ninth Street north.
Jefferson Avenue from Fifth Street south to Eighth Street south.
Jefferson Avenue from Nineteenth Street south to Twenty Ninth Street south.
Kentucky Avenue from south City limits to Twelfth Street north.
Manor Drive from Kentucky Avenue to east line Bel Air Addition.
Maple Drive from Fourth Street south to East State Street.
Monroe Avenue from Twenty Seventh Street south to Twelfth Street north.
Pennsylvania Avenue from Eighth Street south to Thirteenth Street north.
Pierce Avenue from Twelfth Street north to Nineteenth Street south.
President Avenue from Sixth Street south to Fourth Street south.
Quincy Avenue from Fourteenth Street north to Seventeenth Street north.
Rhode Island Avenue from Twelfth Street north to Seventeenth Street north.
Taft Avenue from south City limits to Twelfth Street north.
Virginia Avenue from East State Street to Nineteenth Street south.
Winnebago Way from Fourth Street south to First Street north. (Ord. 12-19, 12-18-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
C. Highways:
Highway 122 from the west corporate limits to the east corporate limits.
U.S. Highway 65 from the north City limits to the south City limits. (Ord. 12-19, 12-18-2012)
Title 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
10-1-1: NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS:
All buildings, houses, portions of land and lots adjacent to or abutting upon streets and avenues shall be known and designated by the numbers on the
plat and schedule of building numbers in the City on file in the Office of the City Engineer, and entitled and designated HOUSE NUMBERS. (1953 Code
§ 5-1; amd. Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
10-1-2: DUTY TO NUMBER:
As provided in section 364.12(3d), Code of Iowa, it shall be the duty of the owner of any building facing, abutting or opening upon any street or avenue or
other public way in the City to place upon said building suitable numbers composed of figures not less than three inches (3") in height and of, or painted
on, glass or some metallic substance, and shall conform to and be in accordance with the plat and schedule of building numbers referred to in section 10-
1-1 of this chapter. (1953 Code § 5-2; amd. 1985 Code)
At the time of building permit approval, the City Engineer or designee shall assign an address to a new or relocated structure. Each structure shall be
assigned only one (1) address, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. (2017 Code)
10-1-3: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
Any building facing, abutting or opening upon any street, avenue or public way hereafter moved, erected, constructed or completed shall, upon the
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 212/358
completion of the construction or moving thereof, be promptly numbered by the owner thereof in accordance with the plat and schedule of building
numbers referred to in section 10-1-1 of this chapter. (1953 Code § 5-3)
10-1-4: MAINTENANCE OF NUMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises required herein to be numbered to maintain such building numbers in good condition and in a
conspicuous place where the same may be seen and read from the street. (1953 Code § 5-4)
10-1-5: CITY TO PLACE NUMBERS:
Should any owner fail to number or to maintain numbers upon any building owned by him, as required by the provisions of this chapter, for a period of ten
(10) days after the same is required, the City Engineer may cause such numbers to be placed and shall report the cost thereof to the City Council who
shall assess the same against the property or premises so numbered and order the same collected with the ordinary taxes assessed against such
premises. (1953 Code § 5-5)
Chapter 2
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE A. BUILDING CODE
10-2A-1: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City, the most current edition of the International Building Code adopted by the State of Iowa Building
Code Commissioner's Office, reviewed and/or modified, from time to time, by the Building Advisory and Appeals Board and the Chief Building Official,
which Building Code, which by this reference, is duly adopted, with the following amendments, as fully and completely as if set out in detail herein.
An official copy of the International Building Code, as hereby adopted, including a certificate by the City Clerk as to its adoption and the effective date
thereof, is now on file in the Office of the City Clerk and at the City Public Library for public inspection. (Ord. 17-5, 6-6-2017)
10-2A-2: AMENDMENTS TO BUILDING CODE:
The City Building Code shall be amended as follows:
Section 101.1 Title. (Name of jurisdiction) City of Mason City, Iowa.
Section 101.4.1 Gas. Change "international" to "uniform".
Section 101.4.3 Plumbing. Change "international" to "uniform", delete last sentence.
Section 101.4.4 Property Maintenance. Delete entire paragraph.
Section 102.6 Existing Structures. Delete "International Property Maintenance Code".
Section 103.3 Deputies. Delete last sentence.
Section 105.2(1) Work Exempt From Permit. Building.
Section 105.2(1), referring to "one story detached accessory building, used as tool and storage sheds", shall be and the same is hereby repealed.
Section 109.2, chapter 1 of the International Building Code pertaining to permit fees, shall be as follows: Building permit fees shall be set by resolution of
the City Council.
Section 423.3 Critical Emergency Operations. Delete.
Section 423.4 Group E Occupancies. Delete.
Chapter 11 Accessibility. Delete.
Chapter 27 Electrical. Delete.
Chapter 28 Mechanical Systems. Delete.
Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems. Delete.
Appendix A-K. Delete in "International Building Code" 2009.
(Ord. 17-5, 6-6-2017)
10-2A-3: BUILDING INSPECTIONS DIVISION:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 213/358
There is hereby established in the administrative body of the City, within the Development Services Department, the Building Inspections Division. Said
division shall be the "enforcement agency" for all matters contained in this title. The division shall be under the supervision of the Chief Building Official.
A. Duties: It shall be the duty of the Chief Building Official for the City to administer and enforce all of the Building Codes adopted by ordinance by the City
Council to provide a safe and sanitary environment for the citizens of Mason City. Said Chief Building Official shall be empowered to inspect any and all
buildings and other structures, public or private and to, as herein provided, condemn and order removed or remodeled and put into proper and safe
condition for the citizens of this City, as set out in the building codes of the City. (Ord. 13-07, 3-5-2013)
10-2A-4: BUILDING ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD:
A. Board Established: There is hereby created a Building Advisory and Appeals Board, as required by chapter 1, section 112 of the International Building
Code and this Code, which shall be composed of five (5) members, appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The Chief Building
Official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as Secretary to the board.
B. Appointment; Terms: Said members of the board shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council, and shall serve for a
period of five (5) years from April 1 following their appointment, except appointments to fill vacancies for the unexpired term of any member. Any
member may be removed from office by the Mayor for cause.
C. Organization Of Board: The board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from among its members. Such Chairman, or in his absence the Vice
Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The board shall meet at City Hall, and all meetings of the board shall be
open to the public. The presence of three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and it shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the Office of the Chief Building Official and the City Clerk and shall be a public record.
D. Duties And Powers: The Building Advisory and Appeals Board shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Adopt reasonable rules and regulations, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the Chief Building Official with duplicate copies to the
appellant and the City Clerk.
2. Recommend to the City Council such new legislation as is consistent therewith.
3. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or interpretation made by the Chief Building Official in
the enforcement of the Building Code as set out in this article.
4. Authorize upon appeal modifications to the Building Code, as provided in section 104.10 of the International Building Code, the compliance of any
order or interpretation of the Chief Building Official as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this Code will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of the Code shall be observed and substantial
justice done.
E. Factors To Be Considered: In considering all appeals to the Building Code, the board shall, before making any finding in a specific case, first determine
that the proposed modification will not impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare of the City.
In the event that a modification is granted, the board shall observe the conditions as set out in sections 104.11, 104.11.1 and 104.11.2 of the
International Building Code.
1. In lieu of or in addition to administrative regulations, the board may grant a limited extension of time for the compliance of any order or notice,
provided the board makes specific findings of fact based on evidence relating to the following:
a. There are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of any notice or order; and
b. Such an extension is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter in securing the public health, safety and general welfare.
2. The board may grant a modification in a specific case and from a specific provision of this title subject to appropriate conditions; and provided the
board makes specific findings of fact based on the evidence presented in the record as a whole and related to the following:
a. There are practical difficulties in carrying out a strict interpretation or order; and
b. Due to the particular circumstances presented, the effect of the application of the provisions would be arbitrary in the specific case; and
c. Such modification is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title in securing the public health, safety and general welfare.
F. Adoption Of Modification: Upon appeal, or by adoption of a modification, the board, by a majority vote, may approve a modification for the building of a
new structure which cannot practicably meet the standards of the Code. Prior to considering any modification, public notice shall be given. A
modification, if granted, shall:
1. State in what manner the modification from the specific provision(s) is to be allowed; and
2. State the conditions under which the modification is to be made; and
3. Be based upon specific findings of fact based on evidence related to the following:
a. There are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of the specific provision common to structures to which the modification will apply; and
b. Such modification is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title in securing the public health, safety and general welfare.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 214/358
G. Appeals Board Jurisdiction: Any persons affected by any written notice, but not limited to the following notices, or any persons wishing to submit any
petition, but not limited to the following petitions, may appeal to the Building Advisory and Appeals Board in accordance with the City administrative
procedures ordinance:
1. Notice of Building Code violation.
2. Petition for modification. (Ord. 04-4, 1-6-2004)
10-2A-5: APPEALS, METHOD OF FILING:
The Building Advisory and Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or interpretation made by the
Chief Building Official in the enforcement of the Building Code. Appeals to the board may be filed by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department,
board or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Chief Building Official. Such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from the date of the
offending ruling, decision, interpretation or order of the Chief Building Official with the Building Advisory and Appeals Board, a notice of appeal specifying
the grounds thereof. A filing fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be paid to the City Clerk by the party filing such an appeal. (Ord. 04-4, 1-6-2004; amd. 2017
Code)
A. Appeals Board Procedures: Any builder, engineer, architect or developer entitled to service under the Building Code may appeal from any requirement,
decision, interpretation, order or any action of the Chief Building Official under this title by filing such appeal at the Office of the Chief Building Official,
Mason City, Iowa. All appeals shall be in writing and submitted to the Chief Building Official containing the following information:
1. Names of all appellants participating in the appeal.
2. A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants involved in the notice and order.
3. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of that specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the
contentions of the appellant.
4. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reason(s) why it is claimed the protested order or action should be
reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
5. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses.
6. The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one (1) appellant as to the truth of the matter stated in the appeal.
B. Scheduling And Notice Of Hearing: As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the Chief Building Official shall fix a date, time and place
for the hearing of the appeal by the board. Such date shall be not less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the appeal was
filed with the Chief Building Official. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the
hearing to each appellant by the Secretary of the board either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing
a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on the appeal. Said notice of hearing shall be by certified mail.
C. Hearing: The procedures will be conducted as set out in the City administrative procedures ordinance. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the
board, or in the case of only having a quorum for said hearing the concurring vote of two (2) members, shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Chief Building Official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass
under the Building Code or to effect any modification in this Code.
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by a decision of the Building Advisory and Appeals Board shall have recourse to trial as provided
by statute.
D. Decision On Appeal: In exercising the powers granted, the Building Advisory and Appeals Board may, in conformity with law, modify the order,
requirement, decision or interpretation appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or interpretation as should be made, and to that
end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. (Ord. 04-4, 1-6-2004)
10-2A-6: MOVING OF STRUCTURES:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
ALTERNATE MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION: Interpreted as set out in section 104.11 of the International Building Code.
MODIFICATION: Interpreted as set out in section 104.10 of the International Building Code.
STREET: All public streets, roads, highways, alleys or other public places.
STRUCTURE: Any house, garage, building or other object which is to be moved on structure movers' trucks or skids.
TESTS: Interpreted as set out in section 104.11.2 of the International Building Code.
B. License Required, Fee And Term: No person shall move or cause to be moved upon, over or across any street or from any lot or parcel of ground to
another lot or parcel of ground any structure unless such person has qualified as a structure mover and has obtained a license to engage in such
business from the City Clerk as hereinafter provided. As application for the license, the structure mover shall include information related to his/her
experience in moving structures and the equipment to be used. The license fee to be paid for said license shall be in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00)
and shall expire on March 31 of each year.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 215/358
1. Exception: A structure with a ground floor area of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet or less, has no horizontal dimension greater than twenty five
feet (25') and a loaded height no greater than fifteen feet (15') may be moved by an unlicensed person; provided, that all other requirements of this
chapter are met.
C. Moving Permit Required: Every person shall, before moving any structure, obtain a moving permit from the Chief Building Official. The fee for a moving
permit shall be calculated in the same manner as a building permit.
D. Insurance Required: Except for a move exempted under subsection B1 of this section, prior to issuance of a moving permit, the applicant shall file proof
of public liability insurance for the period said permit is in effect with minimum limits of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property
damage, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for a single personal injury or death, and three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for multiple injuries or
deaths, which insurance shall indemnify and hold harmless the City on account of any and all damage or injury, including death, to real or personal
property, whether public or private, which arises out of or is connected with or caused by the moving of any structure over, upon or across any public
street, alley or other public place.
E. Application For Permit: An application for a moving permit shall be in writing upon forms furnished by the Chief Building Official and shall contain,
among other things, the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant, proof of licensing (if not exempt) and equipment proposed to be used.
2. The dimensions of the structure to be moved and its maximum heights when loaded.
3. The present location and the proposed location of the structure.
4. The route over which the structure is to be moved, the type and height above the street of obstructions, including trees, the time when removal will
begin and the approximate length of time necessary to complete the operation.
5. The time when the structure will be first moved into or within the corporate limits and the length of time said structure will be in the process of moving
within said limits.
6. The name and address of the owner of said structure and the proposed use of said structure upon its new location if such new location is within the
City.
F. Additional Notice: The Development Review Committee may require the owner or mover to provide additional public notice, through publication of a
notice in the official newspaper and/or other means, if the proposed move involves a long period, may disrupt activities on adjacent properties along the
move route or at the site to which the structure is moved, or will potentially block or slow progress on arterial or collector streets during peak hours.
G. Development Review Committee: All permit applications to move a structure within the City limits shall be reviewed by the Development Review
Committee, as established in section 12-7-1 of this Code. The Development Review Committee shall review the proposed time of the move, the move
route of the structure, determine if City and public utilities are affected, review the final placement of the structure and advise the Chief Building Official
regarding any pertinent requirements affecting or affected by the proposed move. Any utility or similar entity with equipment or appurtenances located
within, over or upon any street located within the path of the move shall be notified of the date, time and place of the meeting. The Development
Review Committee may require additional review for certain structures and moving routes prior to final consideration of a permit by the Chief Building
Official.
H. Other Agencies: If a structure is moved upon, over or across any street or crossing under the jurisdiction of any other agency or entity (such as the Iowa
Department of Transportation or a railroad), the appropriate permits or waivers, if required, shall be applied for prior to approval of a moving permit by
the City. Proof of application for or issuance of such permit(s) or waiver(s) shall be provided to the Chief Building Official. If the affected agency or entity
cedes jurisdiction to the City, written confirmation of the same from the affected agency shall be provided. The structure shall not be moved until all
required permits or waivers have been issued.
I. Final Placement Of Structure: The structure shall meet all applicable requirements of the zoning district applying to the lot upon which the structure is to
be moved, according to title 12 of this Code, as well as all applicable requirements of this title.
J. Issuance Of Permit: Upon a determination by the Chief Building Official that all requirements are met, the Chief Building Official shall issue the permit.
K. Denial Of Permit: The Chief Building Official shall deny a permit to move a structure when the City Engineer determines that the structure is of such
size, weight, dimensions or character as to likely cause substantial damage or injury to any street or to any private property abutting a street, including
trees overhanging a street or alley, unless necessary accommodations can be made with the City and/or adjoining private property owners to mitigate
any negative impacts.
L. Clearing Of Route:
1. The City of Mason City Arborist Department, upon request, may assist the mover in the proper pruning and clearing of City owned trees or trees
otherwise encroaching upon the right-of-way. Should this department be unavailable to perform said trimming, the mover may employ a licensed and
bonded tree trimmer from a list of such businesses approved by the City.
2. The mover shall make all arrangements and accommodations for raising or otherwise moving of utility lines or structures with the appropriate utility
company.
M. Escort: The Chief Building Official, in consultation with the City Engineer, may require that part or the entire move be escorted by warning vehicles,
consisting of vehicles displaying flashing lights and "Wide Load" signs as necessary. Alternatively, the Chief Building Official may require the move to
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 216/358
be escorted by police vehicles. The structure mover shall schedule the move according to available police personnel, as determined by the Chief of
Police, and shall pay all associated costs.
N. Planking Street: The City Engineer shall have the authority to require the planking of any street when such planking is deemed advisable by him, having
due regard for the place, manner, form, condition and type of street over which the structure is to be moved.
O. Restrictions During Move:
1. Caution Signals: It shall be the duty of the structure mover to provide proper caution lights or flares during the hours of darkness and to provide
flagmen when necessary for the safe movement of the structure on any public street.
2. Barricading Intersections: It shall be the duty of the structure mover to place barricades in the intersections of streets when required by the City
Engineer or when reasonably required for public safety.
3. Parking Restrictions: If required by the City Engineer, the structure mover shall place "No Parking By Order Of Police" signs in visible locations in the
right-of-way, at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the move.
4. Barricades And Signs: All barricades and signs shall conform to the current edition of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD).
The applicant shall provide conforming barricades and/or signs, or may obtain them from the Operations and Maintenance Department during
regular business hours, upon payment of a deposit to ensure return of the barricades and/or signs in good condition.
P. Bridge Restrictions And Weight Limit Embargoes:
1. Any move route that requires passage over bridges or overpasses shall be reviewed by the City Engineer. If the City Engineer determines that a
structural analysis is warranted, related costs or a portion thereof may be assessed to the applicant.
2. Any move route over streets with weight limit embargoes shall be reviewed by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may deny use of any embargoed
street.
Q. Report To City Engineer And Chief Building Official: Every person granted a permit for the moving of a structure shall report to the City Engineer and
the Chief Building Official within twenty four (24) hours after the moved structure is placed upon any lot within the City. It shall be the duty of the City
Engineer, within ten (10) days after receipt of such report, to inspect all streets over which said structure has been moved and to determine the extent
of the damage to such streets or private property abutting such streets. If the moving of said structure has caused any damage to such streets or
private property, the said mover shall be responsible for repairs or replacement, meeting current State, County and/or City requirements and standards.
Upon failure of the mover to complete repairs or replacement in a reasonable time after notice from the City Engineer of the damage or injury required
to be repaired, said City Engineer may repair or cause to be repaired said damage and injury and hold sureties on the mover's bond or on the
insurance carrier responsible for payment and the cost of such repairs.
In addition to the above damages, costs will be filed for damages to trees and shrubbery at the current cost of the species and labor.
R. Report To Police, Fire Department, Utility Companies During Move: Every mover shall report to the Chief of the Fire Department or his assistants, the
Chief of the Police Department or his assistants, and affected utility companies each night the exact location of the structure while being moved. Except
under unavoidable circumstances, no structure shall be left standing on any street for a period of more than twenty four (24) hours.
S. Unlawful Moving: It shall be unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved a structure upon, over or across any street, except the route
designated, within the time specified and with the equipment specified by the permit granted for the moving of such structure. An extension of time may
be granted by the Chief Building Official under unavoidable circumstances.
T. Temporary Placement Of Moved Structure: A structure that has been moved from its original site shall not be temporarily placed on any parcel for a
period of longer than forty eight (48) hours. The Chief Building Official may grant an extension if a structure is in the act of being moved in accordance
with a valid moving permit, and unavoidable circumstances require a structure to be temporarily placed on a parcel other than the parcel indicated on
the moving permit. This requirement shall not apply to structures placed temporarily on City owned property, if approved by the City Administrator.
U. Building Advisory And Appeals Board Authority: In addition to the authority granted to the Building Advisory and Appeals Board by this article, the
Building Advisory and Appeals Board shall have authority to require the Chief Building Official to issue or deny issuance of a permit for the moving of
any structure where, by reason of peculiar topographical conditions or other unusual circumstances or conditions, the strict enforcement of the
limitations of this title would be unreasonable and would amount to a practical confiscation of the structure, and would result in particular hardship upon
the owner, other than the costs related to the move; provided, that the relief sought can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without injury to streets and property abutting thereon and without substantially impairing the general intent and purpose of this title. (Ord. 13-09, 3-19-
2013)
ARTICLE B. ELECTRICAL CODE
10-2B-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. This Electrical Code establishes the office of electrical inspector; prescribes the duties of said inspector; provides the rules for the prevention of fire,
safety of life and the installation of wiring and equipment and operation thereof; provides for permits and permit fees for the installation of electrical
equipment and wiring; provides for the examination and licensing of electricians; provides for the adoption of the current edition of the National
Electrical Code as set out in section 10-2B-15 of this article; and provides a penalty for the violation hereof. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2B-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 217/358
A. Office Established: There is hereby established in the Building Inspections Services Division of the City, an electrical inspection office, consisting of one
(1) electrical inspector, under the supervision of the Chief Building Official. The term "inspector" as used within this article shall mean "electrical
inspector". The electrical inspector shall enforce the provisions of this Code and all building codes in a manner consistent with the intent thereof. The
inspector shall perform the duties necessary for the enforcement of the Electrical Code of the City and to act as a designated representative of the
Chief Building Official as needed.
B. Qualifications:
1. The electrical inspector shall either be licensed as a master electrician or possess equivalent knowledge and experience to that of a master
electrician and receive a master electrician's license within one (1) year of employment by the City of Mason City. A new hire for the position of
electrical inspector who fails to obtain a master electrician's license within one (1) year from the date of employment, or an incumbent electrical
inspector who fails to maintain a master electrician's license, shall be immediately terminated by the Chief Building Official. The new hire shall also
obtain, within two (2) years, a certification as an electrical inspector that is acceptable to the Chief Building Official.
2. The inspector may hold membership in the International Association Of Electrical Inspectors and the National Fire Protection Association and, with
the approval of the Chief Building Official, may serve on any electrical committee to which the inspector may be appointed. Membership dues and
itemized necessary expenses in connection with such activities may be paid by the City.
3. The inspector shall not engage in the business of sale, installation or maintenance of electrical equipment, either directly or indirectly, and shall have
no financial interest in any concern engaged in such business in the City at any time while holding office. This shall not be construed in any way to
prevent the inspector from performing such services for the City as may be required.
C. Duties: The inspector shall inspect all work authorized by any permit to assure compliance with provisions of this Code and peripherally all codes or
amendments thereto, approving or condemning said work in whole or in part as conditions require. The inspector may issue, upon request, a certificate
of approval for any work approved. The inspector shall condemn and reject all work done or being done or materials used or being used which do not,
in all respects, comply with the provisions of these codes and amendments thereto; and shall order changes in workmanship or materials or both,
essential to obtain compliance with the provisions of these codes. The electrical inspector shall investigate any construction or work regulated by these
codes and shall issue such notices and orders as provided in the following subsections:
1. Right Of Entry:
a. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this Code or other applicable
law, the inspector, or a duly authorized representative, hereby is authorized to enter such property at any reasonable time and to inspect the same
and perform any duty imposed upon the inspector by this Code or other applicable law; provided, that:
(1) If property is occupied, the inspector shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry explaining the reasons therefor;
(2) If property is not occupied, the inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the
property and request entry, explaining the reasons therefor. If entry cannot be obtained because the owner or other person having charge or
control of the property cannot be found, after due diligence or if entry is refused, the inspector, or authorized representative, shall have recourse
to every remedy provided by law, to secure lawful entry and inspect the property.
b. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the inspector, or authorized representative, has reasonable cause to believe the building or premises is so
hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the public health or safety, the inspector shall have the right to
immediately enter and inspect such property, and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether
such property be occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property be occupied, the inspector
shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining the reasons therefor and the purpose of the inspection.
No person shall fail or refuse, after proper demand has been made as provided in this subsection, to promptly permit the inspector, or authorized
representative, to make any inspection provided for by this subsection C. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
2. Reinspections:
a. The inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to make at such times and as often as, in the inspector's discretion, it may seem necessary,
thorough reinspection of the installation in or on any building, structure or premises of all electrical wiring, electrical devices and electrical material
now installed or that may hereafter be installed.
b. When the installation of any such wiring device or material is found to be in violation of this Code, the person, firm, corporation or governmental
agency owning, using or operating the same, shall be notified in writing and shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to place such
wiring, device or material in compliance with this Code and to have such work completed within a period of ten (10) days after such notice, or
within such other reasonable period specified by the electrical inspector in said notice and shall pay such fees as are required by this Code.
c. When an additional inspection trip is necessary to correct a violation of the Electrical Code, an additional fee (set by a resolution of the City
Council) for each trip may be charged at the discretion of the Chief Building Official.
3. Authority To Disconnect:
a. The inspector is hereby empowered to disconnect or to order, in writing, the discontinuance of electrical service to wiring, devices or materials
found to be dangerous and a hazard to life, health and property until the installation of such wiring device or material has been made safe as
directed by the inspector.
b. Any person, firm, corporation, public utility, political subdivision or governmental agency ordered to discontinue such electrical service shall do so
within twenty four (24) hours after the receipt of such written notice and shall not reconnect such service or allow or cause the same to be
reconnected until notified to do so by the electrical inspector. Refusal or failure or neglect to comply with any such notice or order shall be
considered, by the inspector, a violation of this Code. The inspector may then institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate the refusal to comply with any such notice or order. The Chief Building Official, the Chief of the Fire Department, or the duty
officer, shall also have the authority to cause the discontinuance of electrical energy to a structure or component when hazardous to firefighters in
their line of duty or work.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 218/358
4. Stop Orders: Whenever any work regulated by this Code is being done contrary to the provisions thereof, the electrical inspector may order the work
stopped by notice, in writing, served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done and any such persons shall forthwith stop
such work until authorized by the electrical inspector to proceed with the work. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-3: LICENSES:
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in or cause the installation, maintenance, alteration or repair of any electrical equipment within the scope of
this Code unless such person, firm or corporation shall first have obtained from the City of Mason City or the State of Iowa an electrical contractor's license
or a City electrical maintenance license. Nor shall any electrical contractor employ any but licensed master electricians, electrical journeymen, qualified
electrical apprentices or unclassified workers licensed by the State of Iowa working under the supervision, direction and control of a licensed master
electrician or a licensed journeyman electrician, and also with the exception that no license shall be required in order to execute or perform any of the
classes of electrical work exempted by the provisions of this article. Every person holding a valid State of Iowa license shall register with the City electrical
inspector of the City of Mason City prior to performing any electrical work within the corporate limits of the City of Mason City. Each registrant shall place
on file with the City electrical inspector a copy of his/her State of Iowa license.
No license shall be required for any of the following described work:
A. Electrical Supply Agencies: The installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment installed by or for any electrical supply agency in the generation,
transmission, distribution or metering of electricity.
B. Electrical Equipment Or Apparatus: Any work involved in the manufacturing, testing, repairing, servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus, except
that this exemption shall not include any permanent wiring.
C. Elevators And Escalators: Any work involved in the erection, installation, repairing, remodeling or maintenance of elevators (freight or passenger),
dumbwaiters or escalators, not including electrical energy to the control panels of elevators, dumbwaiters or escalators.
D. No License Required For Homeowners: A permit shall be issued to a homeowner who proposes to install, repair or add to the electrical system in said
homeowner's existing, single-family dwelling, which is used as the homeowner's permanent place of residence; provided, that each of the following
conditions shall be fulfilled:
1. Such owner has applied, to the electrical inspector, for the homeowner's permit.
2. The fee, for each homeowner's permit, has been paid to the City through the Building Inspections Services Division.
3. Said homeowner shall have submitted a detailed plan of all work to be performed. This plan shall be reviewed by the electrical inspector to verify that
said homeowner understands the requirements that will be required for all electrical work pertaining to the permit to be issued.
4. The homeowner shall personally perform all labor in connection with the work done under the provisions of this section, shall meet the materials and
workmanship requirements of the Mason City Electrical Code and shall be inspected the same as any work done by a licensed electrical contractor.
E. Replacement Of Lamps: No license shall be required for the replacement of lamps.
F. Routine Maintenance: Routine maintenance allowed under section 10-2G-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-19, 11-16-2010)
10-2B-4: CLASSES OF LICENSES:
The following classes of licenses shall be issued by the City which shall be designated as:
Class I Electrical contractor's license
Class II Electrical maintenance license
Class III Electrical journeyman's license
Class IV Electrical master's license
A. Class I, electrical contractor's license: This license shall entitle the holder thereof to engage in the business of and to secure permits for the installation,
alteration, repair of any electrical devices, appliances or equipment, but shall not authorize the holder thereof to do the work of installation, alteration or
repair without also being a holder of an electrical master's license.
Applications must be filed in duplicate on forms provided by the electrical inspector, for a contractor's license and must include the business address of
his establishment.
A contractor's license may be issued to a person, firm or corporation. If issued to a firm or corporation, an electrical supervisor, who is a licensed
master electrician, must be employed. In addition to a license, any person, firm or corporation engaged as a contractor in doing electrical wiring or
installing any electric wires, apparatus or appliances and holding a Class I license, as provided in this Code, must file with the City Clerk general and
complete operations liability insurance in the amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for all work performed which requires licensing
pursuant to this Code. The carrier of any insurance coverage maintained by this licensee to meet this requirement shall notify the City Clerk thirty (30)
days prior to the effective date of cancellations or reduction of the coverage.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 219/358
B. Class II, electrical maintenance license: This license shall entitle the holder thereof to undertake the work of and secure an annual license for
maintaining and repairing electrical devices, appliances and equipment; provided, that the holder of such license regularly employs, as supervisor, one
(1) or more persons certified by the Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals as being qualified for such work; and provided, that such work shall be
confined to the premises owned or occupied by the holder of said license, the location of which premises shall be described in the license.
Maintenance workers, performing electrical work, shall place on file with the City Clerk a copy of his/her electrical license. The electrical inspector shall
be informed of changes in personnel.
C. Class III, electrical journeyman's license: This license shall entitle the holder thereof to perform any work of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing
electrical equipment as an electrical journeyman under the direction of the holder of an electrical contractor's license by whom he is employed. In order
to obtain a journeyman electrician's license, the applicant for a journeyman's license shall have completed an Apprenticeship Training Program
registered by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training of the United States Department of Labor in accordance with the standards established by that
department or shall have received training or experience for a period of time and under conditions as established by the Board of Electrical Examiners
and Appeals. In addition, an applicant shall meet examination criteria based upon the most recent National Electrical Code as adopted by the Board of
Electrical Examiners and Appeals. All experience requirements and qualifications must be met to allow one to take examination.
Every holder of a license shall keep his or their license in his or their place of business at all times.
D. Class IV, master electrician license: Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall plan, install, repair, lay out or supervise the installation of
wiring, apparatus, or equipment for electrical light, heat, power or other purposes unless the person is: 1) licensed by the board as a master electrician;
and 2) the work is for a licensed electrical contractor and the person is an employee, partner or officer or is the licensed electrical contractor.
An applicant for a master electrician license shall have had at least one (1) year's experience acceptable to the Board of Electrical Examiners and
Appeals as a licensed journeyman and successfully passed the master electrician's examination approved by the Board of Electrical Examiners and
Appeals. All experience requirements and qualifications must be met to allow one to take the examination. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-5: LICENSE FEES:
Fees for the respective licenses shall be set by a resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-6: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
A. If the license is allowed to expire for more than one (1) year, an applicant will be required to take the examination and upon passing said examination
and payment of the required fees will be issued a license. Exception: Licensees that have successfully passed a certified proctored examination
approved by the Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals.
B. No examination will be required if contractor's license is not allowed to expire.
C. All locally licensed electricians must complete six (6) hours of approved continuing education courses before they can renew their local license. Within a
three (3) year period, the contact hours shall include a minimum of six (6) hours of studying the most current National Electrical Code as adopted by
the City of Mason City. A copy of the certificate of training must be submitted to the Mason City electrical inspector before renewal of license. (Ord. 10-
06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-7: FRAUDULENT USE OF LICENSES:
It shall be a violation for any person, firm or corporation to misrepresent fact or attempt to use any license of another person, firm or corporation. (Ord. 10-
06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-8: BOARD OF ELECTRICAL EXAMINERS AND APPEALS:
A. Creation: There is hereby created a Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals which shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the Mayor
subject to the approval of the City Council. The members shall be residents or be employed within the City of Mason City and at least shall be licensed
electrical contractors and at least two (2) licensed electrical journeyman. Every member shall be appointed for three (3) years, said term beginning on
July 1. The Mayor may remove any member for just cause. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
B. Organization Of Board: The members of the Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals shall annually elect a Chairman. The electrical inspector shall
be Secretary to the board and shall preserve and keep a record of all proceedings before the board, including the records and documents pertaining to
examinations and other proceedings. The members of the board shall be provided a suitable room for its meetings and necessary incidental expenses,
said board to act without compensation.
C. Duties Of Board: It shall be the duty of the Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals to meet at the call of the Chairman or Secretary or upon call of a
majority of its membership. The board shall, within ten (10) days, report in writing to the Mayor, City Clerk and the applicant, the result of all
examinations, together with their recommendations, as to the issuance or denial of all licenses as the case may be. Licenses shall be issued when
approved by a majority of the board by the City Clerk.
D. Suspension Or Revocation: The board shall have the power to suspend or revoke any local license or renewal thereof, for any fraud or
misrepresentation in obtaining the licensing, for failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, the Electrical Code or other ordinances, as
for negligence, incompetence or misconduct in the performance of any duties of an electrical contractor or electrician, as outlined in the following
procedure:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 220/358
In all cases involving revocation or suspension of a license, at least fifteen (15) days' notice shall be served upon the holder whose license is in
question and said notice shall indicate the date, time and place of hearing and the general grounds for the contemplated revocation or suspension. The
notice shall also advise the holder of his or her right to appear at said hearing in person, or by counsel, for the purpose of being heard.
E. Right To Appeal Decision Of Board Of Electrical Examiners And Appeals: Any applicant shall have the right to appeal to the City Council any ruling of
the board by filing a written notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of ruling therefrom appealed. The Council shall
forthwith fix a date, time and place of hearing on such appeal which shall not be less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after the date of
said filing of the notice of appeal and the City Clerk shall notify the interested person, by certified mail, of the time and place of said hearing. After
hearing said appeal, the City Council may sustain or overrule the ruling of the board. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-9: RIGHT TO APPEAL DECISION OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
A. Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any ruling, decision, interpretation or order of the electrical inspector or his duly authorized representative
shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals by filing a written notice of such appeal within ten (10) days from the
date of the offending ruling, decision, interpretation or order.
B. Upon fixing of such notice, a date, time and place for the hearing shall be fixed, which time shall be no more than fifteen (15) days after the date of filing
the notice of appeal, and the person appealing shall be notified of the date, time and place of such hearing. Hearings on the appeal shall be open to
the public and all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to present their position. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-10: AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF ELECTRICAL EXAMINERS AND APPEALS:
A. The Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals shall have the authority by majority to vote to affirm, modify or reverse any ruling, decision,
interpretation or order of the electrical inspector and to permit modification from the strict terms and provisions of this Code when such modification can
be made without increasing the hazards to the health or safety of person or property and when such modification shall not violate the intent and
purposes of this Code. Mere inconvenience to the appellant shall not be grounds for the granting of such modification.
B. The Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals will periodically review the Electrical Code and shall furnish written recommendations to the City Council
for updating said Code. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-11: PERMITS FOR ELECTRICAL WORK:
A. Required Prior To Commencement: All electrical work, as set forth in this section, shall not commence until a permit is issued by the electrical inspector.
Except as provided by law, where work has been started prior to obtaining a permit, the regular fee therefor shall be doubled. The inspection and
enforcement provisions shall apply to the following:
1. All new electrical installations for commercial or industrial applications, including installations both inside and outside of buildings, and for public use
buildings and facilities and any installation at the request of the owner.
2. All new electrical installations for residential applications in excess of single-family residential applications.
3. All new electrical installations for single-family residential applications requiring new electrical service equipment or requiring a building permit.
4. Existing electrical installations observed during inspection which constitutes an electrical hazard. Existing installations shall not be deemed to
constitute an electrical hazard if the wiring when originally installed was installed in accordance with the Electrical Code in force at the time of
installation and has been maintained in that condition.
5. The inspector shall require submission of plans and specifications, drawings, descriptions and diagrams as necessary to show clearly the character,
kind and extent of electrical work covered by applications for a permit and, upon approval thereof, shall issue the permit applied for.
6. The electrical inspector shall collect such fees as are required by this Code and issue receipts therefor, copies of which shall be maintained as a
record in said inspector's office. The inspector shall transfer all fees collected to the proper authority provided by law to receive such funds.
7. Minor repairs: A permit is not required for the replacement of lamps, connection of electrical equipment by attachment cord and cap to permanently
installed receptacles, or the replacement of faulty equipment.
B. To Whom Issued: A permit shall be issued only to an electrical contractor licensed by the City or State of Iowa. Furthermore, any permit required by this
Code may be issued to the owner of a single-family dwelling or mobile home used exclusively for living purposes, to do any work regulated by this
Code as set forth in subsection 10-2B-3D of this article.
C. To Obtain Permit: Prior to commencement of any electrical installation, the person making such installation shall apply for and obtain a permit for said
work except in the case of an emergency. The application shall include the name and business address of the person, firm, corporation or other
association that is to do the work. A description of the property, name of the occupant of said property and a general description of the materials to be
used shall be included and shall specify the particular part or parts of work which requires inspection in conformity with the provisions of this Code.
The application shall be accompanied by fees in accordance with the schedule of fees set out in subsection E of this section.
D. Permit Regulations:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 221/358
1. Fraudulent Application For Permit Illegal: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to present any fraudulent information in making
application for any permit from the electrical inspector. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful to use the name of another person, firm or corporation in
order to secure an electrical permit unless regularly employed by and directly authorized by the holder of such electrical contractor's license.
2. Revocation Of Permit: Any permit issued that contains fraudulent information or violates the rules of any ordinance issued by the City of Mason City
or any Code issued by the State of Iowa shall be subject to revocation at the direction of the electrical inspector. The person holding the permit shall
be notified to appear and show cause why the permit should not be revoked and failure to appear shall be deemed sufficient to cause the permit to
be revoked.
E. Permit Fees:
1. Fees Set By Resolution: Permit fees shall be set by a resolution of the City Council.
2. Payment Of Fees: All fees herein shall be paid to the electrical inspector payable to the City. Any deficiency in previous fees shall be paid before
another permit is issued. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-12: ELECTRICAL SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation generating electrical energy for electric light, heat or power in the City to set a meter for electrical
usage in any building or premises containing electrical wiring or equipment which has not been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector or his
duly authorized representative. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall, upon written notice from the inspector to do so,
immediately remove such conditions and discontinue such electrical usage. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-13: COVERING WORK BEFORE INSPECTION:
No person having charge of construction, alteration or repair of any building or any other person shall cover or conceal or cause to be covered or
concealed any wires or electrical apparatus for which a permit is required before the said wiring or electrical apparatus has been inspected and approved.
(Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-14: POWER OF INSPECTOR IF WORK IS COVERED:
The electrical inspector shall have the authority to remove or cause the removal of lath, plasterboard or other covering which may prevent the proper
inspection of electrical wiring or electrical apparatus. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-15: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
A. Except as added to, deleted, modified or amended in this article, there is hereby adopted as a portion of this Electrical Code the current edition of the
National Electrical Code (NFPA 70) as sponsored by the National Fire Protection Association under the auspices of the American National Standards
Institute.
B. The electrical inspector shall require that hereinafter the installation of all electric light and power wiring, all electrical fixtures and appliances and all
electrical work shall be of such grade and type as to conform with the standard practices of the National Electrical Code except as modified or
amended in this Code. All existing electrical apparatus, wiring, fixtures and appliances shall be made to conform to the requirements of this Code when
so ordered by the electrical inspector. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-16: AMENDMENTS TO NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
The National Electrical Code is subject to the following exceptions, modifications and additions:
A. Grounding: The grounding of wiring installation for services shall be made with an approved clamp on the street side of the water meter at a point near
the entrance to a building. Minimum conductor to be used is size no. 6 copper. This conductor shall be installed in such a way as not to be subject to
severe mechanical injury by following different structural components and securely fastened in all its travels or it may be laid in the concrete floor, but
the inspector must be assured that it is a continuous piece of copper and that no connections are made that depend on solder.
B. New Service: When a new service is installed to an existing structure all unfinished areas shall be upgraded to meet all requirements included in this
Code and all requirements of the current NEC. Existing wiring in finished areas shall meet the Code requirement at the time period of its installation.
C. Wiring In Dwellings: For installation of electrical wiring in dwellings, including multiple-family dwellings, any of the wiring methods of chapter 3 of the
National Electrical Code may be utilized, except above unstructured ceilings and unfinished basements (exposed floor joists), a metallic raceway
system shall be used. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
Exception: Up to four feet (4') of cable may be exposed if protected from physical damage. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
D. Outside Wiring:
1. Overhead conductors between buildings and structures shall be bracketed on the exterior of each building. When services terminate on the roof of a
building, adequate structural strength must be added to roof structure to compensate for strain of service conductors on the structure and shall be
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 222/358
securely bracketed and waterproofed at all points of roof rupture.
2. Whenever an existing service is repaired, altered, damaged by fire or in deteriorating condition or damaged by other means, it shall be made to
comply in all respects with the provisions of this Code to the discretion of the AHJ.
E. Commercial Wiring:
1. All wiring in excess of ninety (90) V to ground shall be installed in an approved raceway system.
2. When a new service is installed, existing wiring shall meet the Code requirements for the time period of its installation. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-17: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
See general penalty section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
ARTICLE C. PLUMBING CODE
10-2C-1: CODE ADOPTED:
Except as hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or amended, there is hereby adopted as the Mason City Plumbing Code, the most current edition, of the
Uniform Plumbing Code, as published by the International Association Of Plumbing And Mechanical Officials, as adopted by the State of Iowa, which
Plumbing Code is, by this reference, duly adopted. Said Plumbing Code of the City and its provisions shall be controlling in the construction and
maintenance of plumbing and in all other matters covered by said Plumbing Code within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 13-11, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017
Code)
10-2C-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following sections of the Code are hereby amended, deleted, modified or added to as more specifically set forth in the following subsections:
A. Owner's Permit: In cases where the owner of a property desires personally to do plumbing work upon premises which are then his or her legal domicile
or residence or for which the owner has a valid homestead exemption, said owner may appear before the plumbing/mechanical inspector and, upon
establishing that said person is competent to do the specific work for which the permit is desired and upon paying the permit fees as hereinafter set
forth, the plumbing/mechanical inspector shall issue a permit to such applicant and no other or different license or permit shall be required of such
person, any other terms or provisions of the Plumbing Code to the contrary notwithstanding. (Ord. 13-11, 4-2-2013)
B. Fee Schedule: Plumbing permit fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 16-9, 5-17-2016, eff. 7-1-2016)
10-2C-3: CODE ON FILE:
An official copy of the Mason City Plumbing Code as hereby adopted, including a certificate by the City Administrator/City Clerk as to its adoption and
effective date thereof, is now on file in the Office of the City Administrator/City Clerk and the Public Library for public inspection.
Copies of the Uniform Plumbing Code can be obtained from IAPMO Headquarters, 5001 Philadelphia St., Ontario, CA 91761-2816. Copies of the Iowa
State Plumbing Code can be obtained from Department of Health, Lucas Office Building, 321 E. 12th St., Des Moines, IA 50319-0075. (Ord. 13-11, 4-2-
2013)
10-2C-4: PLUMBING/MECHANICAL INSPECTOR:
A. Office Established: There is hereby established in the Building Inspections Division of the Development Services Department a plumbing/mechanical
inspection office, consisting of one (1) plumbing/mechanical inspector under the supervision of the Chief Building Official.
B. Enforcement: The plumbing/mechanical inspector shall enforce the provisions of this Code and all building codes in a manner consistent with intent
thereof. The plumbing/mechanical inspector shall perform the duties necessary for the enforcement of the Plumbing and Mechanical Codes of the City
and to act as the designated representative of the Chief Building Official.
1. The duties of the plumbing/mechanical inspector may be assumed by the Chief Building Official.
C. Qualifications: The plumbing/mechanical inspector shall have the qualifications of a master plumber, with at least five (5) years' practical experience as
a master plumber, shall hold an Iowa master plumber's license and an Iowa master HVAC license, shall hold a certification as a plumbing/mechanical
inspector that is acceptable to the Chief Building Official, and shall receive such salary and compensation as may be fixed and determined by the City
Council.
D. Duties: It shall be the duty of the plumbing/mechanical inspector to see that the construction, reconstruction and maintenance of plumbing, roof and
house drainage systems in buildings and the ventilation and water supply thereto constructed in such buildings and within five feet (5') outside the
foundation thereof, shall conform to and be in compliance with the terms and provisions of the Plumbing, Mechanical and Fuel Gas Piping Codes.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 223/358
The plumbing/mechanical inspector shall approve or reject all plans submitted. He shall keep a daily record of his work, including notices served,
applications received, permits granted and known or suspected violations of the Plumbing, Mechanical and Fuel Gas Piping Codes, and all other
matters pertaining to the terms and provisions of said codes.
The plumbing/mechanical inspector shall keep a record of all work hereafter done in new or old structures or buildings and see that all such work is
done in compliance with said codes and pursuant to a permit obtained therefor. He shall have power to stop any work being done contrary to the terms
and provisions of said codes and to revoke any permit granted for the same. He shall have the police power to enter any buildings or structures or
other property during reasonable hours for the purpose of executing the duties assigned to him by said Plumbing, Mechanical or Fuel Gas Piping
Codes.
The plumbing/mechanical inspector shall see that all plumbing, mechanical and gas piping work receives such tests as are prescribed in said
Plumbing, Mechanical and Fuel Gas Piping Codes, and shall approve or reject all such work, and shall issue a certificate accepting or rejecting such
work by posting the same in some conspicuous place in the building, structure or other property in connection with which the work is being done. He
shall have the power to condemn any plumbing, mechanical or fuel gas piping work whenever the same is not reasonably safe and sanitary or may
recommend the condemnation of such work to the Chief Building Official.
In newly annexed areas, or in existing areas receiving initial sanitary sewer main service, the plumbing system in existing buildings may be accepted by
the plumbing/mechanical inspector as suitable for connection to the City sanitary sewer system; provided, that all new portions of the plumbing system
comply with the provisions of this Code; and further provided, that any unsafe or hazardous plumbing is corrected. (Ord. 13-11, 4-2-2013)
10-2C-5: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter or repair any plumbing, roof or house drainage system or the ventilation thereof or repair, install or connect in
any way to the sewer or water supply of the City or do any other plumbing or gas piping work in or to any building without first having obtained the
necessary license as required by the State of Iowa. A plumbing contractor license shall entitle the holder to engage in the business of and secure permits
for the installation, alterations, and repair of plumbing appliances and equipment. (Ord. 13-11, 4-2-2013)
10-2C-6: BOARD OF PLUMBING APPEALS:
A. Board Established: In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the plumbing/mechanical inspector relative to
the application and interpretations of this Code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Plumbing Appeals which shall consist of seven (7)
residents of the City. One (1) member shall be a member of the public, one (1) member shall be a building contractor, two (2) members shall be the
holders of master plumber's licenses, two (2) members shall be the holders of journeyman plumber's licenses and one (1) member shall be the holder
of a master HVAC license. The plumbing/mechanical inspector shall be an ex officio member and shall act as Secretary to said board, but shall have
no vote upon any matter before the board. The Board of Plumbing Appeals shall meet as needed. The Board of Plumbing Appeals shall have no
authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provision of this Code nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of this Code.
B. Appointment: Members of the Board of Plumbing Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council, and shall serve a
five (5) year term.
C. Meetings: Said board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the conduct of its business and the hearing of appeals and shall make its
decisions or findings in writing. The meetings of said Board of Plumbing Appeals shall be held in the City Hall in such reasonable quarters as may be
therein provided by the Council, and shall meet at the call of the Chairman of said board, but not more often than once each calendar month.
D. Right To Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any ruling, decision, interpretation or order of the plumbing/mechanical inspector shall have the right to
appeal to the Board of Plumbing Appeals by filing a written notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days from and after the date of the
ruling, decision, interpretation or order from which appeal is taken.
E. Notice Of Hearing: Upon the filing of such notice of appeal, a time and place for hearing by the Board of Plumbing Appeals shall be fixed, which time
shall be not more than fifteen (15) days after the date of filing such notice of appeal, and the person appealing shall be notified of the time and place of
such hearing. Hearings on appeal shall be open to the public and all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to present their position.
F. Authority Of Board Of Plumbing Appeals: The Board of Plumbing Appeals shall have authority to determine the suitability of alternate materials or type
of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretation of the provisions of the Plumbing Code, and to permit variance from the strict terms and
provisions of the Plumbing Code when such variance can be made without increasing hazards to public health or safety, and when the granting of such
variance would not violate the intent and purposes of the Plumbing Code. Mere inconvenience to the aggrieved party shall not be grounds for granting
of any variance or for the modification or reversal of any ruling, decision, interpretation or order of the plumbing/mechanical inspector.
G. Periodic Review Of Mason City Plumbing Code: In addition to the functions and duties of the Board of Plumbing Appeals as stated in this section, said
board shall periodically review and evaluate the provisions of the Mason City Plumbing Code and shall furnish written recommendations to the City
Council for updating said Code.
H. Right To Appeal Decision Of Board Of Plumbing Appeals: Any applicant shall have the right to appeal to the City Council any ruling of the Board of
Plumbing Appeals, by filing a written notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of ruling therefrom appealed. The
Chief Building Official shall forthwith fix a time and place of hearing on such appeal which shall not be less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15)
days after the date of filing of the notice of appeal, and the City Clerk shall notify the interested person, by certified mail, of the time and place of said
hearing. After hearing said appeal, the City Council may sustain or overrule the ruling of the Board of Plumbing Appeals. (Ord. 13-11, 4-2-2013)
ARTICLE D. MECHANICAL CODE
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 224/358
10-2D-1: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted as the Mason City Mechanical Code the International Mechanical Code, most current edition of such, adopted by the State of
Iowa, as published by the International Code Council. A copy of said Code is now on file in the Office of the City Clerk and at the Mason City Public Library
for public inspection. (Ord. 10-07, 5-4-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2D-2: AMENDMENTS:
A. Reference Changes: Where the International Mechanical Code refers to the International Plumbing Code, change to Uniform Plumbing Code.
Where the International Mechanical Code refers to the International Electrical Code, change to National Electrical Code.
Where the International Mechanical Code refers to the International Fuel Gas Code, change to Uniform Plumbing Code. (Ord. 06-07, 10-3-2006; amd.
Ord. 13-11, 4-2-2013)
B. Mechanical Permit Fees: Mechanical permit fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 16-10, 5-17-2016, eff. 7-1-2016)
C. Board Of Appeals: The Board of Plumbing Appeals, as set out in section 10-2C-6, "Board Of Plumbing Appeals", of this chapter shall hear and decide
appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the plumbing/mechanical inspector relative to the application and interpretations of the
International Mechanical Code as adopted and amended by the City of Mason City. (Ord. 06-27, 10-3-2006; amd. Ord. 13-11, 4-2-2013)
ARTICLE E. RESIDENTIAL CODE
10-2E-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The 2009 International Residential Code, or the most current edition adopted by the State of Iowa, is hereby adopted, as amended herein. (Ord. 17-7, 6-6-
2017)
10-2E-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The adopted Code shall be amended as follows:
A. R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit:
1. Section R105.2 subheading "Building", paragraph 1, referring to one story accessory structures, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
2. Section R105.2, subheading "Building", paragraph 10, referring to decks not exceeding 200 square feet in area, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
B. R108.2 Schedule Of Permit Fees, is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following:
Fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
C. The frost line depth indicated in table R301.2(1), Climactic And Geographic Design Criteria, shall be forty-eight inches (48").
D. R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
E. Appendices A through U are hereby deleted in their entirety. (Ord. 17-7, 6-6-2017)
ARTICLE F. HOUSING CODE
10-2F-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Title: This article shall be known and cited as the MASON CITY HOUSING CODE hereafter referred to as "this Code" or the "Housing Code". This Code
incorporates the requirements of both the Iowa Code and the housing quality standards established by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development.
B. Purpose: The purpose of the Mason City Housing and Property Maintenance Code is to ensure that housing facilities and conditions protect and
promote the health, safety and welfare of people who reside in Mason City and the general public as well.
C. Scope: This article shall apply to all dwellings within the jurisdiction of the City of Mason City used or intended to be used for human occupancy, except
for "temporary housing" as defined herein. (Ord. 04-3, 1-6-2004; amd. 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 225/358
10-2F-2: CODE ADOPTED:
Except as hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or amended, there is hereby adopted as the Housing Code of the City, the 2015 edition of the
International Property Maintenance Code, or the most current edition, as prepared and edited by the International Code Council, regulating and governing
the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical
things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupations and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures in the City; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection fees therefor. (2017 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-10 - HOUSING CODE. Go to new ordinance.
10-2F-3: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 1:
Chapter 1, Scope And Administration, of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code (or the most current edition) is adopted, except as hereby
amended, deleted, modified, revised, or added to, as specifically set forth as follows:
A. 101.1, Title: Delete and replace. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Mason City, Iowa,
hereinafter referred to as "the Housing Code", or "this Code".
B. 103.1, General: Delete and replace. Enforcement and administration of this Code shall be the responsibility of the Code official, under direction of the
Director of Development Services.
C. 103.5, Fees: Delete and replace. The fees for activities and services performed by the Development Services Department in carrying out its
responsibilities under this Code shall be determined from time to time by resolution adopted by the City Council.
D. 106.3, Prosecution Of Violation: Delete and replace last sentence only. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal
means or resource.
E. 109.1, Imminent Danger: Delete and replace first and second sentences only. When, in the opinion of the Code official, there is imminent danger of
failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the
occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of
explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, or when
the occupants are using the premises for illegal activities or storage of illegal substances that may pose a danger to the occupants or persons in
proximity thereof, the Code official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The Code
official shall cause to be posted at the front or main entrance to such structure a placard declaring the structure to be unsafe and prohibiting its
occupancy.
F. 111.1, Application For Appeal: Delete and replace first sentence only. Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code official or a notice or order
issued under this Code shall have the right to appeal to the Housing Advisory and Appeals Board, provided that a written application for appeal is filed
no more than twenty (20) calendar days after the action or decision being appealed.
G. 111.2, Membership Of The Board: Delete and replace. The board shall be comprised of five (5) persons who shall be appointed by the Mayor with
approval of the City Council. The Code official shall serve as a non-voting ex-officio member of the board.
H. 111.2.1, Alternate Members: Delete.
I. 111.2.2, Chairman: Delete and replace. Chair and Vice-Chair. The board shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair from among its members. Such Chair, or in
his/her absence, the Vice-Chair, shall conduct all meetings and may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
J. 111.2.4, Secretary: Delete and replace. The Code official shall serve as Secretary to the board and shall distribute all decisions and findings in writing to
the landlord and the occupant. The Secretary shall cause all records and minutes of the board to be maintained by the Development Services
Department and the City Clerk.
K. 111.2.6, add subsection: Terms: Members of the board shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years, from the first day of April following their
appointment, except for appointments to fill vacancies which shall be for the unexpired term of any member. The Mayor, for cause, may remove any
member from office. Upon completion of their term of office, members shall continue to serve in their full capacity until a successor has been duly
appointed.
L. 111.2.7, add subsection: Vacancies: Vacancies on the board caused by death, resignation or other reason shall be promptly filled by appointment of the
Mayor and approval of the City Council for the unexpired term of office.
M. 111.3, Notice Of Meetings: Delete and replace. Upon receipt of a complete appeal application and filing fee, the Code official shall establish a date for
the hearing to be held within fifteen (15) business days of the date upon which the completed application was received, and shall send a notice of the
hearing to the appellant as well as the respective property owner and occupant, if different from owner.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 226/358
N. 111.4.2, add subsection: Extensions Of Time: In response to an appeal of a notice and order, the board may grant an extension of time to comply with a
notice and order for not more than twelve (12) months, subject to appropriate conditions, and provided that the board makes specific findings of fact
based upon evidence relating to the following:
1. That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in carrying out the strict letter of any notice and order; and
2. That such an extension is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Code in securing the public health, safety and general welfare; and
3. That the violation(s) in question do not constitute an imminent danger, per section 109.1.
O. 111.4.3, add subsection: Variances: In response to an appeal of a notice and order, the board may grant a variance from a specific provision of this
Code in a specific case, subject to appropriate conditions and provided the board makes specific findings of fact based upon evidence related to the
following:
1. That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in carrying out the strict letter of any notice and order; and
2. That the effect of the application of the provisions would be arbitrary in the specific case; and
3. That an extension would not constitute an appropriate remedy for these practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships; and
4. That the variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Code in securing the public health, safety and general welfare and does
not constitute an imminent danger to the public.
(2017 Code)
10-2F-4: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 2:
Chapter 2, Definitions, of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code (or the most current edition) is adopted, except as hereby amended, deleted,
modified, revised, or added to, as specifically set forth as follows:
A. 201.6, add new subsection: Board: The Housing Advisory and Appeals Board of the City of Mason City. All references in this Code to "board" or "Board
of Appeals" shall be considered to reference the City of Mason City Housing Advisory and Appeals Board.
B. 202, General Definitions, add definition: Accessory Building Or Structure: A structure that is not attached to the dwelling by a common wall and is not
used for living or sleeping or for human occupancy. Examples of accessory buildings or structures include garages and sheds.
C. 202, General Definitions, delete and replace: Approved: The dwelling or referenced feature of the dwelling substantially complies with this Code or other
referenced codes as determined by the Code official.
D. 202, General Definitions, add definition: Landlord: Any person who rents to another or who has custody or control of a building, or parts thereof, in
which dwelling units or rooming units are let for occupancy or offered for rent.
E. 202, General Definitions, delete and replace: Let For Occupancy Or Let: To permit, provide, or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure, to be occupied by any person who is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or
unwritten lease, agreement or license.
F. 202, General Definitions, Owner, revise second clause only as follows: "or recorded in the official records of Cerro Gordo County as holder of a contract
to purchase, or as holding title, to the property;". The remainder of the definition before and after this clause is unchanged.
G. 202, General Definitions, add definition: Placard: A written announcement posted on a dwelling unit or rooming unit that has been determined to be unfit
for human occupancy; also referred to as "white tag".
H. 202, General Definitions, add definition: Reasonable Cause: Any condition that poses an imminent threat to the health, safety and/or welfare of the
occupant(s) or others.
I. 202, General Definitions, add definition: Rental Dwelling Permit: A written certificate of compliance, issued periodically, which grants the landlord the
option of letting for occupancy a specific unit for rental purposes and showing that the unit for which it is issued was in compliance with this Housing
Code at the time of issuance.
J. 202, General Definitions, add definition: Rental Dwelling Unit: Any dwelling unit or rooming unit that is let for occupancy as defined in this Code, where
the owner of record is not an occupant of the unit; regardless of whether or not rent is charged or paid.
(2017 Code)
10-2F-5: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 3:
Chapter 3, General Requirements, of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code (or the most current edition) is adopted, except as hereby
amended, deleted, modified, revised, or added to, as specifically set forth as follows:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 227/358
A. 302.4, Weeds, delete and replace first sentence only: Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of
twelve inches (12").
B. 304.14, Insect Screens, delete and replace: During the period from May 1 to November 1, every door, window and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16
mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
C. 307.1, General, delete and replace last sentence only: Guards shall not be less than 36 inches (914.4 mm) in height above the floor of the landing,
balcony, porch, deck, ramp, or other walking surface.
D. 309, Pest elimination, add new subsection 309.6, as follows:
309.6, Bedbugs.
309.6.1. Landlord's Responsibilities. In regard to bedbug infestations, the owner or landlord shall be responsible for the following:
1. The owner or landlord shall be responsible for all costs related to the inspection and treatment of a bedbug infestation in any part of a building
that contains two (2) or more rental dwelling units. This includes common areas such as shared kitchens, lounges, hallways, etc.
2. The owner or landlord shall have the infested unit(s) and all adjacent units inspected by a qualified inspector within five (5) business days of
receiving notice from a tenant that his or her unit may be infested.
3. The owner or landlord shall take reasonable measures to treat the infestation no more than five (5) business days after the inspection, including
treating adjacent units and hiring a pest control agent.
4. The owner or landlord shall not apply pesticides, unless he/she is a certified applicator.
5. The owner or landlord shall provide reasonable written or oral notice to a tenant before entering a unit for bedbug inspection or control
purposes.
6. The owner or landlord shall offer assistance to tenants who cannot comply with treatment procedures, for which they may charge a reasonable
amount.
7. The owner or landlord shall not offer or show a unit for rent if he/she knows or suspects it is infested.
8. The owner or landlord shall, upon request from a current or prospective tenant, disclose the last date when the rental unit was inspected for
bedbugs and found free of infestation.
309.6.2. Tenant's Responsibilities. In regard to bedbug infestations, the tenant of a rental dwelling unit shall be responsible for the following:
1. The tenant of a single family rental dwelling unit shall ensure that bedbugs are eradicated in accordance with this Code and shall be responsible
for the costs of inspection and eradication. The tenant shall notify the owner or landlord prior to treatment and again after eradication.
2. The tenant of a unit located within a building containing two (2) or more rental dwelling units shall:
a. Promptly notify the owner or landlord, orally or in writing, when he/she knows or suspects the unit is infested with bedbugs;
b. Grant the owner/landlord, qualified inspector, or pest control agent access to the unit;
c. Comply with reasonable measures to eliminate and control the infestation, or pay for additional costs arising from noncompliance; and
d. Refrain from moving infested material from the unit until treatment is complete or the landlord gives permission to do so.
(2017 Code)
10-2F-6: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 4:
Chapter 4, Light, Ventilation And Occupancy Requirements, of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code (or the most current edition) is adopted,
except as hereby amended, deleted, modified, revised, or added to, as specifically set forth as follows:
A. 404.4, Bedroom And Living Room Requirements, add new subsection 404.4.6: Conversion Of Existing Rooms To Bedrooms. Any room in an existing
structure not originally designed or used as a bedroom may not be converted for use as a bedroom unless the requirements of this chapter and all
other applicable requirements are met.
(2017 Code)
10-2F-7: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 5:
Chapter 5, Plumbing Facilities And Fixture Requirements, of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code (or the most current edition) is adopted,
except as hereby amended, deleted, modified, revised, or added to, as specifically set forth as follows:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 228/358
A. 502.1, Dwelling Units, delete and replace first sentence only: Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet,
approved floor covering and kitchen sink, which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition.
B. 504.4, Water Heating Facilities, delete and replace last sentence only: An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve
discharge pipe within 6 inches (6") of the floor shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.
C. 505.1, General, delete and replace second (last) sentence only: All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied
with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the International Plumbing Code, except toilets shall be supplied with cold water only.
Each dwelling unit or multiple family building that provides laundry facilities shall provide a clothes washer standpipe, which may discharge directly over
a floor drain. A proper air gap shall be provided.
(2017 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-10 - HOUSING CODE. Go to new ordinance.
10-2F-8: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 6:
Chapter 6, Mechanical And Electrical Requirements, of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code (or the most current edition) is adopted, except
as hereby amended, deleted, modified, revised, or added to, as specifically set forth as follows:
A. 602.1, Facilities Required, add to end of section: Heating systems requiring electrical energy for operation shall be provided with an independent circuit.
B. 602.2, Residential Occupancies, delete and replace last sentence only: Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall unvented fuel burning space
heaters be used, as a means to provide required heating. No fuel burning furnace shall be located within any sleeping room or bathroom unless
provided with adequate ducting for air supply from the exterior, and provided the combustion chamber for such heating unit is sealed from the room in
an airtight manner. Fuel burning space heaters are prohibited in dwelling units.
C. 602.2, Residential Occupancies, delete the "Exception" paragraph.
D. 602.3, Occupiable Work Spaces, delete and replace: Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat, during the period from September 15
to May 15 to maintain a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
E. 604.2, Service, add to end of section: Where fusible equipment is in place, Type S fuses will be required.
F. 605.2, Receptacles, delete and replace third (second to last) sentence only: Any bathroom or toilet room receptacle outlet shall have ground fault
interrupter protection. In any room other than a bathroom or toilet room, any receptacle within 36 inches (36") of a water source and all exterior outlets
shall have ground fault interrupter protection.
G. 605.3, Luminaires, delete and replace first sentence only: Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room
and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire with a switch that is easily accessible from the entrance to the room. All dwellings shall
have lighted entrances and exits controlled by interior switches that are convenient and accessible.
(2017 Code)
10-2F-9: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 7:
Chapter 7, Fire Safety Requirements, of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code (or the most current edition) is adopted, except as hereby
amended, deleted, modified, revised, or added to, as specifically set forth as follows:
A. 702.1, append to the end of section: A means of escape shall be provided for all bedrooms.
B. 702.3, Locked Doors, delete and replace: All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without
the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code, or where
the dwelling is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
C. 702.4, Emergency Escape Openings, add the following subsections:
1. 702.4.1 Windows And Similar Means Of Egress. The bottom edge of any window in a habitable space that serves as an emergency escape opening
shall be no more than forty-four inches (44") above the floor.
2. 702.4.2 Habitable Spaces In Basements. Each bedroom in a dwelling unit located within a basement, where fifty percent (50%) or more of the
vertical height of the room is below the exterior grade, shall have at least one operable emergency escape (egress) window or exterior door, with a
minimum openable area of 5.7 square feet, leading directly to a public way.
3. 702.4.3 Window Wells. Window wells are required whenever any portion of the vertical dimension of a basement egress window is below the outside
grade. The minimum horizontal area of a window well shall be nine (9) square feet, with a minimum horizontal projection and width of thirty-six inches
(36"). The area of the window well shall allow the egress window to be fully opened. Window wells with a vertical depth greater than forty-four inches
(44") shall be equipped with a permanently affixed ladder or steps usable with the window in the fully open position. Ladders, rungs, or steps shall
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 229/358
have an inside minimum width of twelve inches (12"), shall project at least three inches (3") from the wall, and shall be spaced not more than
eighteen inches (18") on center vertically for the full height of the window well.
4. 702.4.4 Fire Escapes. No existing fire escape shall be deemed a sufficient means of egress unless it is inspected and approved by the Code official
and the Mason City Fire Marshal.
D. 704.1, General, delete and replace: All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any
combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the International Fire Code, subject to the approval of
the Mason City Fire Marshal or his/her representative.
(2017 Code)
10-2F-10: RENTAL DWELLING PERMIT:
A. Permit Required For Specific Structure: No person shall rent for occupancy any dwelling, dwelling unit, duplex, apartment, rooming unit (except a
rooming unit or units within owner occupied single-family dwellings, condominiums and containing no more than 2 roomers) or rooming house unless
the landlord has obtained a rental dwelling permit for the respective dwelling unit(s) from the Code official applicable to those portions of the specific
structure used for residential rental purposes.
B. Permit Requirements:
1. Issuance Upon Compliance: A rental dwelling permit shall be issued by the Code official indicating compliance with this Code at the time of
issuance.
a. Valid Period: A rental dwelling permit shall be valid for no more than five (5) years from the date of issuance. If a rental dwelling unit is not
occupied for any length of time during the five (5) year period, the permit shall remain valid, provided the permit is not revoked, the unit does not
become a nonrental (owner occupied) unit, and the unit continues to comply with this Code.
b. Transfer Of Permit: A rental dwelling permit shall be transferable from one landlord or owner to another at any time prior to its expiration,
termination or revocation if a notice, including name and contact information of the new landlord, is given to the Code official no more than thirty
(30) calendar days after the transfer. A rental dwelling transfer late penalty shall be charged to the subsequent landlord if more than thirty (30)
calendar days passes between the change in ownership and notification of the Code official.
2. Penalty For No Rental Dwelling Permit: All dwelling units and rooming units being let for rent and occupancy without a valid rental dwelling permit, or
an application for a permit is on file with the Code official, may be ordered vacated or it may be ordered that no further rent shall be recoverable by
the landlord of such units until compliance with this Housing Code is met. In addition, the Code official may impose a penalty if the respective
landlord does not submit an application for the necessary permit(s) more than thirty (30) calendar days after notification by the Code official that the
proper permit has not been obtained. All fees and penalties shall be in an amount established by resolution adopted by the City Council.
3. Issuance After Inspection: After inspections have been completed according to section 10-2F-11 of this article, and the Code official has determined
that all provisions of the Housing Code have been met, the Code official shall issue a rental dwelling permit no more than ten (10) business days
after the final inspection or reinspection. A rental dwelling permit shall not be issued unless the furnace check has been provided according to
subsection 10-2F-11G1 of this article and all applicable fees and penalties have been paid.
C. Extension Of Permit: Rental dwelling permits shall be valid through the expiration date contained thereon. However, extensions, which shall not exceed
sixty (60) calendar days, may be granted to cover any time period between the stated expiration date and the period of time permitted by the Code
official to remedy any violations cited subsequent to an inspection or reinspection, provided that an application to renew the rental dwelling permit is on
file.
D. Permit Renewal: A rental dwelling permit may be renewed for an additional five (5) years upon or before expiration of the current permit. To renew the
rental dwelling permit, the dwelling must be inspected as described in section 10-2F-11 of this article and found to comply with the terms of this Code.
E. Revocation Of Permit:
1. Causes: The Code official may revoke a rental dwelling permit at any time if:
a. Fraud, collusion or an illegality has been documented in the inspection or permitting process.
b. A dwelling unit fails to meet the requirements of the Housing Code, and the owner or landlord does not address the deficiencies within thirty (30)
calendar days after the initial inspection, or within fifteen (15) calendar days after the most recent reinspection. The Code official or the Board of
Housing Appeals may extend this period for due cause.
c. Fees or penalties are outstanding for more than ninety (90) days.
2. Appeal: The owner or landlord shall be notified in writing that the rental dwelling permit is being revoked and shall have ten (10) business days to file
an appeal with the Housing Advisory and Appeals Board. (Ord. 04-3, 1-6-2004; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2F-11: INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Inspection Notices: A written notice for each inspection or reinspection shall be sent or delivered to the owner, or the owner's designated agent, prior to
conducting inspections except when a potential threat to health or safety exists which would create the need for a more immediate inspection. The
City's failure to demonstrate proof of having sent the notice shall not relieve the owner or landlord of the corrective actions ordered by the Code official
to bring the dwelling unit into compliance, nor from the associated reasonable time to complete them.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 230/358
B. Search Warrant: When entry is lawfully refused, the Code official may apply to the court of jurisdiction for a search warrant. No owner, landlord, or
occupant shall fail, neglect, or attempt to permit full access to the Code official after a search warrant, issued by the court, is presented.
C. No Show Or Failure To Notify City To Reschedule: If an owner, landlord or occupant fails to provide for access to a unit for a scheduled inspection,
including refusing entry, a "no show" penalty may be charged, unless the owner, landlord, or occupant, at least twelve (12) hours prior to the scheduled
inspection or reinspection, notifies the Code official that he/she cannot attend at the scheduled time and the inspection or reinspection is therefore
rescheduled.
D. Inspection Of Owner Occupied Dwellings: Inspection of owner occupied single-family dwellings, owner occupied condominiums, owner occupied
cooperatives, or any of the above containing an occupant group meeting the occupancy requirements of the adopted Building and Fire Codes, shall be
performed only upon request or complaint to the Code official, or upon reasonable cause as determined by the Code official.
1. The Code official shall inspect the property and create a list of deficiencies or violations, which shall be provided to the owner no less than ten (10)
business days after the inspection was performed.
2. Any deficiencies or violations identified by the Code official shall be resolved no less than thirty (30) calendar days of receiving the list from the Code
official. If reinspection is necessary, the owner shall be notified no less than five (5) calendar days before the scheduled reinspection.
E. Inspection Of Rental Dwelling Units: Rental dwelling units shall be fully inspected to ensure compliance with all requirements of this Code. Inspections
shall take place for any one (1) or more of the following purposes:
1. Upon establishment of a dwelling unit as a rental dwelling unit and submittal of a rental dwelling permit application;
2. At least once every five (5) years, for renewal of a rental dwelling permit, along with submittal of a rental dwelling permit application, to determine if
the unit continues to meet the requirements of this Code;
3. Upon request by the owner or landlord;
4. Upon receipt of a founded complaint; or
5. Upon reasonable cause as determined by the Code official.
F. Landlord Notification: If a rental dwelling unit or premises is occupied, the Code official shall first make a reasonable effort to notify the owner or landlord
and request entry; however, occupants may grant access to the Code official for rental housing inspections without permission from the owner or
landlord.
G. Rental Dwelling Permit And Renewal Inspection Process: Upon receipt of a complete rental dwelling permit application and payment of the rental
dwelling permit fee, the Code official shall schedule an initial inspection and notify the owner or landlord of the date and time thereof, no more than
thirty (30) calendar days after determination that the application is complete. An inspection shall be scheduled only if the permit fee has been paid.
1. Furnace Check: The owner or landlord shall provide, before the first inspection or within thirty (30) days of acceptance of the application, proof that
an inspection of the primary heating equipment for each dwelling unit has been conducted.
a. The owner or landlord shall engage the services of a mechanical/heating contractor to conduct a furnace inspection as part of, or no more than
two (2) years prior to, the initial inspection for new rental dwelling units, or the initial inspection for rental dwelling permit renewal, for each rental
dwelling under his/her control.
b. The owner or landlord shall be responsible for providing documentation to the Code official that a furnace inspection has been completed and that
the equipment is in good, operable and safe condition.
2. Initial Inspection: The Code official shall inspect the premises and develop a list of deficiencies or violations. The list shall be supplied to the owner or
landlord no more than ten (10) business days after the initial inspection. If the Code official finds that there are no deficiencies or violations during the
initial inspection, a rental dwelling permit shall be issued no more than ten (10) business days after the initial inspection. There is no fee for the initial
inspection. Any other fees or penalties due (such as "no show", transfer, or "no rental dwelling permit" penalties) shall be paid prior to the date and
time of the scheduled initial inspection. The inspection shall not be conducted if fees and penalties are unpaid.
3. First Reinspection: The owner or landlord shall correct any deficiencies or violations identified by the Code official during the initial inspection. The
first reinspection shall be scheduled no more than thirty (30) calendar days after the owner or landlord receives the list of deficiencies or violations. If
the Code official finds that the identified deficiencies or violations have been corrected, a rental dwelling permit shall be issued no more than ten (10)
business days after the first reinspection. If there are still deficiencies or violations, the Code official shall provide a list thereof to the owner or
landlord no more than ten (10) business days after the first reinspection. There is no fee for the first reinspection; however, any other fees or
penalties due shall be paid prior to the date and time of the scheduled first reinspection. The reinspection shall not be conducted if fees and penalties
are unpaid or the furnace check, as required in subsection G1 of this section, has not been completed, submitted and approved by the Code official.
4. Second And Subsequent Reinspections:
a. If necessary, the second or any subsequent reinspection shall be scheduled no more than fifteen (15) calendar days after the owner or landlord
receives the list of deficiencies or violations. The owner or landlord shall correct any deficiencies or violations identified by the Code official during
the prior reinspection.
b. A fee shall be charged for the second and any subsequent reinspection. This fee, in addition to any other fees or penalties due, shall be paid
before the second or subsequent reinspection is conducted. The reinspection shall not be conducted if there are any unpaid fees or penalties.
c. If the Code official finds that the identified deficiencies or violations have been corrected, a rental dwelling permit shall be issued no more than ten
(10) business days after the reinspection.
d. If there are still deficiencies or violations, the Code official shall provide a list to the owner or landlord no more than ten (10) business days after
the second or subsequent reinspection. The next reinspection shall be scheduled no more than fifteen (15) calendar days after the owner or
landlord receives the list of deficiencies or violations.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 231/358
5. Repeated Deficiencies Or Violations: Unless the owner or landlord can show good and verifiable cause, any deficiencies or violations that were
identified during an inspection or reinspection must be resolved by the next reinspection or by the next subsequent reinspection. If said deficiencies
or violations are still unresolved after any combination of two (2) successive inspections or reinspections, the Code official may deny the rental
dwelling permit.
H. Time Extensions: The Code official, for good and verifiable cause, may extend the time between inspections and reinspections and shall notify the
owner or landlord of the extension and the date and time of the inspection or reinspection upon expiration of the extension.
I. Tenant Complaints: Unless there are significant issues that constitute a hazard or danger to the occupants or to the health, safety or general welfare, a
tenant must first file a formal complaint to the owner, landlord, or designated agent. Forms for this purpose will be provided by the Development
Services Department. A copy of the form shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer.
1. The owner or landlord shall have no more than seven (7) days after receipt of the written complaint to address the complaint.
2. If the complaint is not remedied to the tenant's satisfaction within seven (7) business days, the complainant will notify the Code Enforcement
Division. If the Code official determines that the complaint is founded, the Code official shall schedule an inspection. If the owner or landlord refuses
entry, the Code official may seek a warrant as stated in subsection B of this section.
3. If violations are found, the owner or landlord shall have fifteen (15) calendar days to remedy the violations. A fee equal to the cost of a second or
subsequent reinspection shall be charged to the owner or landlord and paid no more than thirty (30) days after the inspection; however, if further
reinspections are needed to ensure compliance, the requisite fee shall be paid prior to any reinspections.
4. The owner or landlord shall not pursue an action for eviction, nor shall the owner or landlord cause any service, facility, equipment or utility required
by this Code to be removed, shut off, or discontinued because of, or in retaliation for, filing a complaint under this subsection.
J. Notice Of Violations: Whenever the Code official determines that a violation of the Housing Code exists, the Code official shall inform the owner or
landlord of the violation(s).
1. Right To Appeal: The Code official shall notify the owner or landlord of their right to appeal, and shall provide an appeal application form upon
request.
2. Staying Of Order Under Appeal: Except for emergency orders to vacate made according to the requirements of this Code, enforcement of any notice
and order of the Code official shall be placed on hold until a determination is made by the Housing Advisory and Appeals Board.
K. Placarding Procedures For Unfit Properties Or Rental Dwellings Without Rental Dwelling Permit: Any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit which is
found to be so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the
occupants or of the public, or is a rental dwelling unit that has not been issued a rental dwelling permit shall be determined to be unfit for human
habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the Code official.
1. Placarded Dwellings To Be Vacated: Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or any portion thereof, placarded in accordance with this article by the
Code official, shall be vacated immediately or as ordered by the Code official.
2. Reoccupy Placarded Dwelling: No dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or portion thereof, which has been placarded in accordance with this article,
shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the Code official. The Code official
shall remove such placard whenever the violations upon which the placarding action was based have been eliminated.
3. Removal Of Placard Prohibited: Except for the Code official as provided above, it shall be unlawful for any person to deface or remove a placard
from any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit which has been deemed unfit for human habitation and placarded in accordance with this section.
4. Condemnation Referral: After a reasonable period of time after a property has been placarded and no remedial action begun, but in no case greater
than six (6) months, the Code official shall inform the proper authorities to initiate the process for condemnation and demolition of the building.
L. Distribution Of Information: The Code official shall make all rules and regulations available to the general public. Standard forms and blank notices shall
also be available upon request. (Ord. 04-3, 1-6-2004; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2F-12: OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES FOR MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY OF RENTAL DWELLING UNITS:
Rental dwelling unit owners or landlords shall be responsible for causing the dwelling and/or premises to meet the following requirements:
A. Maintenance: The rental dwelling unit owner or landlord shall maintain and repair all dwellings and outbuildings on the premises in accordance with all
requirements of this Code.
B. Access By Landlord For Maintenance: Every occupant of a dwelling unit or rooming unit shall give access to the landlord or his/her representative or
employee, to any part of such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of maintenance or other actions
required by the Housing Code and for making corrective actions ordered by the Code official. The landlord shall provide notice to the occupant not less
than twenty four (24) hours before entry, except in cases of emergency or where notice or notification is not feasible.
C. Grading, Drainage And Landscaping Of Premises: Grading, drainage and landscaping shall be continuously maintained. This Housing Code shall not
affect the existence or maintenance of stormwater drainage systems.
D. Floors In Kitchens And Bathrooms: Every toilet room floor surface, bathroom floor surface and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained
so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean, dry and sanitary condition.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 232/358
E. Landlord To Let Clean Units: No landlord shall permit occupancy of any vacant dwelling unit or rooming unit unless it is substantially clean, sanitary and
fit for human occupancy.
F. Common Areas Maintenance: Every landlord of a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units or more than one (1) rooming unit shall be
responsible for maintaining, in a safe and sanitary condition, the shared public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof, unless there is a written
agreement between the landlord and occupant to the contrary.
G. Occupancy Control: No owner or operator shall allow the occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit to exceed the number of persons
allowed under this and other applicable codes, including the Building and Fire Codes.
H. Contact Information: The owner or landlord shall be responsible for notifying the City of any change of address or other applicable contact information. If
no new contact information is provided, the City will address correspondence to the last known address on file. (Ord. 04-3, 1-6-2004; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2F-13: OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITIES FOR MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY OF RENTAL DWELLING UNITS:
A. Occupant Responsible For Sanitary Condition: Every occupant of a rental dwelling unit shall maintain the dwelling unit or rooming unit in a clean, safe
and sanitary condition.
1. Every floor and floor covering shall be kept substantially clean and sanitary.
2. Every wall and ceiling shall be kept substantially clean and free of dirt or greasy film.
3. No dwelling or the premises thereof shall be used substantially for the storage or handling of garbage.
4. No dwelling or the premises thereof shall be used for the storage or handling of dangerous or hazardous materials beyond typical household use.
5. No occupant of a rental dwelling unit shall deliberately or negligently destroy, deface, damage, impair or remove any part or portion of the premises
or knowingly permit any other occupant or person to do so without consent of the landlord.
B. Supplied Facilities; Smoke Detection: The landlord shall have installed batteries for all required smoke detectors at the time a new occupant moves into
a dwelling unit. Subsequent replacement of batteries required to operate smoke detection equipment shall be the responsibility of occupants unless
otherwise arranged or agreed upon by the respective occupant and landlord. Occupants of a rental dwelling unit shall notify the landlord if they become
aware that the smoke detection equipment is not operating properly. Occupants shall not cause a smoke detector to be removed.
C. Cooking In Rooming Units Prohibited: Other than meals cooked in a microwave oven, no occupant of a rooming unit shall cook meals in a rooming unit
unless an approved kitchen and/or dining room is contained within the rooming unit.
D. Occupancy Control: No occupant of a rental dwelling unit shall allow the occupancy of any dwelling unit or rooming unit within which he/she resides to
exceed the number of persons allowed under this and other applicable codes, including the Building and Fire Codes. (Ord. 04-3, 1-6-2004; amd. 2017
Code)
10-2F-14: HOUSING ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD:
A. Created: There is hereby created a Housing Advisory and Appeals Board.
B. Purpose And Duties: The Housing Advisory and Appeals Board shall have the authority to act upon appeal of a decision of the Code official, variances
to the requirements of this Code, extensions of time for the compliance of any order or notice, and to sustain or modify an order of the notice of
violations authorized in the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended. The Housing Advisory and Appeals Board may also
make recommendations to the City Council for changes to the Housing Code and adopt reasonable policies.
C. Board Membership And Terms Of Office: See section 111 of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended.
D. Meeting Schedule: The Housing Advisory and Appeals Board shall meet at such intervals necessary in order to fulfill its described purposes. The
Housing Advisory and Appeals Board shall address appeals no more than fifteen (15) business days after the date upon which the Code official
received the completed appeal application, including the appeal fee.
E. Rules And Regulations: The Housing Advisory and Appeals Board may adopt rules and regulations to govern its organizational procedures as it may
deem necessary and which are not in conflict with the Housing Code or other laws.
F. Appeal Application:
1. Application: Any person aggrieved by a notice of violations or a denied rental dwelling permit or of any applicable rule or regulation issued pursuant
to the Housing Code, may apply to the Housing Advisory and Appeals Board for reconsideration of such notice and order, provided that such appeal
application is made no more than ten (10) business days after the date the notice was received. Only those matters or issues specifically raised in
the appeal application shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
2. Appeal Filing Fee: At the time of filing such an application for an appeal, the appellant shall pay a filing fee in an amount established by section 10-
2F-15 of this article.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 233/358
3. Application Deadline: The right to an administrative hearing and further adjudication shall be waived for the notice, order, and any portion thereof if
an appeal has not been properly filed within ten (10) business days after receipt of either the notice of violation or the written notice of a denied rental
permit.
G. Notice Of Hearing: Upon receipt of a complete appeal application and filing fee, the Code official shall establish a date for the hearing to be held within
fifteen (15) business days of the date upon which the completed application was received and shall send a notice of the hearing to the appellant, as
well as the respective landlord and occupant. (Ord. 04-3, 1-6-2004; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2F-15: FEES AND PENALTIES:
A. Schedule Established: A consolidated fee and penalty schedule shall be adopted by the City Council by resolution.
B. Fee And Penalty Deadlines:
1. Rental dwelling permit fees are due at the time of application. No inspections shall be scheduled if this fee is not paid.
2. The fee for renewal of a rental dwelling permit shall be paid for prior to or upon the expiration of the current permit. No inspections shall be
scheduled if this fee is not paid.
3. Rental dwelling transfer late penalties shall be due thirty (30) calendar days after the Code official sends a notice to the landlord requesting that
transfer information be submitted.
4. Reinspection fees shall be paid prior to the next scheduled inspection or reinspection; if such fees cannot be paid prior to the scheduled inspection
because the Code official finds that an immediate inspection or reinspection is warranted, such fees shall be due no more than thirty (30) calendar
days after the respective reinspection or complaint inspection.
5. "No show" penalties shall be paid prior to the next scheduled inspection or reinspection; if no further inspection or reinspection is required, such
penalties shall be due thirty (30) calendar days after the scheduled appointment when the "no show" took place.
6. "No rental dwelling permit" penalties shall be due thirty (30) calendar days after written notification is mailed or personally delivered by the Code
official, unless the owner or landlord has applied for a rental dwelling permit prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) day period.
7. Appeal fees shall be due at the time the respective appeal application is filed.
8. The Code official may deny or revoke a rental dwelling permit if all applicable fees and penalties are not paid.
9. The City may certify any unpaid balance, interest, and late payment fees and penalties to the County Auditor as a lien upon the rental property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax. (Ord. 04-3, 1-6-2004; amd. 2017 Code)
ARTICLE G. SIGN CODE
10-2G-1: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted as the Sign Code of the City, the 2009 International Building Code or most current edition, as adopted and amended by the State
of Iowa, as it applies to the construction, erection and maintenance of signs. An official copy of the 2009 International Building Code, including a certificate
by the City Clerk as to its adoption and effective date thereof, is now on file in the Office of the City Clerk and at the City Public Library for public
inspection. (Ord. 14-3, 2-4-2014)
10-2G-2: ZONING CODE:
In addition to the permit requirements for signs in the 2009 International Building Code, referenced in section 10-2G-1 of this article, all signs shall be
located, constructed, erected, operated and maintained in accordance with title 12, chapter 20, "Sign Regulations", of this Code. (Ord. 14-3, 2-4-2014)
10-2G-3: SIGN ERECTOR'S LICENSE; FEE; INSURANCE:
A. Sign Erector's License Required; Fee: No person shall engage or continue in the business of erecting, maintaining or replacing any sign or advertising
structure or perform any such acts for compensation without first having obtained a license for such work from the City Clerk. Such sign erector's
license shall be issued upon submission of written application and an annual license fee therefor. Said annual license fee shall be in the amount of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per year, payable to the City Clerk and shall expire on June 30 each year.
B. Insurance: The applicant shall file with the Clerk evidence of public liability insurance acceptable to the City, to be in full force and effect for the period of
said license, with minimum limits of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for
a single personal injury or death, and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for multiple injuries or deaths, which insurance shall indemnify and
hold harmless the City, from the same risks as hereinbefore provided for corporate surety bonds.
C. Suspension; Revocation: Any sign erector's license may be suspended or revoked as follows:
1. A sign erector's license may be suspended by the "Chief Building Official" if:
a. The license was issued in error; or
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 234/358
b. The license was incorrect; or
c. The contractor has failed to comply with the ordinances and regulations of the City relating to the work for which the license was issued.
2. No license may be suspended until after a hearing is held by the "Chief Building Official". The contractor shall be mailed notice of the date, time and
place of the hearing at least ten (10) days in advance. The notice shall also state the exact ordinances or regulations the contractor is alleged to
have violated or in what way the information stated in the application was incorrect.
3. After the hearing, the "Chief Building Official" may suspend the license for any period of time up to six (6) months.
4. Such suspension shall be subject to review by appeal to the Building Advisory and Appeals Board, as set forth in article A of this chapter.
5. The Chief Building Official may revoke the license of any sign erector who has had two (2) or more suspensions within a two (2) year period. If any of
the suspensions were appealed according to subsection C4 of this section, only those suspensions that were upheld by the Building Advisory and
Appeals Board may be counted.
6. "Routine maintenance" shall be defined as the repair of an existing electrical apparatus or equipment of the same size and type for which no
changes in wiring are made. This does not include any new electrical installation or the expansion or extension of any circuit.
7. A person licensed under this section and who has obtained the State of Iowa sign installation endorsement through the Iowa Electrical Examination
Board may perform routine maintenance on a street or light pole. (Ord. 14-3, 2-4-2014)
ARTICLE H. ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
10-2H-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The most current edition of the International Energy Conservation Code adopted by the State of Iowa is hereby adopted. A copy of the International
Energy Conservation Code can be obtained by contacting the International Code Council at 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 600, Falls Church, VA 22041. A
copy of the International Energy Conservation Code is on file at the Mason City Public Library and the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 10-09, 5-4-2010; amd.
2017 Code)
10-2H-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
A. Where the International Energy Conservation Code refers to the International Electrical Code; change to read "National Electrical Code".
B. Where the International Energy Conservation Code refers to the International Fuel Gas Code; change to read "Uniform Plumbing Code".
C. Where the International Energy Conservation Code refers to the International Plumbing Code; change to read "Uniform Plumbing Code". (Ord. 07-08,
4-3-2007)
ARTICLE I. FIRE CODE
10-2I-1: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City, the 2015 edition, or the more current edition, of the International Fire Code adopted by the State of
Iowa including appendix chapters as prepared and edited by the International Code Council, reviewed and/or modified, from time to time, by the Chief
Building Official, and the Fire Chief, which by this reference is duly adopted as fully and completely as if set out in detail herein. An official copy of the
International Fire Code, as hereby adopted, including a certificate by the City Clerk as to its adoption and the effective date thereof, is now on file in the
Office of the City Clerk and at the City Public Library for public inspection. (Ord. 17-4, 6-6-2017)
10-2I-2: AMENDMENTS TO FIRE CODE:
Section 101.1 Title: (Name of jurisdiction) City of Mason City, Iowa.
Section 108.3 Qualifications: Change to "The Board of Appeals shall consist of members as defined in section 10-2A-4 of the City Code".
Section 109.4 Violation Penalties: Change to "As defined in title 1, chapter 4 of the City Code".
Section 111.4 Failure To Comply: Change to "As defined in title 1, chapter 4 of the City Code".
Section 2304 shall be and the same is hereby amended by adding:
The provisions of section 2304 shall not prohibit the dispensing of Class I and Class II liquids in the open from a fuel dispensing system supplied by
an above ground tank, not to exceed one thousand (1,000) gallons, located at commercial, industrial, government or manufacturing establishments,
and intended for fueling vehicles used in connection with their business. Such dispensing may be permitted, provided:
1. An inspection of the premises and operations has been made and approval granted by the authority having jurisdiction.
2. The tank is safeguarded against collision, spillage, and overfill, to the satisfaction of the authority having jurisdiction.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 235/358
3. The tank is listed or approved for such above ground use.
4. The tank complies with requirements for emergency relief venting, and the tank and dispensing system meet the electrical classifications of the
Code.
5. The tank storage shall comply with NFPA 30 (2013).
Appendix J and L: Delete in the International Fire Code (2015). (Ord. 17-4, 6-6-2017)
10-2I-3: OPEN BURNING:
A. Prohibited; Exceptions: Open burning for the purpose of disposal of material is prohibited except as follows:
1. Notification Of Fire Department:
a. Application; Fees: Application for a variance must be made in writing to the Fire Department. If a variance is granted, a permit fee of ten dollars
($10.00) shall cover the costs of assuring compliance. If an on site visit is required for the process of granting a variance, a fifteen dollar ($15.00)
first time fee shall be added to the cost of the permit.
b. Lot Size: Unless authorized by the Fire Chief, only single-family lots of twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet in size or larger shall be granted
a variance of this section.
c. Distance: No variance shall be granted unless the site of burning is two hundred feet (200') or more from any sensitive neighboring structure.
2. Material Restrictions: Only leaves, grass clippings, small twigs and branches produced on the site listed on the permit shall be eligible to be burned.
Burning of rubbish and paper products shall be prohibited. Rubber tires shall not be used to ignite landscape waste.
3. Time And Atmospheric Restrictions:
a. The Fire Chief shall establish periods for burning of yard waste for spring and fall. No burning shall be permitted outside of these periods except
with authorization by the Fire Chief.
b. Unless otherwise authorized by the Fire Chief, open burning shall be only on specific days, between twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to sundown.
Open burning shall be prohibited when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous.
4. Location On Property: Burning shall not take place within fifty feet (50') of a structure; within twenty five feet (25') permissible if the pile size is three
feet (3') or less in diameter and two feet (2') or less in height.
5. Containers: No burning shall be done in containers. "Burn barrels", incinerators, etc., are prohibited.
6. Fire Extinguishing Equipment: A garden hose connected to a water supply, or other approved fire extinguishing equipment must be readily available
at the burning site.
7. Attendance: All burning material shall be constantly attended by a person who shall take responsibility of the burning.
8. Discontinuance Of Burning: The Fire Chief, or a designated representative, shall be authorized to order the burning ceased if smoke emissions are a
problem.
B. Exemptions: The following shall be permitted unless prohibited:
1. Disaster Rubbish: The open burning of rubbish, including landscape waste, for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an
officially declared emergency condition exists.
2. Trees And Trimmings:
a. The open burning of trees and trimmings not originated on the premises; provided, that the burning site is operated by the City, said burning site
being fenced and access controlled, burning is conducted on a regularly scheduled basis and is supervised at all times. Burning is conducted only
when weather conditions are favorable with respect to surrounding property, as announced by the Fire Chief and the burning site is limited to areas
at least one-fourth (1/4) mile from any inhabited building. However, when the open burning of trees and tree trimmings causes air pollution as
defined in Iowa Code section 455B.131(3), the City Fire Department or the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) may take appropriate
action to secure relocation of the burning operation. Rubber tires shall not be used to ignite trees and tree trimmings.
b. This exemption shall not apply within the area classified as the PM 10 (inhalable) Particulate Group II area of the City. This Group II area is
described as follows:
The area in Cerro Gordo County, Iowa, in Lincoln Township including Sections 13, 24, and 25; in Lime Creek Township including Sections 18, 19,
20, 21, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, and 35; in Mason Township the West one-half (W 1/2) of Section 1, Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, the North onehalf
(N 1/2) of Section 11, the Northwest one-quarter (NW 1/4) of Section 12, the North one-half (N 1/2) of Section 16, the North one-half (N 1/2) of
Section 17 and the portions of Sections 10 and 15 north and west of the line from U.S. Highway 122 south on Kentucky Avenue to 9th Street S.E.
to the section line between Sections 15 and 16.
3. Flare Stacks: The open burning or flaring of waste gases.
4. Recreational Fires: Open fires for cooking, heating, camping, and recreation using liquefied petroleum gas, natural gas, charcoal or clean untreated
wood in excess of one and five-eighths inches (15/8") minimum dimension (no building materials) as fuel are permitted, provided that they comply
with the adopted Fire Code.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 236/358
No recreational fires other than those for the purpose of cooking shall be permitted after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight or before twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon.
If smoke emissions from a recreational fire cause a problem, the fire shall be extinguished by order of the Fire Chief or his designee.
5. Ceremonial Fires: Fires for the purpose of celebration by schools, churches and other organizations may be permitted by the Fire Chief or his
designee.
6. Training Fires: Fires set for the purpose of bona fide training by Fire Department personnel in firefighting methods, provided that the Executive
Director of the IDNR receives notice in writing at least one (1) week before such action commences. All asphalt roofing and asbestos containing
materials shall be removed prior to the training fire.
7. Agricultural Burns: Prescribed burning of weeds and natural prairie may be permitted by the Fire Chief or his designee.
8. Agricultural Land Use: Existing farmsteads that have been annexed into Mason City and are still zoned agricultural shall be exempt from City
ordinances on open burning except that if in the event smoke emissions were to cause a problem, the fire shall be extinguished by order of the Fire
Chief or his designee.
C. Penalties: Penalties for violations of this section shall be as permitted in this Code; repeat violators shall be subject to revocation of their burning
permits. (Ord. 17-4, 6-6-2017)
10-2I-4: SPECIAL INSPECTIONS:
A. A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) will be charged to cover costs of inspections that are conducted outside of the regular fire inspector's route and that
require reports to other agencies as set out herein; but not limited to the following: State Fire Marshal, State Department of Health, Department of
Human Services, City Council, etc.
B. A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) will be charged for fire extinguisher classes conducted by the Fire Department.
C. Regular fire inspections shall be provided free of charge. Upon the first visit, the occupant will be given a courtesy letter explaining the benefits of said
inspection and will state that a reinspection will also be provided after a reasonable date at no cost. The third and any additional inspections required
will be twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 17-4, 6-6-2017)
ARTICLE J. EXISTING BUILDING CODE
10-2J-1: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the City, the most current edition of the International Existing Building Code adopted by the State
of Iowa Building Code Commissioner's Office reviewed and/or modified, from time to time, by the City Building Advisory and Appeals Board, and the City's
Chief Building Official, which by this reference is duly adopted as fully and completely as if set out in detail herein. An official copy of the International
Existing Building Code, as hereby adopted, including a certificate by the City Clerk as to its adoption and the effective date thereof, is now on file in the
Office of the City Clerk and at the City Public Library for public inspection. (Ord. 17-6, 6-6-2017)
10-2J-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
A. Appendix from the International Existing Building Code - delete (will use as a guide only).
B. Resource A Guidelines On Fire Ratings Of Archaic Materials And Assemblies, International Existing Building Code - delete (will use as a guide only).
(Ord. 17-6, 6-6-2017)
Title 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS of Mason City, referred to herein as the "regulations". (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-
2015)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to encourage orderly community development and provide for the regulation and control of the extension of public
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 237/358
improvements, public services, and utilities, the improvement of land, and the design of subdivisions, consistent with the City's approved Comprehensive
Plan and other specific community plans.
These regulations support Comprehensive Plan policies for the creation of new neighborhoods and the revitalization of existing neighborhoods that are
walkable, served by public utilities, and have good access to commercial services, schools, recreational amenities and open space. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-1-3: JURISDICTION:
These regulations apply to all subdivisions of land, as defined herein, located within the corporate limits of the City, or within two (2) miles of the corporate
limits of the City, pursuant to section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-1-4: APPLICABILITY; CONDITIONS:
A. Subdivision Required: No land shall be subdivided or lots conveyed within the corporate limits or the two (2) mile extraterritorial area of the City, with the
exception under section 11-1-5 of this chapter, until the following conditions are satisfied:
1. The subdivider or his/her agent shall submit a preliminary plat of the parcel to the Zoning Division in the Development Services Department.
2. The subdivider shall obtain a recommendation to approve, modify or disapprove the preliminary plat by the commission and approval of the
preliminary plat by the Council.
3. The final plat of the parcel is reviewed by the Administrative Officer and approved by the Council.
4. The approved final plat is filed with the County Recorder and County Auditor.
B. Building Permits: No building permit shall be issued for construction on any lot, parcel or tract where a subdivision, lot split or boundary line adjustment
is required by this title, unless and until a final plat, lot split or boundary line adjustment has been approved and recorded in accordance with this title.
C. Lot Splits: Lot splits, as defined, require prior approval of the Administrative Officer as specified in section 11-3-3 of this title.
D. Boundary Line Adjustments: Boundary line adjustments between adjoining parcels require prior approval of the Administrative Officer as specified in
section 11-3-2 of this title. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-1-5: CRITERIA FOR SUBDIVISIONS IN UNDEVELOPED AREAS:
A. Premature subdivisions are prohibited within the Z1 District. A rezoning to another district is required prior to, or concurrent with, any subdivision.
B. No subdivision in an undeveloped area shall be approved unless the following criteria are met:
1. The site is contiguous to an existing neighborhood or can be readily connected to an existing neighborhood or corridor by a collector street.
2. The site is able to be served by public utilities within a reasonable distance as determined by the City Engineer and Development Review Committee
(see title 12, chapter 7 of this Code).
3. A concept plan has been submitted, showing how the proposed subdivision will fit into a complete planned neighborhood of at least forty (40) acres
in size. The concept plan must be drawn to scale and demonstrate how the proposed subdivision's transportation and utility network will connect to
the broader area included in the concept plan to provide an interconnected development that uses land, transportation and public utility resources
efficiently and effectively. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-1-6: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS, TITLES AND PLANS:
In addition to the requirements of this title, all plats of land must comply with all other applicable City, County, State and Federal Statutes or regulations.
These regulations are expressly designed to supplement and be compatible with the City's zoning title, Comprehensive Plan and other City plans and
regulations. Plats may be disapproved on the basis of the above and other Council approved plans and policies that may be adopted. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-
2015)
11-1-7: WAIVER OR MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS:
A. Modification Of Requirements: Upon recommendation of the commission, the Council may vary, modify or waive the requirements of chapter 4, "Design
Standards And Required Improvements", of this title, provided one (1) of the following qualifying circumstances are met:
1. If the subdivider can demonstrate that strict compliance with the requirements of this title would result in extraordinary hardship because of
excessive costs due to non-self-inflicted conditions; and if the subdivider can demonstrate that strict compliance with the requirements of this title
would conflict with the objectives of these subdivision regulations and the Mason City Comprehensive Plan; or
2. If a subdivider can demonstrate that strict compliance with the requirements of this title would result in subdivision design that would compromise
public health or safety, or could result in the substantial degradation of natural features.
3. Notwithstanding the above, the Council may not approve a waiver that is in conflict with the requirements of title 12 of this Code, unless a variance
has been approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment as prescribed in title 12 of this Code.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 238/358
B. Criteria For Council Action: The Council may act to vary, modify or waive a requirement only if it finds that the public safety and interest is protected and
that such variance, modification or waiver will not hinder development of neighboring properties and that the variance, modification or waiver will not
nullify the intent or purposes of this title or of other titles of this Code. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-1-8: FEES:
The Council shall from time to time establish by resolution a schedule of reasonable fees, sufficient to recover incurred costs, to be charged for the review
of plats under these regulations. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-1-9: SELLING BEFORE APPROVAL; PENALTIES:
A. Final Subdivision Approval Required: Land which forms part of a subdivision requiring Council approval under these regulations shall not be sold before
Council grants final subdivision approval, except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval.
B. Land Division Approval Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer or sell any division which requires approval under this title without first
having obtained approval by the City. Each such attempt, agreement, transfer or sale shall be deemed a separate violation.
C. Preventive Actions: In addition to the foregoing, the City may institute injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent any
pending sale or transfer or to prevent any further sale or transfer in violation of this title.
D. Penalties: A violation of any provision of this title shall be considered a misdemeanor and punished accordingly. Each day that a violation occurs and/or
is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
11-2-1: INTERPRETATION:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the singular number
shall include the plural and the plural number includes the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive; the word "person" includes
a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual; the words "used" or "occupied" include the words
"intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied". (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: That person designated by the City Administrator as the officer responsible for the administration and enforcement of this
title.
ALLEY: A way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, railroad rights-of-way, rivers, tracts of public land or the boundary of the
subdivision.
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT: An adjustment of lot or parcel lines between owners of contiguous officially platted lots or parcels where no more than
the same number of lots or parcels, or fewer numbers of lots or parcels, exist after the adjustment. A boundary line adjustment also includes the removal
of internal or common boundary lines to consolidate two (2) or more lots or parcels having common ownership into one (1).
BUILDING PERMIT: A document issued under the authority of the City building official which authorizes the construction of a structure on a lot.
COMMISSION: The Mason City Planning and Zoning Commission.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The Mason City Comprehensive Plan, as adopted and as amended from time to time.
COUNCIL: The Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having one (1) end connecting to another street, and the other end terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
DEDICATION OF PLAT: A document, submitted for recording with the final plat, which sets out the legal description of the property platted, contains a
signed and properly acknowledged statement that the plat is made with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owner, dedicates street
and other public property and easements, and may include private restrictions or covenants.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE: The committee authorized to complete concept review of a plat of subdivision, per title 12, chapter 7 of this
Code.
EASEMENT: An authorization by a property owner for another to use a designated part of the property for a specified purpose.
FRONTAGE: That side of a lot abutting on a street and regarded as the front of the lot.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 239/358
IMPROVEMENTS: Changes to land necessary to prepare it for building sites, including, but not limited to, grading, filling, street paving, curb paving,
sidewalks, walkways, water mains, sewers, drainageways and other public works and appurtenances.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel or tract intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for
building development.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: Any lot which is not a corner lot which abuts two (2) streets.
LOT SPLIT: The division of a single parcel into two (2) lots, each sufficiently sized for development.
OWNER: The legal entity holding title to the property being subdivided, or such representative or agent as is fully empowered to act on its behalf.
PLAT: A map, drawing or chart on which a subdivider's plan for the subdivision of land is presented, which he submits for approval and intends, in final
form, to record.
PLAT OF SURVEY: The graphical representation of a survey of one (1) or more parcels of land, including a complete and accurate description of each
parcel within the plat, prepared by a registered land surveyor.
PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS OR COVENANTS: Contracts or agreements entered into between private parties and which constitute a restriction on the use
of all private property within a subdivision for the benefit of property owners, and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development
which would tend to impair stability of values.
PUBLIC WAY: A right-of-way across or within a block for use by the public.
STREET: Public or private property, not an alley, intended for vehicular circulation. In appropriate context, the term "street" may refer to the right-of-way
bounded by the property lines of such property or may refer to the paving installed within such right-of-way.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street primarily intended to carry traffic from one part of the City to another and not intended to provide access to abutting
property.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A low to moderate capacity street which serves to move traffic from minor streets to major or arterial streets.
STREET, MAJOR: A street which has or is planned to have continuity to carry traffic from one section of the City to another.
STREET, MINOR: A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting properties and the local needs of a neighborhood.
SUBDIVIDER: The owner of the property being subdivided, or such other person or entity empowered to act on the owner's behalf.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into three (3) or more parts for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building
development. The term, when appropriate to the context, may refer to the process of subdividing or to land subdivided. However, the sale or exchange of
small parcels of land to or between the owners of adjacent platted lots, where such sale or exchange does not create any additional lots, shall not be
considered a subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR: All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions, including any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the
local government facilities, or the creation of any public improvements.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: Any subdivision which contains not more than four (4) lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road, or
the extension of Municipal facilities or the creation of any public improvements, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining
property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Comprehensive Plan, zoning map, zoning title or these regulations.
SUBDIVISION PLAT: The graphical representation of a subdivision of land, prepared by a registered land surveyor, having a number or letter designation
for each lot within the plat and a succinct name or title that is unique for the County where the land is located.
SUBDIVISION, PREMATURE: Any subdivision that is not served by Municipal utilities and/or does not comprise all or a portion of an existing or planned
neighborhood, as specified in section 11-1-5 of this title.
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE: A document, signed, sealed and dated by a registered land surveyor, which contains the legal description of the property
and a statement by the registered land surveyor that the plat was prepared by the surveyor or under the surveyor's direct personal supervision.
UTILITIES: Systems for the distribution or collection of water, gas, wastewater, stormwater, electricity, digital communications and telephone and cable
television service. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
Chapter 3
PROCEDURES
11-3-1: SCOPE:
This chapter includes the processes and requirements for all land division applications within Mason City and the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction. (Ord.
15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-2: BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
The purpose of this section is to prescribe uniform procedures allowing for approval of minor changes to the boundaries of parcels between owners of
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 240/358
adjacent parcels of land or to remove one (1) or more common property lines and combine two (2) or more parcels into one (1). Such adjustments shall be
reviewed administratively, as follows:
A. Applications shall be submitted by the landowner on a form as established by the Administrative Officer and shall be accompanied by the following:
1. In the case of a boundary line adjustment between two (2) parcels with structural improvements, a boundary survey including all the information
required by chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa. In the case of a boundary line adjustment consolidating two (2) or more parcels or lots, or a boundary
line adjustment between two (2) unimproved parcels or lots, a site plan drawn to scale showing the boundaries and dimensions of the two (2)
parcels.
2. Legal descriptions of the new parcels resulting from the boundary line adjustment.
3. The location of all buildings, utility easements and access (proposed or existing) for all parcels involved including adjoining property.
4. A draft copy of the deed to be recorded with the boundary survey showing the appropriate conveyance to complete the boundary line adjustment.
B. The parcel being conveyed shall be combined with the existing adjoining parcel onto one (1) deed and recorded with the boundary surveyor site plan.
C. The Administrative Officer shall approve or deny the application based upon the boundary survey and other relevant information upon determination
that all resulting parcels meet the requirements of the zoning title and that all resulting parcels have access to an adjoining public roadway by actual
road frontage or easement.
D. If the Administrative Officer finds that the proposed boundary line adjustment does not comply with all requirements in this section, the boundary line
adjustment shall be denied. Such denial shall be issued in writing and shall state how the proposed boundary line adjustment does not conform to all
adopted codes and standards. Decisions of denial may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to title 12, chapter 5 of this Code.
(Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-3: LOT SPLIT REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
The purpose of this section is to prescribe a process for the division of parcels into two (2) lots, known as lot splits, when a formal subdivision is not
required. Such divisions shall be reviewed administratively, as follows:
A. Applications shall be submitted by the owner on a form as established by the Administrative Officer and shall be accompanied by the following:
1. In the case of a lot split of a parcel or lot with structural improvements, a boundary survey including all the information required by chapter 354 of the
Code of Iowa.
2. Legal descriptions of the new parcels resulting from the lot split.
3. The location of all buildings, utility easements and access (proposed or existing) for all parcels involved, including adjoining property.
4. A draft copy of the deed to be recorded with the boundary surveyor site plan, showing the appropriate conveyance to complete the lot split.
B. The Administrative Officer shall approve or deny the lot split based upon the boundary survey or site plan and other relevant information. No lot split
shall be approved unless it meets the following criteria:
1. The resulting parcels meet the minimum lot size required for the zoning district in which they are located.
2. Structures on the resulting lots will meet the required setbacks and other bulk standards for the zoning districts in which they are located.
3. Both parcels have access to an adjoining public roadway by actual road frontage or easement.
4. Neither this process nor any former lot split process has previously been used to sever a lot from the parent tract.
C. If the Administrative Officer finds that the proposed lot split does not comply with all requirements defined in this section, the lot split shall be denied.
Such denial shall be issued in writing and shall state how the proposed boundary line adjustment does not conform to all adopted codes and standards.
Decisions of denial may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to title 12, chapter 5 of this Code. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-4: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
In order to convey critical information regarding the subdivision process, a preapplication conference is encouraged, but not required, prior to the
submission of an application for a plat of subdivision. The conference shall include the Administrative Officer, City Engineer, other appropriate City staff,
and utility company representatives where advisable. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to:
A. Acquaint the applicant with the subdivision regulations and related requirements of the City;
B. List the requirements that the applicant must comply with prior to the submission of the preliminary plat;
C. Establish the applicable street widths for the subdivision under the provisions of section 11-4-4 of this title;
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 241/358
D. Describe the standard engineering specifications adopted by the City;
E. Determine whether the applicant wishes to request waivers of any subdivision regulations as established in section 11-1-7 of this title. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-
2015)
11-3-5: CONCEPT PLAN:
The applicant shall submit a concept plan for review by the Development Review Committee, prior to the submittal of any plat. The concept plan is
intended to reflect the general intentions of the applicant with regard to layout of lots, streets and utilities, and to provide a basis for discussion and revision
before substantial engineering costs are incurred. Developers are discouraged from preparing plat documents until the concept plan has been reviewed by
the Development Review Committee. The concept plan shall include the following information:
A. The proposed layout of streets and utilities, emphasizing connections to adjacent neighborhoods and corridors;
B. Approximate location of lots, location of stormwater facilities, and open space;
C. Generalized land uses proposed, such as residential, commercial or mixed use;
D. General topography, based on existing topographic maps or other resources (a survey is not required for the concept plan);
E. Approximate locations of any buildings or structures located on the property;
F. Surrounding land uses and approximate location of buildings on abutting properties;
G. Sensitive features of the property, including streams, wooded areas, known or potential wetlands, known archaeological sites, etc.;
H. For proposed subdivisions in areas not previously developed, the concept plan shall be accompanied by a conceptual build out showing how the
proposed subdivision will fit into a complete planned neighborhood of at least forty (40) acres in area, per section 11-1-5 of this title. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-
2015)
11-3-6: CONCEPT PLAN REVIEW:
Upon receipt of a concept plan, the Administrative Officer and the Development Review Committee shall meet with the developer to review the concept
plan in the context of the standards of this chapter, other City Code requirements and Comprehensive Plan policies. The Administrative Officer will
determine if the proposed subdivision is a major or minor subdivision and shall schedule review of the concept plan by the Development Review
Committee, which review shall occur within twenty (20) days of receipt of the concept plan. Comments of the Development Review Committee are
intended to provide guidance to the applicant in preparing the preliminary plat and do not constitute an official decision on the application. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-
2015)
11-3-7: APPLICABILITY OF PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
Preliminary and final plat requirements are applicable to all major subdivisions. The owner and developer of a minor subdivision, as defined, may choose
to omit the preliminary plat submission and approval process. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-8: PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
Following the concept plan review, any subdivider requesting preliminary plat approval shall file the following information with the Administrative Officer
prior to the deadline established by the commission:
A. Application form and filing fee, as established by a resolution of the Council.
B. One (1) original and two (2) copies of the preliminary plat drawn at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger, on a sheet size not
exceeding twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"). The preliminary plat shall be clearly marked "Preliminary Plat" and shall show the
following:
1. Subdivision name, scale, north point and date.
2. The name and address of the property owner and the name and address of the person or firm preparing the plat.
3. A key map showing the general location of the subdivision in relation to surrounding streets and development.
4. All adjacent streets and subdivisions and names of the owners of record of all adjacent unplatted properties.
5. Legal description of the property included in the proposed subdivision.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 242/358
6. Approximate total area of the proposed subdivision.
7. Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision and adjoining property.
8. Existing and proposed topography of the site showing contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet (2') if the slope of the site is less than
ten percent (10%), and at vertical intervals of not more than five feet (5') if the slope is ten percent (10%) or greater.
9. The general location and areas of any existing watercourses, wetlands, floodplains, trees, wooded areas, prairie resources or other environmentally
sensitive areas on or within two hundred feet (200') of any portion of the proposed subdivision. If any portion of the area within the proposed
preliminary plat lies within the City's regulatory floodplain, the boundaries of the floodplain and location and elevation of established cross sections
shall be placed on the preliminary plat or on an addendum.
10. Locations of existing easements including, but not limited to, utility easements, drainage easements and access easements, lot lines, streets, public
utilities, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, drainpipes, culverts, stormwater detention facilities and any other public improvements on the
property.
11. Layout of proposed blocks and lots, including the dimensions of each, and the lot and block number in numerical order.
12. The location, width, grades, dimensions and proposed names of all proposed streets (public and private) and utility and other easements.
13. Proposal for drainage of the land, including proposed storm sewers, ditches, swales, bio swales, rain gardens, culverts, bridges, stormwater
management facilities and other structures.
14. Proposed utilities, including sanitary sewers, water lines, fire hydrants, gas mains, electric utilities, streetlights and other facilities.
15. Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools, parks, playgrounds or public or semipublic purposes.
16. Proposed easements, showing locations, dimensions, purposes and limitations.
17. A summary description of any covenants or private restrictions to be incorporated in the final plat.
18. Any other pertinent information.
19. The City approval block consisting of the signature of the Administrative Officer and the date and resolution number approving the preliminary plat,
shall be located on the first page of the plat.
C. One (1) eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") black line copy of the preliminary plat as outlined in subsection B of this section.
D. One (1) digital copy of the preliminary plat containing the elements as outlined in subsection B of this section in a format compatible with the City's
geographic information system or other format acceptable to the City.
E. One (1) digital copy of the preliminary plat containing the elements as outlined in subsection B of this section in a format as specified by the
Administrative Officer.
F. One (1) digital copy of the legal description of the subdivision in a format specified by the Administrative Officer. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-9: PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW PROCEDURE:
A. Upon receipt of a complete preliminary plat application, the Administrative Officer shall distribute copies of the preliminary plat to the City Engineer and
other affected City departments and public utility companies for review, and shall schedule the plat for review by the commission. All City departments
tasked with review of the plat shall report their findings as to the plat's compliance with City standards to the commission prior to its consideration of the
plat. The Administrative Officer shall also provide notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing before the commission regarding the
preliminary plat application. The notice shall be published in the City's newspaper of record and be made by U.S. mail at least ten (10) calendar days
prior to the hearing to the owners of record of all properties within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the area included in the preliminary plat.
B. The commission shall review the plat, together with all staff reports, to determine whether the plat conforms to the ordinances and Comprehensive Plan
of the City. The commission shall, within forty five (45) days following receipt of the completed application, conduct a public hearing on the proposed
preliminary plat unless such time period shall be extended by agreement between the subdivider and the City. After due consideration of the plat, the
commission shall make a recommendation to the Council. The commission may recommend to approve, to approve subject to modifications or to deny
the preliminary plat. If such recommendation is to approve subject to modifications or to deny the preliminary plat, the reasons for the decision shall be
stated in the recommendation. Any preliminary plat that is not reviewed by the commission within forty five (45) days following receipt of the application
shall be forwarded to the Council without the commission's recommendation.
C. The Council shall review the recommendation of the commission and shall review the plat to determine whether the plat conforms to the ordinances and
the Comprehensive Plan of the City. Following such review, the Council may approve, approve subject to modifications, or deny the preliminary plat.
The Council shall set forth in its official records its reasons for denying the plat or approving the plat subject to modifications. The Council shall take
action on the plat within forty five (45) days following action by the commission, unless such time period shall be extended by agreement between the
subdivider and the City. If the Council shall fail to take action on the plat within said forty five (45) days, the plat shall be deemed approved.
D. The Administrative Officer shall notify the developer and City Engineer of the Council's decision. If the preliminary plat is approved, the Administrative
Officer shall provide a copy of the approved preliminary plat and the resolution approving the preliminary plat to the City Engineer and developer. (Ord.
15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-10: DURATION AND EFFECT OF APPROVAL:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 243/358
The approval of the preliminary plat by the Council shall be effective for one (1) year unless, upon written request of the owner and subdivider, the Council
grants an extension of time. Such extension request must be received no fewer than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the approval. The request
should include the status of the subdivision's improvements, a comprehensive list of improvements to be completed during the extension, the estimated
dollar cost of the remaining improvements, and justification for the extension. If the final plat is not filed within one (1) year and no extension is granted by
the Council, all previous actions of the Council with respect to the plat shall be deemed null and void. Approval of the preliminary plat shall confer upon the
applicant the following assurances during the period of approval effectiveness:
A. The general terms and conditions under which the preliminary plat was approved will not be changed.
B. The subdivider may submit, on or before the expiration date of such approval, the final plat of all or part of the property contained in the preliminary plat
for approval.
C. The approval of the preliminary plat by the Council shall constitute authorization for the installation of improvements as required by this title, and as
shown on the preliminary plat; provided, no such improvement shall be constructed or installed until and unless complete plans and specifications for
the construction of such improvements have been approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-11: FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
Any subdivider requesting final plat approval shall file the following information with the Administrative Officer prior to the deadline as established by the
commission:
A. Application form and filing fee, as established by a resolution of the Council.
B. A copy of the deed, certificate of title, land contract or any other recorded legal documentation showing verification of ownership of said parcel being
subdivided.
C. A surveyor's certificate (original and 1 copy).
D. A dedication of plat (original and 1 copy).
E. A statement of restrictions of all types that run with the land and become covenants in the deeds of the lots.
F. Evidence that all required improvements have been completed in accordance with the construction plans as approved and in substantial compliance
with the approved preliminary plat. In lieu of completion of improvements prior to final plat approval, the subdivider shall post a performance bond,
escrow or any other evidence of financial responsibility acceptable to the City, guaranteeing that improvements not completed shall be completed
within a period of one (1) year from the date of approval of such final plat. If the improvements are not completed within the specified time, the Council
may use the bond, escrow or other approved financial instrument or any necessary portion thereof to complete the same.
G. A street tree planting plan approvable by the City and bearing a signature block for the City Forester.
H. One (1) signed original and two (2) black line copies of the final subdivision plat drawn at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or
larger, on a sheet fifteen inches by eighteen inches (15" x 18") in size. The final plat shall be clearly marked "Final Plat" and shall show the following:
1. Subdivision name, scale, north arrow and date.
2. The name and address of the property owner and the name and address of the person or firm preparing the plat.
3. All adjacent streets and subdivisions.
4. The legal description of the property included in the subdivision.
5. All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating boundaries of the subdivided area, the lots, streets, alleys, easements and any other
similar public or private uses.
6. All monuments to be of record.
7. All distance, bearing, curve and other survey data as required by chapter 355, Code of Iowa.
8. The location, width, dimensions and names of all public streets to be dedicated for public use and private streets provided for by perpetual
easement.
9. Block and lot numbers.
10. The location and purpose of any easement and/or private restriction shown on the plat.
11. In the case of a minor subdivision where no preliminary plat was required or approved, a grading plan showing areas of excavation and stockpiling,
soil erosion control methods which will be practiced, and quantities involved in the soil erosion control methods.
12. If any portion of the area within the proposed final plat lies within the City's regulatory floodplain, the boundaries of the floodplain and location and
elevation of established cross sections shall be placed on the final plat or on an addendum.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 244/358
13. If more than one (1) sheet is used, each sheet shall clearly show the number of the sheet, the total number of the sheets included in the plat, and
match lines indicating where other sheets adjoin.
14. The required City signature block executed by the Mayor, and the date and resolution number approving the final plat shall be 5.4" x 1.5" or
2.2" x 3.7" in size, located in the lower right hand corner of the first page of the plat. A signature block for the Mayor shall be located on all
subsequent pages. Any exceptions must be approved by the Administrative Officer.
I. One (1) eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") black line copy of the final plat as outlined in subsection H of this section.
J. One (1) digital copy of the final plat containing the elements as outlined in subsection 11-3-8B of this chapter in a format compatible with the City's
geographic information system or other format acceptable to the City.
K. One (1) digital copy of the final plat containing the elements as outlined in subsection 11-3-8B of this chapter in a format as specified by the
Administrative Officer.
L. One (1) digital copy of the legal description of the subdivision in a format specified by the Administrative Officer.
M. One (1) archival copy of the plat meeting the specifications outlined in subsection 11-3-8B of this chapter in a format and on media acceptable to the
City Engineer. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-12: FINAL PLAT REVIEW PROCEDURES:
A. Upon receipt of a complete final plat application, the Administrative Officer shall distribute copies of the final plat to the City Engineer and other affected
City departments and public utility companies for review, and shall schedule the plat for review by the Council. All City departments tasked with review
of the plat shall report their findings as to the plat's compliance with City standards to the Council prior to its consideration of the plat.
B. The Council shall review the final plat and all staff reports to determine whether said plat is in substantial conformity to the approved preliminary plat
and whether said plat conforms to the ordinances and the Comprehensive Plan of the City. If the plat is found to be in substantial conformity to the
approved preliminary plat and conforms to the ordinances and Comprehensive Plan of the City, the Council shall approve the plat by resolution. The
Council shall take action on the plat within sixty (60) days following the filing of the completed application with the Administrative Officer, unless such
time period is extended by agreement between the subdivider and the City. If the Council does not take action within sixty (60) days, the final plat shall
be deemed approved. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-13: INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The Council may require that all public improvements described on the approved preliminary plat for a major subdivision be installed and dedicated prior to
approval of the final plat. If the Council does not require such installation, the Council shall require the subdivider to post a performance bond, escrow or
other evidence of financial responsibility equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the installation of the improvements, in a form acceptable to
the City, guaranteeing that improvements not completed shall be completed within a period of one (1) year from the date of approval of such final plat. If
the improvements are not completed within the specified time, the Council may use the bond, escrow or other approved financial instrument or any
necessary portion thereof to complete the same. The City shall return or release the instrument of financial responsibility when all of the required
improvements have been installed and approved and accepted by the City Engineer. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
Chapter 4
DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
11-4-1: SCOPE:
A. The standards contained in this title shall be considered the minimum standards necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. Design of subdivisions shall comply with the standards of this title, demonstrate consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, and take into consideration
the natural features of the site and patterns of adjacent development.
C. The subdivider of property shall be responsible for constructing all public improvements associated with the proposed subdivision according to this
Code, unless exempted from such requirements. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-4-2: BLOCKS:
A. Blocks should be limited in size and be laid out in a pattern that ensures the connectivity of streets, provides for efficient provision of public and safety
services, and establishes efficient and logical routes between residences and nonresidential destinations and public gathering places.
B. To provide multiple travel routes within and between neighborhoods, block faces along local and collector streets should range between three hundred
feet (300') and six hundred feet (600') in length. Longer block faces may be allowed in cases of large lot commercial, industrial, or rural residential
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 245/358
development, or where topography, water features, or existing development prevents shorter block lengths, although midblock pedestrian connections
may be required. Block faces are measured from centerline to centerline.
C. Block faces in residential subdivisions should have a width sufficient to accommodate two (2) tiers of lots. One (1) tier of lots may be permitted for
blocks adjacent to arterial streets, railroads or waterways.
D. Block faces should be at least six hundred feet (600') in length along arterial streets to limit the number of intersections and maintain the capacity of the
street. The City may approve shorter block faces in high density commercial areas or other areas with high pedestrian counts. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-4-3: LOTS:
A. The size and shape of all lots shall comply with all requirements of the zoning title. Lots must be of sufficient size to accommodate an adequate
buildable area and area for required setbacks, off street parking and service facilities required by the type of use and development anticipated.
B. Lots with multiple street frontages must be large enough to accommodate appropriate setbacks and adequate vehicular sight clearance on all street
frontages.
C. All lots shall abut a public street or upon an approved private street. Each lot shall contain at least the minimum frontage required by the zoning district
in which the property is located, or if no minimum lot width is required, at least fifty feet (50') in width.
D. Lots fronting on or having direct access to arterial streets shall be avoided. Where unavoidable, lots shall be so arranged as to minimize the number of
access points.
E. Double frontage lots may be permitted only where lots abut an arterial street or major street and a minor street, and provided that such lots shall front
only on a minor street.
F. All side lot lines shall be at approximate right angles to straight street lines or approximately radial to curved street lines, except where a variation will
provide a better street and lot layout. For the purpose of this subsection, "approximate right angles" means angles between eighty degrees (80°) and
one hundred degrees (100°).
G. At least fifty percent (50%) of blocks shall be oriented having one (1) axis no greater than fifteen degrees (15°) of geographical east/west. The
east/west lengths of said blocks shall be longer than the north/south lengths of those blocks. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-4-4: STREETS AND CIRCULATION:
A. Connectivity Of Streets, Sidewalks, And Trails: Subdivisions shall provide for continuation and extension of arterial, collector and local streets,
sidewalks and trails in order to ensure connectivity between neighborhoods, multiple travel routes resulting in the diffusion and distribution of traffic,
efficient routes for public and emergency services, and to provide direct and continuous vehicular and pedestrian travel routes to neighborhood
destinations. Streets shall be located in accordance with the following standards:
1. Arterial and collector streets and trails must be located and extended in general accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and the City's master
trails plan.
2. All streets, sidewalks, and trails should connect to other streets, sidewalks, and trails within the development, and to the property line to provide for
their extension to adjacent properties wherever possible and practical.
3. The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient, and orderly movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; to meet the needs of the
present and future population served; to have a simple and logical pattern and allow that pattern to continue through adjacent properties; and to
respect natural features and topography.
4. Use of cul-de-sacs and other roadways with a single point of access is discouraged. Cul-de-sacs should be utilized to avoid disturbance to
environmentally sensitive areas, respond to access limitations along adjacent principal arterial streets, or where other unusual features prevent the
extension of the street to the property line or the interconnection to other streets within or abutting the subdivision.
B. Street Design Standards:
1. Relation To Existing Streets And Natural Features: Any collector or arterial street shall continue the alignment and width of any such street on any
abutting area when continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, and efficient provision of utilities.
2. Alignment: Streets shall align with existing streets. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') are prohibited
except where topographic or other physical conditions justify a variation from the standard.
3. Local And Minor Collector Streets: Local and minor streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic from outside the immediate neighborhood
while safely connecting to major collector or arterial streets.
4. Half Streets: No half streets shall be permitted. Streets designed to create a border for the tract shall be platted as whole streets according to their
use and classification.
5. Dead End Streets: Dead end streets are prohibited except where a street is planned to continue past the subdivider's property. A dead end street
shall not exceed six hundred feet (600') in length and shall terminate in a temporary circular right-of-way with a minimum radius of forty feet (40').
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 246/358
6. Relation To Floodplains: All new streets and roads, public and private, serving subdivisions intended for residential development shall be designed at
an elevation of one foot (1') above the 100-year flood elevation, except that the Council may waive this requirement in cases where topographic or
special conditions exist.
7. Street Types: Table 1, "Standards For Street Design", of this section provides a summary of various street types. The information in this table is
intended to provide guidance for the design of the street network within a subdivision. The standards may be varied based on the recommendations
of the City Engineer. When designing a subdivision, street types should be chosen based on the intended function of the street and anticipated level
of traffic.
TABLE 1
STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
Type AADT Est.
Units Served
ROW
Pavement
Width From
Back Of Curb
Sidewalks
Conditions/Comments
Principal arterial 10,000 - 20,000
n/a 80' - 100'
49' Both sides
Add width for parking lanes, bike
lanes
Minor arterial 5,000 - 13,000 n/a 80' 45' Both sides
Add width for parking lanes, bike
lanes
Major collector 3,500 - 8,000 n/a 66' 31' Both sides
Add width for parking lanes, bike
lanes
Minor collector 1,500 - 3,500 n/a 66' 31' Both sides
Add width for parking lanes, bike
lanes
Local nonresidential
street
0 - 1,500 n/a 66' 31' Both sides
Accommodates parking both sides
Local residential street 0 - 1,500 n/a 60' 27' - 31' Both sides
Parking on both sides = 31'
Parking 1 side = 27'
Loop or eyebrow street 150 - 350 30 max. 50' 25' - 27' 1 side Parking 1 side
Cul-de-sac 120 - 150 20 max. 60' 27', 45'R turnaround
1 side Accommodates parking both sides
Maximum length: 600'
Commercial alley n/a n/a 20' n/a No parking
Residential alley n/a n/a 16' - 20' n/a No parking
8. Dedication: All platted streets within the City shall be dedicated to the City for public use, except as approved by the Council. Requests for private
streets will be considered; provided, that connectivity to adjacent properties is not needed and the responsibilities for maintenance, snow removal,
garbage service, and street sweeping are clearly established.
9. Maintenance And Services: If private streets are approved, the subdivider must submit a legally binding instrument setting forth the procedures to be
followed for maintaining private streets and providing garbage service, snow removal, street sweeping, and for financing these services. Such costs
shall be shared by all owners of property located within the subdivision, or designated portion thereof, through the use of an owners' association or
other entity satisfactory to the City. Said instrument shall provide that if said services are not provided as required therein, the City shall have the
right to perform said services, and the cost thereof shall be a lien and charge against all of the owners of lots so designated in the subdivision.
10. Street Names: Streets which are or will become extensions of existing streets shall be given the same name as existing streets. New street names
shall not duplicate or sound similar to existing street names. All street names shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
C. Improvements Required: The subdivider shall grade and improve the entire street or alley right-of-way and provide suitable paving, including curb and
gutter on all streets. All streets and alleys shall be of such width and shall be so designed and constructed as to meet the standards of the City, and
shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
1. Sidewalks shall be installed adjacent to all lots within the platted area and between such lots and all entrances to the subdivision. Sidewalks adjacent
to or within outlots reserved for future right-of-way shall be installed prior to the time the outlot is dedicated as a street. Any owner of a developed lot
who purchases all or part of an adjacent undeveloped lot shall install sidewalks on the undeveloped lot within ninety (90) days of purchase.
2. The City may require, as a condition for approval of the plat, dedication and improvement of a multipurpose trail in lieu of a sidewalk in order to meet
the needs of the platted area and other areas. In such event, the City shall pay the subdivider the difference in cost between constructing the
sidewalk and constructing the trail. The trail, upon final approval and acceptance by the City, shall become the property of the City.
3. The City may require, as a condition for approval of the plat, dedication and improvement of a street having a width greater than necessary to meet
the needs of the platted area, but necessary to meet street requirements of both the platted area and other areas. In such event, the City shall pay
the subdivider the difference in cost of improving the wider street and the street of a width adequate to meet the needs of the platted area alone. The
streets, upon final approval and acceptance by the City, shall become the property of the City. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
Title 12
ZONING REGULATIONS
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 247/358
Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION
12-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the MASON CITY ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this title to regulate the forms and functions of all structures, lands, and waters, to regulate lot coverage, population distribution and
density, and the size and location of all structures in accordance with the Mason City Comprehensive Plan. Furthermore, this title is set forth to protect the
health, safety and general welfare of Mason City as required by the Federal Standard State Enabling Act of 1926. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-3: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
Whenever the requirements of this title are in any way in conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed
restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive, or that imposing the highest standards, shall govern. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-4: RELATION TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
It is the policy of Mason City that the enforcement, amendment and administration of this title be accomplished with due consideration of the
recommendations contained in the Mason City Comprehensive Plan as developed and amended from time to time by recommendation of the Planning
and Zoning Commission and approval by the City Council. The City Council recognizes the Mason City Comprehensive Plan as the policy to regulate land
use and development in accordance with the policies and purpose set forth herein. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-5: STANDARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Except as herein provided, no structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no structure or land shall be used, for any
purpose or in any manner that is not in conformity with this title.
B. Except as herein provided, no structure or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building permit shall be granted that does not conform
to the requirements of this title. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
C. No yard or lot existing in the time of passage of this title shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards
or lots created after the effective date hereof shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this title.
D. This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, restrictions, covenants, relating to the form and function of land or imposed on lands within the City
by private declaration or agreement, but where the provisions of this title are more restrictive than any such easement, restriction, or covenant, or the
provision of any private agreement, the provisions of this title shall prevail. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-6: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS NOT PROVIDED FOR WITHIN ZONING DISTRICTS:
Whenever, in any zoning district, a form or function is neither specifically permitted nor denied within section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title, the form or function
shall be considered prohibited. In such cases, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council, on their own initiative or upon request, may
conduct a study to determine if the form or function is acceptable and if so, what zoning district would be most appropriate and the determination as to
conditions and standards relating to development of the form or function. The Planning and Zoning Commission, City Council or property owner, upon
receipt of the staff study shall, if appropriate, initiate an amendment to the zoning regulations to provide for the particular form or function under
consideration or shall find that the form or function is not compatible for development within the City. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-1-7: ZONING MAP:
A. The boundaries of the zoning districts are indicated upon the official zoning map of Mason City, which is made a part of this title by reference hereto.
The official zoning map and all the notations, references and other matters shown thereon is hereby declared to be a part of this title, and amendments
to the map shall be in accordance with the process and requirements of chapter 4 of this title. The official zoning map shall be on file in the Office of the
City Clerk and shall bear the signature of the Mayor attested to by the City Clerk.
B. If, in accordance with the provisions of this title, changes are made in zoning district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the official zoning map,
the ordinance number and date of said change shall be recorded on the official zoning map.
C. Zoning district boundaries shall generally follow parcel lines, lot lines, street right-of-way centerlines, railroad right-of-way centerlines, the center of
streams, City limits, and other preexisting elements, when practical.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 248/358
D. The Administrative Official shall have the power to interpret the location of zoning district boundaries where the location of such lines is not clearly
discernible from the official zoning map. Upon making such a determination, the official zoning map shall be corrected so that the boundaries in
question are clearly discernible.
E. In the case of a lot of record under one (1) ownership that is divided by a zoning district boundary, each portion of the lot shall be governed by the
zoning district applied thereto. Alternatively, the entire parcel may be used as permitted by the regulations applicable to the most restrictive
classification. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-1-8: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
All previously enacted zoning ordinances are hereby repealed. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-9: SEVERABILITY:
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, clause, word or provision of this title be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the title as a whole or any other part thereof other than the part so declared as to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-10: AMENDMENT:
This zoning ordinance of Mason City may be amended by the City Council in the manner provided by statute or as provided herein. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-
2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-11: VIOLATIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful to locate, erect, move, construct, reconstruct, extend, enlarge, convert or otherwise alter any structure, land or waterway in violation
of any of the provisions of this title. A violation of this title shall be a Municipal civil infraction and subject to penalty according to title 1, chapter 4, article
A of this Code.
B. In case of any violation, the City Council, the Administrative Officer, the board, the commission or any property owner who would specifically be
damaged by such violation may institute legally permitted and appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin a violation of this title. (2017 Code)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
12-2-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. The most recent print or online edition of the "Merriam Webster Dictionary" is the recognized reference for words and terms not defined herein.
B. The language set forth in the text of this title shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
1. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
2. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the present.
3. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
4. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
5. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
6. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this title, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in such definition.
7. All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot (0.01').
8. Whenever a calculation is made based upon the provisions herein, if a fraction of a number results, the more restrictive rounding to a whole number
shall apply.
9. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied".
10. The word "use" can be interchanged with the word "function" throughout this title. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-2-2: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS:
ABANDONMENT: The cessation of a function for a period of six (6) months or more. There is a rebuttable presumption that an owner has intended to
abandon a nonconforming use of land or structures where there has been no active use for six (6) months or more.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 249/358
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A subordinate building or structure located on the same lot with an existing principal building which is
incidental and subordinate to the principal building. (See also definition of principal building.)
ACCESSORY DWELLING: Living quarters within an accessory building.
ACCESSORY FUNCTION: A function that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal function on the same lot or parcel.
ACCESSORY SURFACE PARKING: A surface parking lot on a parcel that is adjacent to or nearby, but separate from, the parcel containing the form or
function served by the parking lot.
ACTIVE SOLAR EQUIPMENT: Ground or building mounted solar cell panels and their associated hardware and equipment required to generate and store
electricity or heat water, primarily for use on site.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: The person or official designated by the Director of Development Services as the officer responsible for the administration or
enforcement of this title.
ADULT USE: An establishment consisting of, including, or having the characteristics of any or all of the following: adult bookstore, sex shop, video viewing
booths, adult motion picture theater, adult cabaret. Refer to title 13 of this Code for additional information.
AGRIBUSINESS: An establishment primarily engaged in supplying agricultural services, crop services, farm labor and management services.
AGRITOURISM: Agricultural operations that include activities that may not be directly related to the principal agricultural use. Such activities need not be
subordinate to the agricultural operations in terms of revenue, but shall be subordinate in terms of overall land use. Activities must fall within one or more
of the following categories: on-site processing, storage, sampling and tasting of crops or farm products not principally produced on the farm; retail sales of
crops or farm products not principally produced on the farm; retail sales of non-farm products related to the farm or what is produced on the farm;
education, cultural recreation programming; event hosting as long as such events are clearly subordinate to the farming operation.
ALLEY: A service roadway providing a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
ARTISAN/CRAFTSMAN SHOP: A small scale building or operation involving the on site production of goods primarily by hand or custom manufacturing
using hand tools or mechanical equipment commonly associated with residential or commercial uses.
AUDITORIUM: A building that consists of a theater, lecture hall or concert hall where an audience sits.
BED AND BREAKFAST: Overnight accommodations, typically located within a residential form, offering no more than six (6) sleeping rooms that usually
(but not always) offer a morning meal and operated by the property owner or on site resident manager. This definition shall include accommodations held
out to the general public arranged between owners and guests via a third party using a means of remote communication and transaction (e.g., via the
internet or smart phone application).
BERM: A mound of earth or the act of pushing earth into a mound.
BLOCK: A unit of land bounded by a street or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways or any other lines of
demarcation.
BOARD: The Zoning Board of Adjustment, an officially constituted body established in title 2, chapter 3 of this Code, whose principal duties are to hear
appeals and, where appropriate, grant variances from the strict application of a zoning ordinance and authorize conditional and special uses.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 250/358
BOX, LARGE: A freestanding building with a commercial function with a floor area of thirty five thousand (35,000) square feet or greater.
BOX, MEDIUM: A freestanding building with a commercial function with a floor area between five thousand one (5,001) and thirty four thousand nine
hundred ninety nine (34,999) square feet.
BOX, SMALL: A freestanding building with a commercial function with a floor area not exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet.
BROWNFIELD: An area documented as contaminated (by means of an ASTM E1903-97 Phase II Environmental Assessment or a Local Voluntary
Cleanup Program) or defined as a brownfield by the City of Mason City, the State of Iowa or a Federal government agency.
BUILDING: A structure enclosed within interior walls and having a roof, built, erected and framed of a combination of materials for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land.
BUILDING DISPOSITION: The location of the building relative to the boundaries of each individual lot, establishing suitable basic building types for each
zoning district.
BUILDING HEIGHT: Shall be measured, based upon the requirements of each zoning district, in the number of stories, excluding attics and basements, or
in feet, measured from the average surrounding grade at the foundation to the deck line of a flat roof or to the highest point of any other type of roof.
CALIPER: The measurement of the diameter of a tree trunk at average adult chest height.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of human or animal remains and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories,
mausoleums and mortuaries, if operated in connection with and within the boundaries of such cemetery for which perpetual care and maintenance is
provided.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of Mason City, Iowa.
CIVIC: Buildings and facilities for government and other not for profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, recreation, health care, or for a
function approved by a government agency.
CIVIC SUPPORT: Buildings and facilities in support of the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
CLINIC: A building or portion thereof, the principal use of which is for medical or dental study and/or treatment, and in which the services of professionals
in the medical, veterinary or dental fields of practice are provided.
COLLEGE: An educational institution accredited by the State of Iowa or by the agency with jurisdiction to grant college accreditation, to award associate,
bachelor or higher degrees.
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission.
COMMITTEE: The Mason City Development Review Committee.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS DEFINITIONS:
Antenna: A structure or device, which is part of a wireless telecommunications facility, used for collecting or transmitting electromagnetic waves,
including, but not limited to, directional antennas such as panels and dishes, and omnidirectional antennas such as whip antennas, and similar
devices.
Collocation: The mounting or installation of wireless transmission equipment on a tower or other eligible support structure that is designed to
accommodate equipment from more than one (1) wireless telecommunications provider.
Existing Support Structure: A structure, other than a tower as defined in this chapter, that supports one (1) or more antennas for wireless
telecommunications. Examples include (but are not limited to) water towers, existing buildings, church steeples, smokestacks or cooling towers, and
utility structures and poles.
Tower: As applied to wireless telecommunications facilities, any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof built for the
sole or primary purpose of mounting an antenna, transmitter, or similar apparatus above grade for wireless telecommunications.
Wireless Telecommunication Services: Wireless telecommunication services, including those licensed or authorized by the Federal Communications
Commission, such as transmission and reception of analog, digital, microwave and broadband signals and similar services.
COMMUNITY GARDEN: An area of land designated for small plot gardening or local food production.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A document or series of documents adopted by the City Council of Mason City, Iowa, setting forth policies for the future of the
City.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 251/358
Comprehensive Plan Document
CONCEPT PLAN: A layout of a proposed subdivision, a site or development plan, or other development scheme of sufficient accuracy and detail to be
used for the purpose of discussion and classification.
CONTRACTOR SHOPS: A small scale building for the purpose of conducting building and grounds construction, maintenance and repair related services,
typically containing areas for office, material, equipment and vehicle storage.
CONVENTION CENTER: An exhibition hall or conference center that is designed to hold large public gatherings, public or private meetings or to display
exhibits.
CORNER OFFICE: A mixed use freestanding building with over fifty percent (50%) of the ground floor, not exceeding one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet, serving an office function for the primary purpose of serving neighborhood residents within a one-fourth (1/4) mile radius, with the remainder of
the building occupied by a function permitted in the district, typically sited on a corner lot.
CORNER STORE: A mixed use freestanding building with over fifty percent (50%) of the ground floor, not exceeding one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet, serving a retail function for the primary purpose of serving neighborhood residents within a one-fourth (1/4) mile radius, with the remainder of
the building occupied by a function permitted in the district, typically sited on a corner lot.
CREMATORIUM: A mortuary where corpses are cremated.
CROSS DOCKING FACILITY: A building within which raw, partial components or finished products from a supplier or manufacturer are distributed directly
to a next-level manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer, or end consumer, with marginal to no handling or storage time. A cross docking facility consists of
inbound and outbound truck docks, with minimal storage.
DAYCARE: An establishment, licensed by the State of Iowa, which is intended to provide for the care, supervision and protection of children.
DEVELOPMENT: Altering the landscape in any number of ways such as:
A. Changing landforms from a natural or seminatural state for a purpose such as agriculture or housing;
B. Subdividing real estate into blocks and lots, typically for the purpose of constructing buildings; or
C. Significantly altering a building and/or its surrounding property or changing its purpose, for example, by converting an unused factory complex into
residential condominiums.
DORMITORY: A building used as group living quarters for a student body or religious order as an accessory use to a college, university, boarding school,
convent, monastery or similar institutional use.
DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment that offers merchandise, service or entertainment to persons in motor vehicles.
DUPLEX/TWO-FLAT: A building containing two (2) one-family dwelling units separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from the basement
to roof (duplex) or between floors (two-flat).
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a residential building or residential portion of a building that are arranged, designed, used or intended for use by
one family, and which includes cooking space and lawful sanitary facilities reserved for the occupants thereof.
FACADE: Any face of a building, especially the principal face, which is generally visible from a street, drive, or parking lot. The principal face, or principal
facade, shall be that face incorporating the primary entrance.
FAIRGROUNDS: Public or privately owned land used for public fairs, events, concerts and public gatherings.
FAMILY: Either of the following:
A. A domestic family unit, which is one or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 252/358
B. The functional equivalent of the domestic family unit, consisting of persons living together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and
distinct domestic character, and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family with a demonstrable and recognizable bond that constitutes the
functional equivalent of the bonds that render the domestic family a cohesive unit. All persons of the functional equivalent of the domestic family must
be cooking together and otherwise operating as a single housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority,
association, lodge, combine, federation, or group, coterie, or organization that is not a religious order, nor shall it include a group of individuals whose
association is temporary or resort-seasonal in character.
FAMILY HOME: A community based residential home that is licensed as a residential care facility under chapter 135C of the Iowa Code, or a child foster
care facility under Iowa Code chapter 237, to provide room and board, personal care, habilitation services, and supervision in a family environment
exclusively for not more than eight (8) persons with a developmental disability or brain injury, including any necessary support personnel. A family home
does not include an individual foster care family home licensed under Iowa Code chapter 237.
FARM: An area comprising ten (10) or more acres, which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruits and grain, and their
storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals, such as horses, cattle, sheep and swine.
FARM DWELLING: A dwelling for a family that owns or rents an adjacent or nearby farm, which may or may not be on the same parcel as the farm it
serves.
FARM, SMALL: A farm as defined in this section, except that it consists of less than ten (10) acres.
FENCE: A freestanding structure comprised of posts, rails and panels that is designed to restrict movement across a boundary and is comprised of
durable building materials such as wood, rigid polymers and steel.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: A public or private organization that provides fire protection for a certain jurisdiction, which typically is a municipality, county or fire
protection district. A Fire Department usually contains one or more fire stations within its boundaries and may be staffed by career firefighters, volunteers
or combination thereof.
FORM: The design, configuration or layout of a structure that in appearance is indicative of or reflects a particular function. A structure does not
necessarily have to contain the function indicated by its form (provided that the function contained within the structure is permitted in the zoning district);
for example, a structure may be designed in a form that indicates a single-family residential function, but may instead contain an office or other
nonresidential function.
FREESTANDING HOUSE: A one-family dwelling unit, unattached to any other dwelling unit, which is considered the principal building.
FRONTAGE: Any side of a lot or building that fronts upon a vehicular way, such as a public street, approved private street, access drive or parking lot.
A. Frontage, Principal: That side of a lot or parcel that is adjacent to the street upon which the property is addressed, or from which the principal
function on the lot has its primary access, or the principal frontage established upon a recorded deed or plat of subdivision.
B. Frontage, Secondary: On a corner lot or double frontage lot, that frontage that is not the principal frontage. If a double frontage lot has a third
frontage, that frontage shall be considered a secondary frontage.
FUNCTION: The predominant purpose, use, occupation, or operation for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended or for which land or
buildings are occupied or maintained.
FUNERAL HOME: A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and rituals connected therewith before
burial or cremation.
GAS/CONVENIENCE: A gasoline station and/or convenience store planned, operated and maintained for the purpose of selling gas and convenience
items where the principal building does not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.
GOLF COURSE: A tract of land laid out for at least nine (9) holes for playing the game of golf that may include a clubhouse, pro shop and practice
facilities.
GRAIN STORAGE: A facility, such as a bin or silo, for the temporary storage of grain.
GREENHOUSE: A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material in which the temperature and
humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of plants.
GREENWAY: An open space corridor in largely natural conditions that might also provide for use by bicycles and pedestrians.
GREYFIELD: Vacant, underutilized, or disused area previously functioning as a parking lot, shopping center or large format retailer.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 253/358
GROUP DWELLING: A group home for the sheltered care of persons with special needs that, in addition to providing food and shelter, may also provide
some combination of personal care, social or counseling services and transportation. This definition does not include a family home.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation carried out by a member of the immediate family residing on the premises that is accessory to the principal
residential function of the dwelling and that does not change the residential form of the principal building.
HOSPITAL: An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease,
injury and other abnormal physical or mental conditions and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient
facilities, training facilities, medical offices and staff residences.
HOTEL: A multi-story facility of sixteen (16) sleeping rooms or more providing accommodations to the general public, which may include additional
facilities and services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, swimming pools, entertainment and personal services.
INDOOR RECREATION: Recreational activities (such as bowling, roller skating, paintball, etc.) that are housed indoors.
INDUSTRY, OPEN: Development consisting of large, relatively self-contained and isolated facilities whose potential nuisance or hazard generation from
the processing, manufacturing, assembly, storage and distribution of materials and products is moderately high or higher, as determined by the
Administrative Officer.
INDUSTRY, RESTRICTED: Development consisting of facilities whose manufacturing, assembly, storage and distribution activities do not create
appreciable nuisances or hazards, or that require a pleasant, hazard and nuisance free environment. It is intended that the permitted forms and functions
be compatible and not detrimental to adjacent properties.
INFILL: New development on land that had been previously developed, including existing lots within existing neighborhoods, brownfields and greyfields.
INN: A dwelling or building other than a bed and breakfast with no more than fifteen (15) sleeping rooms providing accommodations to the general public,
which may include a restaurant. This definition shall include accommodations held out to the general public arranged between owners and guests via a
third party using a means of remote communication and transaction (e.g., via the internet or smart phone application).
JUNKYARD: A place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled, or
handled, including, but not limited to, auto and motor vehicle wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and yards for use of salvaged
house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment.
KENNEL: Any building or portion thereof where more than two (2) dogs, cats, or other household domestic animals are maintained, boarded, bred, or
cared for, in return for remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale.
LAW ENFORCEMENT: A public or private organization that provides law enforcement or police protection for a certain jurisdiction, which typically is a
municipality or county. The department may contain one (1) or more departments and may be staffed by career law enforcement officers, volunteers and
professional staff or a combination thereof.
LIBRARY: A place in which literary and other media materials, such as books, periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets and multimedia, are kept for reference
or lending.
LICENSED PROFESSIONAL: For the purposes of this title, a design professional licensed to practice architecture, landscape architecture, engineering or
land surveying by the Iowa State Board of Registration Professional Licensing Agency.
LIVE/WORK BUILDING: A building comprised of mixed use units consisting of residential, commercial, office or artisanal functions. Nonresidential
functions may be located anywhere in the unit. It is intended that the building be occupied by a business operator who lives in the same building that
contains the nonresidential function.
LIVESTOCK: Any animal customarily kept by humans for the purpose of providing food, fiber or work, including, but not limited to, cattle and other bovines,
horses, mules, donkeys and other equines, goats and other caprines, sheep and other ovines and swine, hogs and other porcines (except oriental
potbellied pigs as permitted in title 8, chapter 4 of this Code), but excluding bees. Keeping of bees, chickens and other poultry, and rabbits on residential
properties within the City is regulated in title 8, chapter 4 of this Code.
LOT: A parcel of land at least sufficient in size to meet minimum zoning requirements for function, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other
open space requirements as are herein required. A lot shall have frontage on a public street, or an approved private street, and may consist of:
A. A single lot of record.
B. A combination of complete lots of record, outlots of record or portions of lots of record.
C. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided, that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of this title.
LOT, CORNER: A lot with frontage upon two (2) intersecting streets.
LOT COVERAGE: The percentage of the lot covered by all the building area.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 254/358
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets or places.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from another lot or from a public right-of-way or approved private street easement, railroad
right-of-way or any other public space.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot line along the principal frontage of a lot or parcel separating it from a street right-of-way, approved private street easement, or
an outlot designated or intended for future street purposes. On a corner or double frontage lot, the front lot line shall be along the principal frontage of the
lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lot, a line ten feet
(10') in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. On a double frontage lot, the rear lot line shall be along
the street other than and opposite from the street upon which the principal frontage abuts.
LOT LINE, SECONDARY FRONT: On a corner lot, the lot line abutting a street right-of-way, approved private street easement, or an outlot designated or
intended for future street purposes, that is not on the principal frontage. If a double frontage lot has a third frontage, the lot line along the third frontage
shall be considered a secondary front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: A lot line other than a front, secondary front or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, and where the map of which has been recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Cerro
Gordo County.
LOT TIERS: The transverse division of a lot into increments for the purpose of locating off street parking, trash containers, vehicle storage, and loading
facilities. Lots shall be divided into three (3) tiers that are based upon parking placement and loading functions found within a lot.
A. The first tier shall be the entire width of the lot and measured from the front lot line or secondary front lot line to the facade of the principal building
that is most parallel to the front lot line or secondary front lot line.
B. The second tier shall be measured from the line of the principal building's facade to a distance of twenty feet (20').
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 255/358
C. The third tier shall be the remaining distance from the second tier to the rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH: The length of the principal frontage line of a lot.
LOT, ZONING: A single tract of land located within a single block that is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot or lots" may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
MANSION APARTMENT: A multi-story residential building comprised of up to a maximum of eight (8) separate apartment units and designed or converted
in the style of a large freestanding house or mansion.
MIXED USE BLOCK BUILDING: A multi-story building that is placed at or close to the front lot line supporting multiple functions, one of which may include
structured parking.
MOBILE HOME: A detached transportable building designed to be used as a one-family residential dwelling with all of the following characteristics:
A. Certified in a factory and fabricated to the standards outlined in the Iowa Code;
B. Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels; and
C. Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete, including the major appliances, and ready for occupancy, except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation supports and connection to the utilities, and removal of the towing apparatus
and enclosing of the chassis by an opaque skirt or screen.
MOVIE THEATER: A building where indoor movies are shown with incidental food and beverage service.
MULTIPLE-FLAT: A multi-story building containing nine (9) or more dwelling units.
MULTIPLE PRINCIPAL BUILDING DEVELOPMENT: A development or project in which more than one (1) principal building is situated on a zoning lot.
The multiple principal building development shall be under the control of one owner or group of owners and shall be capable of being planned and
developed as one integral unit, although development may be phased.
MUSEUM: A building for collecting and displaying objects having scientific, historical or artistic value.
NONCONFORMING USE: A building, structure or land lawfully occupied by a use or function that does not conform to the form and function regulations of
the zoning district in which it is situated.
OFFICE BUILDING: A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government or like activity; it may
include subsidiary services for office workers, such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper stand and childcare facilities.
OFFICE SHOWROOM: A multi-use building with a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the building occupied by office and wholesale display and retail
sales functions, with artisanal, technology, research and development, light assembly, warehousing and distribution functions occupying the remaining
space.
OPEN AIR MARKET: A public marketplace conducted outdoors where food and merchandise are sold.
OUTDOOR CUSTOMER DINING AREA: A seating area with tables and chairs located outdoors that provides seating to a contiguous restaurant. This
seating may be in addition to indoor seating or it may be the only seating available for the restaurant.
PARKING BAY: The parking space and aisle adjacent to said parking space.
PARKING STRUCTURE: A structure (or part thereof) that is designed specifically to be used for automobile parking and where there are a number of
floors or levels on which parking takes place.
PEDESTRIAN SHED: An average one-fourth (1/4) mile radius or one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320'), which is about the distance of a five (5)
minute walk at a leisurely pace as measured from the boundary of the lot where a corner store or corner office is located.
PERMITTED: Complies with the zoning ordinance and is permitted and processed administratively by right.
PORCH: A vestibule, stoop or platform providing access to the entry of a building, which may be enclosed or unenclosed, and which may or may not be
covered by a roof.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 256/358
PRESCHOOL: A facility licensed by the State of Iowa which is intended to provide for the education, care, supervision and protection of children.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: A nonaccessory building in which the principal function of the lot on which it is located is conducted.
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE: The main point of access for pedestrians into a building.
PRINCIPAL FUNCTION: The predominant function to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist.
PUBLIC WORKS GARAGE: A public building used exclusively for City, County, or State maintenance vehicles.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (Commonly Referred To As An RV): A vehicle designed for travel, recreation and vacation use. This definition includes, but is
not limited to:
A. Motor home: A self-propelled vehicle with a dwelling constructed as an integral part of the vehicle.
B. Pickup coach: A structure designed to be mounted on a vehicle.
C. Travel/camping trailer: A portable structure that is designed to be towed on the highway by a vehicle and designed or used as a dwelling.
D. Boats and personal watercraft.
E. Small motorized vehicles, such as snowmobiles, dirt bikes, all-terrain vehicles, golf carts, and similar vehicles designed for recreational or utility off
road use.
F. Any trailer designed for conveyance of any of the above. One (1) or more recreational vehicles mounted on a single trailer shall be considered
collectively as one (1) RV for the purposes of this title.
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY, LARGE: A building or place in which worship, ceremonies, rituals and education pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are
held with seven hundred fifty one (751) or more seats in the largest assembly space.
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY, MEDIUM: A building or place in which worship, ceremonies, rituals and education pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are
held with four hundred one (401) to seven hundred fifty (750) seats in the largest assembly space.
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY, SMALL: A building or place in which worship, ceremonies, rituals and education pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are
held with up to four hundred (400) seats in the largest assembly space.
RESTAURANT: A building where food and drink are prepared, served or consumed within the principal building, outdoors on the same premises, or via
take-out or drive-through services. A restaurant may include consumption of alcoholic beverages in accordance with licensing rules and restrictions, but
only when food is also served.
ROADSIDE STAND (Yard, Garage, Roadside, Or Similar): Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying or selling produce or other items grown or
produced on site.
SCHOOL:
K - 8: A school that meets the State of Iowa requirements for K - 8 education.
9 - 12: A school that meets the State of Iowa requirements for 9 - 12 education.
SEASONAL SALES/DISPLAY: An outdoor sale or display of merchandise that is temporarily displayed for a period not to exceed four (4) months.
SELF-STORAGE: A private, small to medium box facility, whose principal function is to allow for indoor storage of residential and household items and
other various and sundry items, not including hazardous materials, and which may include outdoor storage of vehicles and other large items.
SETBACK: The minimum required distance between any structure and lot line of the lot on which it is located.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 257/358
SHOPPING MALL: A building or set of buildings that contain retail units, with interconnecting walkways that may or may not be indoors, enabling visitors to
easily walk from unit to unit.
SHOPPING STRIP: A building consisting of multiple tenants, where the tenant spaces are typically less than twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet.
SIDE YARD/ZERO LOT LINE HOUSE: A building that is built at the property line on one (1) side of the lot.
SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY: Multiple tenant building that houses one (1) or two (2) people in individual rooms or the single room dwelling itself.
SITE OR DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A drawing to scale, usually (but not always) prepared by a licensed professional, that shows size and location of all
existing and proposed buildings, all adjacent streets and highways, the size of all entrances and exits from the land and a legal description of the land. For
some form and functions, a landscape development plan must be included.
STORAGE, OUTDOOR: Exterior depository, stockpiling, or safekeeping of materials, products, vehicles, trailers and the like. Materials that are stored
beneath a structure that includes a roof, but no side walls shall be deemed outdoor storage; or outdoor storage may involve fencing or screening without a
roof. The following shall not be considered outdoor storage:
A. Transient parking of vehicles on parking lots, where such parking does not exceed seventy two (72) hours.
B. Any product representation or signage.
C. Vending machines accessory to allowed forms or functions.
D. Sales and display of new or used vehicles as part of a vehicle sales/rental function.
E. Parking or storage of recreational vehicles on lots with a residential function, subject to section 12-8-6 of this title.
F. Parking or storage of commercial vehicles on lots with a residential function, subject to section 12-8-6 of this title.
G. The parking or storage of vehicles, equipment, and merchandise for a period of less than seventy two (72) hours.
STORY: A habitable level within a building, excluding an attic or raised basement.
STREET: Any vehicularway that is:
A. An existing State, County, or Municipal roadway;
B. Shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law; or
C. Approved by other official action.
STREET, PRIVATE: A street designed for access to adjacent parcels that is not dedicated to the public as right-of-way, and that is owned and maintained
by the adjacent owners that benefit from the private street, either jointly or via an association created for the purpose of such maintenance.
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials assembled to give support or shelter that requires a more or less permanent location on the ground, that is safe,
stable and includes, among other things, buildings, towers, signs, fences and silos; but not including poles and wires constructed for transmission of
utilities.
STRUCTURE HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the ground level to the highest point of a structure, or attached antenna or similar device.
SURFACE PARKING: An off street, ground level, impervious open area that provides temporary storage for motor vehicles.
SWALE: Low lying or depressed land area commonly wet or moist which can function as an intermittent drainageway.
TAVERN: A commercial enterprise whose primary activity is the sale of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises. Taverns include bars,
lounges, nightclubs, private clubs, bottle (BYOB) clubs, and similar facilities serving alcoholic liquor.
TOWNHOUSE: A one-family dwelling unit in a row of at least three (3) such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no
unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one (1) or more vertical common fire resistant walls.
VARIANCE: A departure from any provision of the zoning ordinance except for a variance to allow a specific form or function not permitted within a zoning
district.
VEHICLE REPAIR: Repairing of vehicles within a building or portion thereof, including cars, trucks, motorcycles, scooters and small engines. Vehicle
repair operations shall include areas for the temporary storage of vehicles awaiting repair.
VEHICLE SALES AND RENTAL: A function located upon a privately owned and operated facility for the purpose of displaying, selling, leasing or renting
vehicles (new or used, including recreational vehicles) in operable condition and where service and repair work (if provided) is accessory to the principal
function.
WAREHOUSING: An industrial building for storage of goods related to a business.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 258/358
WASTE TRANSFER: Techniques used primarily to reduce weight, volume and packaging which include, but are not limited to:
Collection Center: A limited industry facility for collecting secondary materials, usually from the public, and reselling to brokers, processing centers or
manufacturers. Collection centers may or may not buy material; can be permanent or mobile; do no processing of materials for resale.
Composting: The controlled decay of organic matter, producing a nutrient rich mulch or organic soil, is utilized for yard debris, thus removing part of
the waste going to landfills and incinerators.
Incineration: A process technology which provides the benefit of reducing the amount (particularly by volume) of wastes; the residues of which must
then be managed and disposed of properly.
Landfill, Sanitary: An engineering project for refuse disposal in which the waste is dumped in accordance with a preconceived plan, compacted and
covered.
Processing Center: A facility that buys secondary material, usually from brokers, collection centers and various postconsumer waste facilities, to use
for the remanufacturing of products.
Recycling: The process by which materials otherwise destined for disposal are retrieved and remanufactured into new products.
Transfer Station: An intermediate facility where collected refuse or material collected for recycling is deposited for transfer to the final processing or
disposal site.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT: A sewage disposal system which is constructed, installed, maintained, operated and owned by a municipality or taxing
district established for that purpose.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT: A sewage disposal system which is constructed, installed, maintained, operated and owned by a municipality or taxing
district established for that purpose.
WATER TREATMENT: A water supply system which is constructed, installed, maintained, operated and owned by a municipality or taxing district
established for that purpose.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS DEFINITIONS:
Commercial Wind Energy Conversion System (Commercial WECS): A wind energy conversion system that is intended to produce electricity for sale
to a rate regulated or nonregulated utility, or for use off site.
Dispersed Wind Energy Conversion System (Dispersed WECS): A wind energy conversion system that has a rated capacity greater than fifty
kilowatts (50 kW), which is incidental and subordinate to a permitted use on the same parcel or on an abutting parcel under the same ownership as
the parcel developed with the dispersed WECS, and which is intended to produce electricity primarily for use on-site. Such system may be
connected to the electrical grid when a parcel on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company. Excess
electrical power generated and not presently needed for on-site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with section 199, chapter
15.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code.
Height, Total System: The height above grade of the system, including the generating unit and the highest vertical extension of any blades or rotors.
Height, Tower: The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind turbine generator and attached blades or rotors.
Small Wind Energy Conversion System (Small WECS): A wind energy conversion system that has a rated capacity of up to fifty kilowatts (50 kW),
which is incidental and subordinate to a permitted use on the same parcel. A system is considered a small wind energy system only if it supplies
electrical power solely for on site use, except that when a parcel on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility
company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for on site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with section
199, chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code.
Tower: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion system that elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the ground.
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS): An aggregation of parts including the base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, guywires and
accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks, etc., configured as necessary to convert the power of wind into mechanical or
electrical energy, e.g., wind charger, windmill or wind turbine.
Wind Turbine Generator: The component of a wind energy conversion system that transforms mechanical energy from the wind into electrical
energy.
YARD: An open space on a lot that is unobstructed by any portion of a structure from twenty four inches (24") above the ground upward, except any
permitted encroachments or as otherwise provided in this title. The measurement of a yard shall be construed as the minimum horizontal distance
between the lot line and the nearest point of a building or structure.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot measured between the front line of the lot and the nearest point of a building.
Yard, Principal Front: On a corner or double frontage lot, the yard adjacent to the principal frontage.
Yard, Secondary Front: On a corner lot, a yard along the frontage of the lot that is not the principal frontage. If a double frontage lot has a third
frontage, that frontage shall be considered a secondary front yard.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 259/358
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and the nearest point of the principal building.
On a double frontage lot, the yard furthest from and opposite the front yard shall be a rear yard.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the nearest point of the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; Ord. 13-22, 7-2-2013; Ord. 13-25, 7-16-2013; Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014; 2017 Code; Ord.
18-9, 10-2-2018; Ord. 19-1, 3-5-2019; Ord. 19-2, 3-5-2019)
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER
12-3-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Administrative Officer, and that such
questions shall be presented to the board only on appeal from the decision of the Administrative Officer. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-3-2: DUTIES:
The Administrative Officer shall enforce the provisions of this title and shall have the following powers and duties in connection therewith:
A. To interpret the terms and requirements of this title if the terms appear to be unclear or ambiguous.
B. Upon request or in the case of an administrative appeal, to provide a written justification for any interpretation.
C. To issue all permits and certificates required by this title.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 260/358
D. To cause any building, structure, land, place or premises to be inspected and examined and to order in writing the abatement or remedying of any
condition found to exist in violation of any provision of this title.
E. To act as advisor to the board and commission and to carry out and enforce any decisions or determinations of the board and commission. (Ord. 10-
003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-3-3: APPEALS:
The interpretations or decisions of the Administrative Officer may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, according to chapter 5 of this title. (2017
Code)
Chapter 4
TEXT AMENDMENTS AND REZONING
12-4-1: TEXT AMENDMENTS AND REZONING REQUESTS:
The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this title may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed; provided, that no
such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which citizens and parties with interest shall have an opportunity to be heard.
Any action taken pursuant to this chapter shall also be in compliance and accordance with the rules and regulations of the Department of Natural
Resources, State of Iowa, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-4-2: PROCEDURE:
Unless initiated by City staff, the commission, or the Council, an application for a text amendment or rezoning shall be given first consideration within sixty
(60) days from the date of its official and complete submission unless extended by the City Council or a time waiver is granted by the applicant. If
applicable, processing of the application through required State or Federal agencies shall extend the review and decision making period. Additional
procedural requirements are as follows:
A. Requests: Requests for a text amendment or rezoning shall be filed with the Administrative Officer on an official application form. The application shall
be accompanied by a fee as provided by City Council resolution. The application shall also be accompanied by detailed written and graphic materials
fully explaining the proposed change, and, in the case of a rezoning, the development of all forms and functions allowed within the proposed district
and their potential impact on surrounding property and the community. The request shall be considered officially submitted when all the informational
requirements have been reviewed and are determined to be complete. The request for a text amendment or rezoning shall be placed on the agenda of
the next regular commission meeting.
B. Proof Of Ownership Or Authorization: Except for rezoning petitions initiated by City staff, the commission, or the Council, the applicant shall supply
proof of ownership of the property for which the rezoning is requested, and, if the applicant is not the owner, supply written authorization from the
owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested rezoning.
C. Conditional Rezoning: Prior to any public hearing, the applicant for rezoning may voluntarily propose conditions or restrictions on the uses, forms or
functions permitted upon the land in question, subject to all of the following:
1. All such conditions or restrictions must be voluntarily proposed by the applicant in writing as part of the rezoning application, or in writing prior to
closing of the public hearing before the commission.
2. All such conditions or restrictions must conform to this title and all applicable requirements of this Code.
3. Conditions or restrictions may not be proposed and may not be changed after the public hearing before the commission has been closed. If the
applicant wishes to change the conditions or restrictions after the commission has closed the public hearing, such changes must be voluntarily
proposed in writing and shall require reconsideration by the commission at a new public hearing.
4. After the public hearing is closed, the commission may recommend approval without the conditions or recommend approval subject to the conditions
or restrictions as submitted by the applicant; but the commission may not alter the conditions as submitted. Conversely, the commission may
recommend denial of the rezoning.
5. The City Council may approve the rezoning without the conditions, or may approve the rezoning subject to the conditions or restrictions as submitted
by the applicant, but the Council may not alter the conditions as submitted. Conversely, the Council may deny the rezoning.
D. Public Hearing: Upon receipt of the application, the Administrative Officer shall set a public hearing following proper hearing notification. The
commission shall conduct the hearing and report its findings and recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a legal
property description and description of the request, and shall be published in the official newspaper at least seven (7) days but no more than twenty
(20) days prior to the hearing and written notice of said hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within three hundred
fifty feet (350') of the subject property. Public notice signs will be posted on the subject property.
E. Failure Not Invalidation: Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this title.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 261/358
F. Technical Reports: The Administrative Officer shall instruct the appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where appropriate, and provide
general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the City Council.
G. Adverse Effects: The commission and City Council shall consider possible adverse effects of the proposed text amendment or rezoning. Its judgment
shall be based upon (but not limited to) the following factors:
1. The proposed action has been considered in relation to the specific policies and provisions of and has been found to be consistent with the official
Mason City Comprehensive Plan.
2. The proposed action is or will be compatible with present and future land uses of the area.
3. The proposed action conforms to all performance standards contained herein.
4. The proposed action will not tend to or actually depreciate the area in which it is proposed.
5. The proposed action can be accommodated with existing public services and will not overburden the City's service capacity.
6. The proposed action is in conformance with the City's utility extension policies or is contiguous to existing development of a similar zoning.
H. Additional Information Requested: The commission and City staff shall have the authority to request additional information from the applicant
concerning operational factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors, said
information to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in relation to all pertinent sections of this title. Failure on the part of the
applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for denial of the request.
I. Appearance To Answer Questions: The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the commission in order to answer questions
concerning the request.
J. Approval, Denial Or Changes: The commission shall recommend approval or denial of the request. In the case of a text amendment, the commission
may recommend changes to the requested amendment.
K. Report And Recommendation Received: The City Council shall not act upon a text amendment or rezoning until they have received a report and
recommendation from the commission or until sixty (60) days after the first regular commission meeting at which the request was considered.
L. Placement On Agenda: Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the commission, the Administrative Officer shall place the report and
recommendation on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the
permanent written record of the City Council meeting.
M. Public Hearing And Consideration: It shall be the duty of the City Council to hold a public hearing and give first consideration to the request within sixty
(60) days after the receipt of the commission recommendation, unless the applicant agrees to an extension in writing to a date certain. Notice of the
hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least seven (7) days but no more than twenty (20) days prior to hearing.
N. Council Decision:
1. The City Council shall consider the commission's recommendation in coming to a final decision. However, prior to making a final decision, the
Council shall refer the application back to the commission for further study and recommendation should any of the following occur:
a. The City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the review process that may have prevented full consideration of relevant issues.
b. New information comes to light that the commission did not have at the time it made its recommendation that may have resulted in a different
recommendation.
c. In the case of a text amendment, the Council may approve minor deviations from the text recommended by the commission, but shall refer major
changes back to the commission. The commission shall hold a public hearing on the changes before making a recommendation to the City
Council.
d. The City Council shall provide the commission with a written statement detailing the specific reasons for referral. This procedure shall be followed
only one time on a singular action.
2. Approval of a proposed text amendment or rezoning shall require a majority vote of the City Council. However, in rezoning cases, if the owners of
twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed rezoning area or the property owners of twenty percent (20%) or
more of the property that is located within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior boundaries of the property for which the rezoning is proposed,
inclusive of public property and right-of-way, object to the rezoning in writing, the rezoning shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of
at least three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the City Council.
O. Denial; Reconsideration: Whenever an application for a text amendment or rezoning has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar
application and proposal for the text amendment or rezoning, affecting generally the same property, shall not be considered again by the commission
or City Council for at least six (6) months from the date of its denial, unless a decision to reconsider such matter is made by the City Council.
P. Effective: The text amendment or rezoning shall not become effective until such time as the City Council approves an ordinance reflecting said text
amendment or rezoning and after said ordinance is published in the official newspaper. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-4-3: INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS AND REZONING REQUESTS:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 262/358
A. The City staff, City Council or commission may, upon their own motion, initiate a request for a text amendment or rezoning.
B. Any person(s) owning real estate or having documented interest therein, within the City, may initiate a request for a text amendment or rezoning as to
affect the same real estate. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 5
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT1
12-5-1: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
A. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an Administrative Official in
the enforcement of this title.
B. To interpret the provisions of this title in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan.
C. To grant a special exception in those cases specified in section 12-5-3 of this chapter.
D. To authorize, in specific cases, a variance from the terms of this title as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this title will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this title shall be observed and substantial
justice done.
E. To grant a conditional use permit and impose conditions upon such permits, so that actual or potential impacts to surrounding property are mitigated or
eliminated. (2017 Code)
12-5-2: APPEALS:
A. Hearing And Decision: The board shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Administrative Officer in the enforcement of this title. Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board
or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Administrative Officer. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days of receipt of the
Administrative Officer's order or determination by filing with the Development Services Department, and with the Board of Adjustment, a notice of
appeal on a form provided by the Development Services Department specifying the grounds of the appeal, and by paying a fee as provided for by City
Council resolution.
B. Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Administrative Officer from whom the
appeal is taken certifies to the board after the notice of appeal has been filed that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the
board or by a court of record on application of notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
C. Decision:
1. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Administrative Officer.
2. Any alternate member who begins hearing a case is required to finish the case, even if the regular member in whose place the alternate member is
serving becomes available. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-5-3: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
A. Hearing And Decision Of Requests: The board shall hear and decide requests for special exceptions to the requirements of this title only under the
following circumstances:
1. To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming structure containing a nonconforming use that has been damaged or destroyed by any means to the
extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time prior to the damage or destruction, where the board finds some compelling
necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming building or use.
2. To permit the erection and use of a building or the use of premises in any location by a Public Service Corporation for public utility purposes that the
board deems reasonably necessary for the public convenience or welfare.
3. To allow an exception to the setback requirements of any district where the strict application of the setback requirements would result in peculiar or
exceptional practical difficulties upon the owner of such property as distinguished from a mere inconvenience; provided, that relief can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good.
B. Application:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 263/358
1. An application for a special exception shall be filed with the Administrative Officer on a form provided by the Development Services Department. The
application shall be accompanied by such plans and/or data deemed by the City to be necessary to adequately describe the special exception
request, a fee as provided for by City Council resolution, and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing
that the proposed special exception will conform to the standards set forth in the following subsections.
2. Upon receipt in proper form of the application, fee and statement, the board shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on the proposed special
exception. Notice of the hearing will be published in an official newspaper of the City at least seven (7) days but no more than twenty (20) days prior
to the hearing. Written notice of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the
subject property. Supplemental or additional notices may be published or distributed as the board may prescribe. At least one (1) public notice sign
will be posted on the subject property.
C. Standards: In order to grant a special exception as permitted above, the board shall find that the following tests are satisfied:
1. In the case of a setback reduction, the need for the special exception results from exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece
of property of record, or by reason of exceptional topographical conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a specific
parcel or property.
2. That the specific proposed exception will not be detrimental to or endanger public health, safety, comfort or general welfare.
3. That the specific proposed exception will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity and will not
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
4. That establishment of the specific proposed exception will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding
property for uses permitted in the zoning district in which the property is located.
5. That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary facilities are being provided.
6. That, except for the specific special exception being proposed, the structure subject to the special exception shall in all other respects conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
7. Approval of the special exception will not substantially impair the general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan.
D. Concurring Vote Of Members: The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board shall be necessary to decide in favor of the special exception. Any
alternate member who begins hearing a case is required to finish the case, even if the regular member in whose place the alternate member is serving
becomes available.
E. Conditions And Restrictions: Prior to granting any special exception, the board may impose conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location,
construction, maintenance and operation of the construction or reconstruction as requested, to the extent deemed necessary for the protection of the
public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in this section. (2017 Code)
12-5-4: VARIANCES:
A. Application: An application for a variance shall be filed with the Administrative Officer on a form provided by the Administrative Officer. The application
shall be accompanied by such plans and/or data deemed by the City to be necessary to adequately describe the variance request, a fee as provided
for by City Council resolution, and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed variance will
conform to the standards set forth in the following subsections.
B. Notice Of Public Hearing: Upon receipt in proper form of the application, fee and statement, the board shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on the
proposed variance. Notice of the hearing shall be published in an official newspaper of the City at least seven (7) days but no more than twenty (20)
days prior to the hearing. Written notice of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within three hundred fifty feet
(350') of the subject property. Supplemental or additional notices may be published or distributed as the board may prescribe. At least one (1) public
notice sign will be posted on the subject property.
C. Difficulties And Hardship: The board shall have the authority to authorize a variance where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or
shape of a specific piece of property of record, or by reason of exceptional topographical conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situation or
condition of a specific piece of property, the strict application of any provision of this title would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties
and particular hardship upon the owner of the subject property as distinguished from a mere inconvenience to the owner, provided relief can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan as
established by the regulations and provisions contained in this title.
D. Literal Enforcement: The board shall have the authority to authorize a variance from the terms of this title as will not be contrary to the public interest
where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this
title shall be observed and substantial justice done.
E. Determinations: In considering all proposed variances to this title, the board shall, before making any finding in the specific case, first determine that the
proposed variance will not constitute any change in the zoning map, will not authorize a use, form or function not specifically allowed within the zoning
district and will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase congestion in public streets, or increase
the public danger of fire and safety, or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect
impair the public health, safety, comfort and welfare of the City.
F. Standards: In order to grant a variance to the strict application of any provision of this title, the board shall find that all of the following tests are satisfied:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 264/358
1. The proposed variance will not threaten neighborhood integrity, nor have a substantially adverse effect on the use or value of other properties in the
area adjacent to the subject property.
2. The proposed variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and spirit of this title.
3. The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if used only as strictly allowed in the district where the property is located.
4. The owner's situation is unique or peculiar to the property in question, and the situation is not shared with other landowners in the area nor due to
general conditions in the neighborhood.
5. The hardship is not of the landowner's or applicant's own making or that of a predecessor in title.
G. Vote To Decide: The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board shall be necessary to decide in favor of the variance. Any alternate member
who begins hearing a case is required to finish the case, even if the regular member in whose place the alternate member is serving becomes
available.
H. Denial; Reapplication: If the variance application is denied, applicants may not reapply for the same variance to the board before six (6) months have
passed from the date of the first application.
I. Appropriate Conditions And Safeguards: In permitting a variance, the board may impose appropriate conditions and safeguards including, but not limited
to, planting screens, fencing, construction commencement and completion deadlines, lighting, operations controls, improved traffic circulation
requirements, highway access restrictions, increased minimum yard requirements, parking requirements, or any other requirement that the board
deems appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-5-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Any landowner or his designated agent may file an application to use land for a conditional use provided for in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title in the
zoning district in which the land is located. Any application shall be subject to the following requirements:
A. Filing Application; Documents; Fee: An application for a conditional use shall be filed with the Administrative Officer on a form provided by the
Development Services Department. The application shall be accompanied by such plans and data deemed by the City to be necessary to adequately
describe the proposed conditional use, a fee as provided for by City Council resolution and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and
adequate evidence showing that the proposed conditional use will conform to the standards set forth in the following subsections.
B. Public Hearing; Notice: Upon receipt in proper form of the application, fee and statement, the board shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on the
proposed conditional use. Notice of the hearing shall be published in an official newspaper of the City at least seven (7) days but no more than twenty
(20) days prior to hearing. Written notice of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within three hundred fifty feet
(350') of the subject property. Supplemental or additional notices may be published or distributed as the board may prescribe. At least one (1) public
notice sign will be posted on the subject property.
C. Finding And Determination: For each application for conditional use, the board shall determine its findings and render a decision upon the issuance of a
conditional use permit, including the stipulations of additional conditions and guarantees that such conditions will be complied with when they are
deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest. Whenever an application is denied, it cannot be resubmitted for one (1) year thereafter.
D. Standards: No conditional use shall be recommended by the board unless the board shall find:
1. The establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, convenience,
comfort or general welfare;
2. The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood;
3. The establishment of the use will not impede the normal orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the
zoning district;
4. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary facilities have been or are being provided;
5. Measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
E. Conditions And Restrictions: Prior to granting any conditional use, the board shall stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance and operation of the conditional use as are deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to
secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in this section. In all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the board shall
require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be
complied with. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-5-6: BOARD DECISION; APPEALS:
A. Any decision of the board shall be filed in the Development Services Department within two (2) business days after the meeting.
B. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth
that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 265/358
days after the filing of the decision in the Development Services Department. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 6
NONCONFORMITIES
12-6-1: GENERAL:
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "use" shall have the same meaning as "function", as the latter is defined in chapter 2 of this title.
B. Within the districts established by this title, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures and characteristics of use that were lawful prior to
adoption or amendment of this title but are prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this title or future amendments. It is the intent of this
title to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this title that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon or extended nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or forms, functions or uses prohibited
elsewhere in the same district, except for existing single-family detached residential dwellings in commercial or industrial districts as outlined in this
title.
C. Nonconformities are declared by this title to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming structure, a nonconforming
use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after
the passage of this title by attachment on a building or premises or additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises or by the addition of
other uses of a nature that would generally be prohibited in the district involved, except for existing single-family detached residential dwellings in
commercial or industrial districts as outlined in this title.
D. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building for which
a building permit was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title and upon which actual building construction has
been diligently commenced. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-6-2: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, where a lot has less area or width than required by the district and was a lot of record at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this title, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be constructed on the lot, provided
all other requirements of this title are met. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-6-3: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title that could not be built under the terms hereof by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yard, its location on the lot or other requirements concerning the structure, the structure may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in such a way that increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be
altered to decrease its nonconformity.
B. Should a nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a structure be damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty
percent (50%) of its replacement cost at time of the damage or destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
title.
C. Should the structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
located after it is moved. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-6-4: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND:
The lawful use of land, where the use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which
becomes nonconforming under the terms of this title as adopted or amended, may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
A. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this title.
B. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel that was not occupied by the use at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this title.
C. If any such nonconforming use of land is abandoned for any reason for a period of more than six (6) months, any subsequent use of the land shall
conform to the district regulations for the district in which the land is located.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 266/358
D. No additional structure shall be erected in connection with the nonconforming use of land. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-6-5: NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES IN COMBINATION:
If the lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or of such a structure and
premises in combination, becomes nonconforming under the terms of this title as adopted or amended, the lawful use may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. Changing Of Use: No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this title in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.
1. Exception: A single-family detached residential dwelling located in the Z4, Z5, Z6 or Z7-1, Z7-3 and Z7-4 Districts may be enlarged up to twenty five
percent (25%) of the aggregate floor area of the current structure so long as the enlargement meets the minimum bulk regulations and off street
parking and loading requirements are met and no additional dwelling units result from the enlargement.
2. Exceptions shall be reviewed and approved by the Administrative Officer.
B. Use Extended: Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building that were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at
the time of adoption or amendment of this title. No such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
C. Change Of Classification: If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another nonconforming use of a
similar nature within the same or a more restricted classification. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted use or to a
conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restrictive use.
D. Use Abandoned: In the event that a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, is abandoned for a period of one (1) year,
the use shall thereafter conform to the uses permitted in the district in which it is located. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and
land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
E. Reconstruction After Damage Or Destruction:
1. Any structure devoted to use made nonconforming by this title that has been damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty
percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time prior to the damage or destruction, exclusive of the foundations, shall not be reconstructed and
used as before the damage or destruction occurred.
2. Notwithstanding the above, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception to permit the reconstruction of a structure that has been
damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time prior to the damage or
destruction, subject to the standards and requirements of section 12-5-3 of this title.
3. If the structure is damaged or destroyed to an extent of fifty percent (50%) or less of its replacement cost at the time of damage or destruction above
the foundation, it may be reconstructed and used as before, provided it be done within six (6) months of such happening, and be built of like or
similar materials. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
F. Removal Or Destruction: When nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure
shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. "Destruction" for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than
fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost at the time of destruction. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-6-6: REQUIRED REPAIRS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe
by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-6-7: UNAUTHORIZED NONCONFORMITIES:
Any use of land, use of structure, or any structure in existence at the time of adoption of this title that was not an authorized nonconformity under previous
zoning ordinances, shall not be authorized to continue its nonconforming status pursuant to this title or amendments thereto. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff.
7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 7
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS
12-7-1: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE:
All applications for site plans, preliminary plats, final plats, conditional use permits, variances and rezonings shall be subject to review by the Development
Review Committee (DRC).
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 267/358
A. Purpose: The purpose of the DRC is to provide a staff and technical review to certify that site development plans comply with the requirements of this
title and all other applicable laws and ordinances.
B. Composition: The DRC shall consist of the following members, each of whom may designate a qualified alternate: (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
1. City staff:
a. Director of Development Services.
b. Planning and Zoning Manager.
c. Chief Building Official.
d. City Engineer.
e. Director of Operations and Maintenance.
f. Fire Marshal.
g. Chief of Police. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
2. The DRC may also include a representative from each of the following agencies or utilities, who shall be invited to the DRC meeting and may attend
to provide input on any project that affects that agency or utility:
a. The local electrical and natural gas utility.
b. The local telephone utility.
c. The local cable and broadband telecommunication company.
d. The Iowa Department of Transportation. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
C. DRC Review Required: Except as exempted below, no application shall be deemed complete nor shall any site plan, preliminary plat, final plat not
subject to preliminary plat approval or conditional use permit be granted and no building permit shall be issued until the application is reviewed by the
DRC, is determined to comply with the requirements of this title and any other applicable laws or ordinances, and has been certified as to compliance
by the Administrative Officer. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
12-7-2: EXCEPTIONS TO DEVELOPMENT REVIEW:
The following are exempted from the development review process:
A. Single- and two-family dwelling units and their accessory buildings in any zoning district.
B. A project involving interior construction that does not increase the footprint or square footage of an existing building; however, if the construction is for a
change in use or would result in greater parking, landscaping or other requirements of this title, DRC review is required. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-3: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURE:
Any site plan not exempted by section 12-7-2 of this chapter shall be reviewed according to the following process:
A. Concept Plan: Prior to application for any permit to allow establishment and/or construction of any form or function subject to this chapter, the developer
shall submit a concept plan for review by the DRC, as outlined in section 12-7-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
1. The concept plan review allows the developer to ask questions, determine potential issues and incorporate ordinance requirements into the site plan
design. The suggestions or direction of the DRC or any representation of the developer at the concept plan review shall not be considered to be
binding upon either the City or the developer, unless the concept plan is accepted as a minor site plan.
2. After discussion of the concept, the DRC shall determine if the project is a minor site plan or a major site plan, according to subsection B or C of this
section, and shall provide the applicant with information on the process going forward and a tentative review schedule.
3. For any form or function designated within a zoning district as P1, P2 or C, the required site plan shall be submitted to the DRC for concept plan
review prior to submittal for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as applicable. If the DRC determines
that the concept requires major site plan review, major site plan review process shall occur prior to review by the applicable bodies. The applicant
shall incorporate all City Code and other applicable requirements into the site plan submitted for review by the other reviewing bodies.
B. Minor Site Plan:
1. The DRC shall determine that a plan is a minor site plan if one (1) or more of the following conditions exist:
a. Construction of a building with a total gross floor area of eight hundred (800) square feet or less, or a building addition that adds no more than ten
percent (10%) total gross floor area to an existing building or is eight hundred (800) square feet in total gross floor area, whichever is less.
b. The application is for a form or function that does not have an exterior effect on the site.
c. The project is otherwise determined by the DRC to be a simple site plan with minimal or no discernible impact on surrounding property.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 268/358
2. The DRC may accept the concept plan as the minor site plan; provided, that the plan provides sufficient detail to determine if compliance can be
attained.
3. Minor site plans may proceed directly to compliance approval after the concept plan review is complete; however, if the form or function requires
additional review according to its designation as P1, P2 or C, review by the required bodies shall be completed prior to review for compliance
approval.
4. Minor site plan applications shall pay a reduced development review fee (as provided for by City Council resolution) prior to review for compliance
approval.
C. Major Site Plan: The major site plan review shall establish that all requirements of this Code have been met, and that the site plan can be successfully
implemented related to City requirements, public and private utilities and the requirements of any other applicable agency. A complete site plan,
meeting the requirements of sections 12-7-5 and 12-7-6 of this chapter, shall be submitted along with the required application form and fees.
D. Compliance Approval: Final compliance approval shall be conducted by the Administrative Officer, who shall determine that all City and development
requirements, as identified or required by the DRC and any other applicable reviewing body, have been incorporated into the final site plan. Upon
determination of compliance, the Administrative Officer shall stamp the site plan as being in compliance; if necessary, the Administrative Officer shall
notify the applicant that the building permit process may commence. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
12-7-4: CONCEPT PLAN REVIEW:
A. Required Information: The following information shall be required for concept plan review by the DRC: (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
1. Narrative description of the application including reason for the request, unique features of the application (if any), tentative time line of the request,
and any other relevant factors that describe or clarify the proposed development and the site plan. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
2. A concept plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of the site, existing and proposed buildings, setbacks, access to streets, parking area and
general site and topographic conditions in sufficient detail to illustrate the project and show how the requirements of this title are or will be met.
B. Meetings: After determination that the narrative and concept plan contain sufficient information for review, the Administrative Officer will place the
concept plan on the agenda for the next available DRC meeting. Concept plan review will allow the applicant to discuss the request and be notified of
issues identified by the DRC. After concept plan review by the DRC, the applicant will be notified if the concept will be considered a minor site plan or a
major site plan, and shall be given appropriate direction and application materials (if required), including a tentative time line for the specific application.
(Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-5: MAJOR SITE PLAN REVIEW:
A. Application And Fee: Where required, an application for major site plan review shall be filed with the Administrative Officer on an official application form
and shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by City Council resolution. The site plan shall be considered as officially submitted only when the
Administrative Officer has determined compliance with all information and fee requirements. Upon making this determination, the Administrative Officer
shall place the major site plan on the agenda for the next available DRC meeting.
B. DRC Review: The DRC shall review the major site plan and determine if it complies with all of the requirements of this title and any other applicable law
or ordinance. After review, the DRC shall make one (1) of the following determinations:
1. Compliance: The major site plan is in compliance with all requirements of this title and all other applicable laws and ordinances, and may be sent to
the Administrative Officer for compliance approval, unless the form or function requires additional review as outlined in subsection C of this section.
2. Conditional Compliance: The major site plan is substantially in compliance with all requirements of this title and all other applicable laws and
ordinances, but minor changes must be made to achieve full compliance. The applicant shall then make the required revisions to the major site plan
as directed by the DRC and submit the revised plan to the Administrative Officer. The Administrative Officer may grant compliance approval upon
determination that all minor changes as directed by the DRC have been made to the major site plan, unless the form or function requires additional
review as outlined in subsection C of this section. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
3. Table: The DRC may determine that the major site plan does not comply with the requirements of this title and other applicable laws and ordinances.
The applicant shall be notified of the changes necessary to the major site plan so that compliance may be achieved, and shall be instructed to
resubmit the plans to the Administrative Officer for review at a future DRC meeting.
C. Forms And Functions Requiring Additional Review: Forms and functions listed as P1, P2 or C shall, in addition to major site plan review, be reviewed as
follows:
1. Major site plans for P1 and P2 forms and functions shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Planning and Zoning Commission meeting
after the DRC has determined that the plan is otherwise in compliance; or, if the DRC had made a determination of conditional compliance, after the
Administrative Officer has determined that the plan is in compliance. P2 major site plans shall also be placed on the first possible City Council
agenda following commission consideration.
2. Major site plans for C forms and functions shall be placed on the agenda of the first possible Zoning Board of Adjustment meeting after the DRC has
determined that the plan is otherwise in compliance; or, if the DRC had made a determination of conditional compliance, after the Administrative
Officer has determined that the plan is in compliance.
3. The reviewing bodies may, as part of the review process, impose conditions upon the site plan or upon the operation of the form or function. If the
Administrative Officer determines that these conditions will result in a significant change to the major site plan, the Administrative Officer may require
the major site plan to be returned to the DRC for additional review.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 269/358
4. Upon determination by the Administrative Officer that the requirements of the DRC and the reviewing bodies have been met, he/she may consider
the plan for compliance approval. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-6: MAJOR SITE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Preparation: All major site plans shall be drawn to a discernible and measurable scale. Depending on the complexity of the site plan, the Administrative
Officer, the DRC or any other applicable reviewing body may require the site plan to be prepared by a licensed surveyor, professional civil engineer,
licensed landscape architect or other design professional.
B. Information: All major site plans shall include the required elements listed in subsection D of this section. Depending on the application, the
Administrative Officer, the DRC or any other applicable reviewing body may also require one (1) or more of the elements listed in subsection E of this
section to be shown on or included with the site plan.
C. Waiver: The Administrative Officer may waive certain submittal requirements when they are clearly not applicable.
D. Required Major Site Plan Elements: All major site plans shall include the following, unless waived by the Administrative Officer according to subsection
C of this section:
1. Name and address of developer and owner.
2. Name and address of architect/designer.
3. Date of plan preparation.
4. Dates and description of all revisions.
5. Name of project or development.
6. Scale of plan (engineering scale only, at 1 inch equals 50 feet or less).
7. North point indication.
8. Lot dimension and area.
9. Required and proposed setbacks, including Building Code setbacks, if applicable.
10. Location, setback and dimension of all buildings on the lot, including both existing and proposed structures.
11. Type of proposed building construction.
12. Proposed occupancy of all buildings.
13. Location, number, and dimensions of existing and proposed parking spaces, including handicap spaces.
14. Location, number, and dimensions of existing and proposed loading spaces.
15. Curb cuts, driveways (including driveway width at property line).
16. Vehicular circulation. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
17. Sidewalks, walkways and trails, and routes of on site pedestrian circulation.
18. Location and type of all proposed lighting, including details of individual fixtures and height of pole mounted lights.
19. Provisions for storage and disposal of waste, garbage and recyclables, including plans for trash receptacle enclosures where required.
20. Location of existing and proposed utility connections, including water, sewer and fire lines. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
E. Additional Major Site Plan Requirements: The Administrative Officer, the DRC or any other applicable reviewing body may additionally require one (1) or
more of the following elements to be shown on or included with the site plan:
1. Site Plan Elements:
a. Location of all adjacent buildings, wells and/or septic systems located within one hundred feet (100') of the exterior boundaries of the property in
question.
b. Location of recreational and service areas.
c. Location of rooftop equipment and proposed screening.
2. Grading/Stormwater Drainage Plan:
a. Existing contours at two foot (2') intervals.
b. Proposed grade elevations, two foot (2') maximum intervals.
c. Drainage plan including configuration of drainage areas and calculations.
d. Storm sewer, catch basins, invert elevations, type of castings and type of materials.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 270/358
e. Spot elevations.
f. Proposed driveway grades.
g. Surface water ponding and treatment areas.
h. Erosion control measures.
i. Wetland boundaries.
F. Landscape Plan:
1. Planting Plan: A plan meeting the requirements of subsection 12-16-5C of this title shall be submitted. The plan shall show how the minimum
planting requirements of section 12-16-5 and table 1 of this title are met. The plan shall include proposed site grading, if applicable, and shall include
the following elements:
a. Planting schedule (table) containing:
(1) Symbols.
(2) Quantities.
(3) Common names.
(4) Botanical names.
(5) Sizes of plant material.
(6) Root specification (bare root, balled and burlapped, potted, etc.).
(7) Special planting instructions.
b. Location, type and size of all existing significant trees to be removed or preserved.
c. Planting detail (show all species to scale at normal mature crown diameter or spread for local hardiness zone).
d. Typical sections in details of fences, tie walls, planter boxes, tot lots, picnic areas, berms and the like.
e. Other existing or proposed conditions that could be expected to affect landscaping.
2. Other Plans And Information:
a. Legal description of property under consideration.
b. Proof of ownership of the land for which a site plan approval has been requested.
c. Architectural elevations of all principal and accessory buildings (type, color, and materials used in all external surfaces).
d. "Typical" floor plan and "typical" room plan.
e. Extent of and any proposed modifications to land within the Floodplain Overlay Districts as described and regulated in chapter 18 of this title.
f. Type, location and size (area and height) of all signs to be erected upon the property in question.
g. Restrictive covenants. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
h. Photometric plan showing light distribution on the property and up to ten feet (10') beyond the property lines. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017
Code)
i. Traffic study.
j. Snow storage and removal plan.
k. Other plans, studies or elements determined necessary by the Administrative Officer, DRC or other reviewing body to make a decision upon the
application in order to ensure that applicable laws and ordinances are met and the public health, safety and welfare are protected. (Ord. 13-12, 4-
2-2013)
12-7-7: COMPLIANCE APPROVAL:
A. Upon DRC determination that a plan is a minor site plan, or upon DRC determination of compliance or conditional compliance for a major site plan as
outlined in subsection 12-7-5B of this chapter, the applicant shall provide a final site plan for compliance approval to the Administrative Officer. The final
site plan shall serve as a complete, thorough and permanent public record of the manner in which the subject site is to be developed. It shall
incorporate all prior required plan revisions resulting from the development review process.
B. The Administrative Officer shall review the final site plan and shall determine that all requirements of this title, any other applicable laws and ordinances
and any specific requirements or conditions of the DRC and other applicable reviewing bodies have been met. Upon such determination, the
Administrative Officer shall notify the applicant, the Chief Building Official and the Zoning Administrator that the plan is in compliance. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-
2013)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 271/358
C. Two (2) copies of the final site plan shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer for review and certification for compliance. Each copy shall be
signed by the Administrative Officer and stamped with the approval date. One (1) copy shall be returned to the applicant, who shall retain it on the job
site during construction to ensure that the site is developed according to the approved plan. The final copy shall be retained in the project file.
Electronic copies shall be distributed to applicable departments and agencies.
D. The Administrative Officer may deny or delay compliance approval if there are delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, unpaid fines
related to housing, zoning or nuisances, or City utility fees due upon the parcel of land to which the site plan application relates. Compliance approval
may be granted upon proof of payment, provided all other requirements are met. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
12-7-8: SITE AND ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN GUIDELINES:
The following site and architectural guidelines shall be used to design all site plans subject to review under this chapter.
A. Building Location And Orientation: Principal entrances should be oriented to the project's primary street or to an active pedestrian or public zone within
the site. When the development has two (2) primary streets, the site plan shall determine orientation.
Parking lots should not be the dominant feature along any street.
Developments should maximize the amount of parking located on the side or rear of buildings and should locate buildings near their primary fronting
streets.
B. Pedestrian Access: Public sidewalks, meeting minimum City standards, should be constructed along all street frontages.
Developments should provide a continuous walkway connection from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to the customer entrances of all principal
buildings on the site. Developments adjacent to multiuse trails should provide a direct connection from the trail to the development's internal pedestrian
circulation system.
Multi-building developments should provide clear and safe walkways that connect all buildings on the site unless the buildings are not intended for
routine pedestrian access.
Where the required walkways cross drives, parking aisles, or other vehicularways, the crosswalks should be distinguished from driving surfaces by the
use of durable, low maintenance surface materials that are different than the primary paving material. Painted concrete is not acceptable in this
application.
C. Vehicular Access: Site plans should minimize the number of access points to adjacent streets. Access from arterial streets should be controlled and will
typically be limited to one (1) point of access per six hundred (600) linear feet, or as otherwise determined by the City Engineer.
Main driveways and drive aisles should provide a continuous system that connects to the main site entrance(s).
When possible, shared service and delivery access should be provided between adjacent parcels and buildings.
D. Making Connections: Pedestrian connections to adjacent developments should be provided. If adjacent properties are undeveloped, the site plan
should indicate how future connections will be provided.
Bike racks should be conveniently located in conjunction with new employment, shopping, residential and public developments where accessibility via
street or trail is possible and usage anticipated.
E. Building Facades: Primary facades greater than one hundred feet (100') in length should incorporate projections, recesses, articulation or variation in
design, materials and color in the wall plane to provide visual interest and sense of scale.
All building facades oriented to a street should be subject to all requirements for primary facade design.
Other rear and side facades may use a simplified expression of the materials and design used on the primary facades.
In commercial, office and mixed use buildings, the primary ground floor facades should be distinguished from the floors above by horizontal banding,
an intermediate cornice line, a change in building materials or fenestration, an awning or arcade or other material means.
F. Roofs: Visible roof materials should be high quality and durable, such as architectural grade asphalt shingles, architectural metals, clay or concrete tile,
copper, natural or synthetic slate, or similar materials.
Roof mounted equipment should be screened from street level view with materials that are architecturally compatible with the primary building facades
or by the roof structure itself.
G. Building/Construction Materials: Exterior building materials should be high quality, durable materials such as brick; native or manufactured stone;
integrally colored, burnished, textured, or glazed concrete masonry units; architectural metals; quality metals such as copper; high quality prestressed
concrete systems; and drainable (water managed) EIFS.
H. Sustainability: Sustainable building materials and methods should be considered and used when feasible to save production resources and reduce
impacts to the environment.
Renewable energy solutions, such as solar, wind and geothermal, should be considered and used when feasible to reduce long term energy costs and
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 272/358
fossil fuel dependence.
Bioretention solutions, such as permeable paving materials, rain gardens, bioswales and vegetative roofs, should be considered and used when
feasible to manage stormwater on site. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-9: SITE PLAN MODIFICATIONS:
A. Minor Changes:
1. Except as specified below, proposed minor changes to a previously approved site plan involving ten percent (10%) or less of the total existing floor
area or site expansions or modifications involving ten percent (10%) or less of the total existing site area, or other such minor modifications to an
approved site plan as determined by the Administrative Officer, which meet all ordinance requirements, may be determined to be in compliance by
the Administrative Officer prior to a building permit being issued and shall not require DRC review, Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council
site plan review, subject to the following:
a. Changes and additions to buildings and developments completed before the effective date of this title shall be reviewed according to the
development review process in section 12-7-3 of this chapter, regardless of the floor area of the improvements or other minor status.
b. Compliance with all ordinance requirements shall be construed to include all adopted policies and codes.
2. Any variances from ordinance requirements shall be subject to the established review and hearing procedures for variance approval.
3. A copy of the plans approved under this chapter shall be appropriately certified by the Administrative Officer and placed on file with the approved site
plans.
B. Major Changes: Plan changes not qualifying as minor shall be classified as major. An amended site plan involving major changes shall be applied for
and administered in a manner similar to that required for a new site plan. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-10: LAPSE OF APPROVAL:
A. Unless otherwise specified by the Administrative Officer, Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council as applicable, the compliance approval shall
become null and void one (1) year after the date of such approval, unless the property owner or applicant has substantially started the construction of
any building, structure, addition or alteration, or has properly and legally commenced the use requested as part of the approved plan. The property
owner or applicant shall have the right to submit an application for time extension in accordance with this chapter.
B. An application to extend the approval of a site plan for up to an additional one (1) year shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer not less than
thirty (30) days before the expiration of said approval. Such an application shall state the facts of the request, showing a good faith attempt to utilize the
compliance approval, and it shall state the additional time being requested to begin the proposed construction. The request shall be heard and decided
by the Administrative Officer prior to the lapse of approval of the original request. A request pertaining to a major project involving a longer period of
time than one (1) year or a second request for a time extension shall be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission for recommendation and to
the City Council for a decision.
C. In making a determination on whether an applicant has made a good faith attempt to utilize the compliance approval, the Administrative Officer,
commission or the City Council, as applicable, shall consider such factors as the type, design, and size of the proposed construction, any applicable
restrictions on financing, or special and/or unique circumstances beyond the control of the applicant which have caused the delay. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-
2013)
12-7-11: BUILDING AND OTHER PERMITS:
No building or other permits shall be issued until the Administrative Officer certifies that the final site plan is in compliance and a properly executed
performance agreement has been received, if required. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-12: INSPECTIONS DURING DEVELOPMENT:
A. Following compliance approval, the Administrative Officer shall periodically, until the completion of the development, review all permits issued and
construction undertaken and compare actual development with the approved final site plan.
B. If the Administrative Officer finds that development is not proceeding in accordance with the approved plan, he/she shall immediately notify the property
owner.
C. Within ten (10) days of such notice, the Administrative Officer shall either revoke the compliance approval or shall take such steps as it shall be deemed
necessary to compel compliance with the applicable laws and ordinances; or shall require the landowner or applicant to seek a modification of the site
plan in accordance with section 12-7-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-13: VARIANCES, REZONING AND PLATS OF SUBDIVISION:
A. Variances And Rezoning: The DRC shall review variances and rezoning requests only when requested as part of a development site plan review as
required by this chapter. The DRC may provide comments or recommendations to the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Planning and Zoning
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 273/358
Commission, as applicable, but may not assume the powers of the respective bodies nor allow any development in conflict with decisions made by
those bodies or by the City Council.
B. Plats Of Subdivision: DRC review of plats of subdivision shall be limited to a determination that all lots, easements, rights-of-way, etc., are in compliance
with the requirements of this title and other applicable laws and ordinances.
1. Preliminary Plats Of Subdivision: The DRC shall review concept plans for preliminary plats of subdivision, as provided in section 11-3-6 of this Code.
Upon DRC determination that the plat is in compliance, the Administrative Officer shall notify the Planning and Zoning Commission of compliance
approval. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
2. Final Plats: A final plat that conforms to an approved preliminary plat is not subject to compliance review. Final plats of subdivision that did not
require prior approval of a preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the DRC prior to submittal of the final plat to the City Council. Upon DRC
determination that the plat is in compliance, the Administrative Officer shall notify the City Council of compliance approval. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013;
amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 8
ZONING DISTRICTS; GENERAL
12-8-1: ZONING DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS:
The following table provides descriptions of the character of each Z District (zoning district):
TABLE 1
ZONING DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS
A. Z1 Agricultural District: Z1 Agricultural District primarily consists of agricultural land with related residential and scattered wetlands, woodlands, on and
off street trails and 2-lane highways.
1. General character: Primarily agricultural uses - 10 acre minimum lot size
2. Building placement: Variable setbacks
3. Typical building height: 2 stories with independent standards for subordinate farm structures
4. Type of civic space: Community parks, greenways and golf courses
B. Z2 Sub-Urban District: Z2 Sub-Urban District primarily consists of detached, single family residential, open lawns, occasional corner store and/or corner
office, neighborhood and community parks, greenways, on and off street trails, interconnected streets and multilane thoroughfares with sidewalks.
1. General character: Lower density development on a 3 - 5 units/acre scale
2. Building placement: Variable setbacks with encroachment standards for porches
3. Typical building height: 2 stories maximum
4. Type of civic space: Community and neighborhood parks, both passive and active
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 274/358
C. Z3 General Urban District: Z3 General Urban District consists of a mix of houses, townhomes, small, multiple-flat residential, small retail buildings,
corner stores, home offices, neighborhood parks, playgrounds, miniparks, small surface parking lots and interconnected streets with sidewalks.
1. General character: Mix of urban housing types
2. Building placement: Variable setbacks
3. Typical building height: 3 stories maximum
4. Type of civic space: Pocket parks, neighborhood scale playground
D. Z4 Multi-Use District: Z4 Multi-Use District consists of a mixture of retail, office, lodging and multi-family residential uses in a mixture of building types,
sizes and assemblages with interconnected, landscaped surface parking lots and sidewalks, community greens, plazas, greenways, interconnected
streets and multilane thoroughfares with sidewalks.
1. General character: Mixture of retail, commercial and medium density residential at a 5 - 10 units/acre scale
2. Building placement: Variable setbacks
3. Typical building height: 4 stories maximum
4. Type of civic space: Urban scale
E. Z5 Central Business District: Z5 Central Business District consists of multi-story, mixed and single use commercial block buildings, townhouses,
multiple-flat residential, lodging and civic buildings; predominantly attached buildings, parking garages, town squares, plazas, pocket parks and an
interconnected street grid.
1. General character: Multi-story, mixed use buildings
2. Building placement: Zero lot line at building front
3. Typical building height: 2 stories minimum, 10 stories maximum
4. Type of civic space: Pocket parks, greenways
F. Z6 Industrial District: The purpose of the Z6 Industrial District is to promote the management and preservation of existing industrial facilities within
Mason City as well as the development and management of new ecologically responsible, sustainable employment centers with interconnected streets
and sidewalks.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 275/358
1. Classifications: Z6-O: Open Industry
Z6-R: Restricted Industry
2. General character: Mix of utilitarian, industrial buildings
3. Building placement: Large and variable setbacks
4. Typical building height: Variable up to 75 feet in height
5. Type of civic space: None
G. Z7 Specific Use District: Z7 Specific Use District consists of specific, single uses including college campuses, hospitals and medical centers that
primarily function independently from other districts. There are multiple Z7 Districts, reflecting different forms and functions.
1. General character: Varies
2. Building placement: Varies
3. Typical building height: Varies up to 6 stories
4. Type of civic space: Varies
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-8-2: PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN Z DISTRICTS:
The zoning form and function table (section 12-8-3, table 2 of this chapter) establishes the permitted and conditional forms and functions allowed in the Z
Districts. If not specifically permitted or conditional, the form or function is prohibited in that Z District. New development associated with the allowed uses
will be subject to the following review and approval process:
A. P - Permitted subject to administrative site plan compliance approval. This use is a permitted use within the appropriate zoning district. An applicant or
developer should consult each zoning district to determine setback and building placement standards as well as chapters 16, "Zoning Standards", and
7, "Development Review Process", of this title.
B. P1 - Permitted subject to commission site plan compliance approval with notification to neighbors and public hearing. As part of this process, the
applicant or developer will be required to meet the conditions and standards of chapter 7, "Development Review Process", of this title. An applicant or
developer should consult each zoning district to determine setback and building placement standards as well as chapter 16, "Zoning Standards", of this
title.
1. All owners of property within a three hundred fifty foot (350') radius shall be sent notice of the hearing by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior to
the commission's hearing and at least one (1) public notice sign will be posted on the subject property.
2. Landowners will be given notice of the time and place of the commission's public hearing.
C. P2 - Permitted subject to commission and City Council site plan approval with notification to neighbors and commission public hearing. As a part of this
process, the applicant or developer will be required to meet the conditions and standards of chapter 7, "Development Review Process", of this title. An
applicant or developer should consult each zoning district to determine setback and building placement standards as well as with chapter 16, "Zoning
Standards", of this title.
1. All owners of property within a three hundred fifty foot (350') radius shall be sent notice of the hearing by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior to
the commission's hearing and at least one (1) public notice sign will be posted on the subject property.
2. Landowners will be given notice of the time and place of the commission's public hearing.
D. C - Conditional use, subject to board approval. Any landowner or his designated agent may file an application for a conditional use as provided for in
this title in the zoning district in which the land is located. All applications must follow the provisions of chapter 5, "Zoning Board Of Adjustment", of this
title. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-8-3: ZONING FORM AND FUNCTION TABLE:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 276/358
TABLE 2
ZONING FORM AND FUNCTION TABLE
P =
Permitted
P* =
Open industry functions are permitted only in the Z6-O District
P1 =
Permitted subject to Planning and Zoning Commission site plan approval, with notification to neighbors
P**,
P1**
=
In the Z4 South Federal Gateway Overlay District, allowed only as a conditional use. See subsection 12-12-7C of this title
P2 =
Permitted subject to Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council site plan approval with notification to neighbors
C =
Conditional subject to Zoning Board of Adjustment approval
C* =
Z6-R Districts only
C** =
Conditional use only in the Z4 South Federal Gateway Overlay District; see subsection 12-12-7C of this title. Not permitted in the
remainder of the Z4 District
Z7* =
See section 12-15-5, table 1 of this title for complete list of forms and functions in the Z7 Specific Use District
A. Residential/mixed use:
Accessory dwelling P P P
Duplex/two flat P P P
Family home P P P P
Farm dwelling P P P P P
Freestanding house P P P P
Group dwelling P1 P P1
Live/work building P P P C*
Mansion apartment P P P1
Mixed use block building P P
Mobile home park P
Multiple flats P1 P P
SRO C P1
Side yard/zero lot line house P P P
Townhouse P P P P
B. Lodging:
Bed and breakfast P C P P P
Dormitory P1 P1 P
Hotel P P
Inn C C P P
C. Office:
Corner office P1 P P P P
Live/work building P P P C*
Mixed use block building P P
Office building P P P P
Districts
Agricultural Sub-Urban
General
Urban Multi-Use
Central
Business Industrial
Specific
Use
Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7*
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 277/358
D. Commercial/retail/service:
Adult use C P
Box, large P
Box, medium P P1
Box, small P1 P P
Corner store P P1 P P P P P
Mixed use block building P P
Multiple principal building development P1 P1
Open air market P P
Restaurant P1 C C P P P
Roadside stand P
Self storage P1 P
Shopping mall P1 P2
Shopping strip P1
Taverns or similar P P
E. Civic:
Auditorium P1 P1 P
Convention center P2 P2
Golf course P P1 P
Indoor recreation P P P P
Library P2 P2 P2 P2
Movie theater P P
Museum C C P1 P1 P
Public parks and related facilities P P P P P P P
Religious assembly, large C P1 C
Religious assembly, medium C C P P1 C
Religious assembly, small C P1 P P P
F. Civic support:
Cemetery P P
Clinic P1 P P P
Crematorium P P C P
Fairgrounds P P
Fire Department P2 P2 P2 P2 P2 P2
Funeral home C P1 P P
Hospital P1 P1 P
Law enforcement P2 P2 P2 P2 P2 P2
Parking structure P2 P2 P
Public works garage P2 P2 P2
G. Education:
College C P1 P1 P
Daycare P P P P P P P
K - 8 P1 P1 P P
9 - 12/high school C C P1 P1
Districts
Agricultural Sub-Urban
General
Urban Multi-Use
Central
Business Industrial
Specific
Use
Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7*
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 278/358
Preschool P1 P P P
Trade school P1 P P P
H. Automotive:
Gas/convenience C P1 P P1 P
Vehicle repair C C P P1 P
Vehicle sales/rental C P C P
I. Agriculture:
Community garden P P P P P P
Farm P P P P P
Grain storage P P
Greenhouse P C P P
Kennel P P1 P
Livestock P P
Small farm C
Stable P
J. Industrial:
Agribusiness P1 P
Artisan/craftsman shop P P P
Contractor shops P1 P P
Cross docking facility C** P
Industry, open P*
Industry, restricted P
Office-showroom P P
Warehousing P
Waste transfer C
Wastewater treatment P2 P2
Water treatment P2 P2
K. Accessory uses:
Accessory parking structure P1 P1 P
Accessory surface parking (off site) C P C P P
Active solar equipment P P P P P P P
Agritourism C
Dispersed wind equipment C C C C C C C
Drive-through P1 P P1 P
Home occupations P P P P P P
Outdoor customer dining area P1 P1 P1 P P P
Outdoor storage P P1** P
Seasonal sales/display P P** P P
Small wind equipment P P P P P P P
(Ord. 19-9, 6-18-2019)
12-8-4: BUILDING DISPOSITION:
Districts
Agricultural Sub-Urban
General
Urban Multi-Use
Central
Business Industrial
Specific
Use
Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7*
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 279/358
TABLE 3
BUILDING DISPOSITION
A. Edge Yard: Types - freestanding house, mansion apartment, duplex/two-flat, multiple-flat, freestanding commercial/retail/service building, office, lodging,
civic, civic support, educational, automotive, agricultural and industrial.
A building that generally occupies the interior of its lot with setbacks on all sides. For residential applications, the front yard is intended to be visually
continuous with the yards of adjacent buildings. For nonresidential building types, the first tier (front lot) is comprised of landscaping and pedestrian
pavements and, in some cases, limited accessory parking, while portions of the second tier (middle lot) and third tier (back lot) can be used for
accessory surface parking.
B. Side Yard: Types - side yard/zero lot line house, duplex/two-flat, corner store or corner office, inn and hotel.
A building that occupies one (1) side of the lot with the setback to the other side. A shallow frontage setback defines a more urban condition. If the
adjacent building is similar with a blank side wall, the yard can be quite private. If a side yard house abuts and shares an unpierced party wall with a
neighboring side yard house, the type is known as a duplex. Energy costs are reduced by sharing a party wall in this disposition. For nonresidential
building types, portions of the second tier and all of the third tier (back lot) can be used for accessory surface parking.
C. Split Yard: Types - duplex/two-flat, townhouse, commercial/retail/service and office buildings.
A building that occupies the boundaries of its lot from side to side leaving the front and rear of the lot as open yard. This is a more urban yard type, as it
provides an open, landscaped frontage along the thoroughfare. For residential applications, the front yard is intended to be visually continuous with the
yards of adjacent buildings. The rear yard can be secured for privacy by combinations of plantings, fences and accessory structures. For commercial
applications, it provides a greener, landscaped frontage with opportunities for outdoor patio seating and dining, and accessory surface parking within
the third tier.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 280/358
D. Rear Yard: Types - townhouse, live/work building, multiple-flat, mixed use block building, commercial/retail/service, office and civic buildings.
A building that occupies the full frontage, leaving the rear of the lot as the sole yard; however, traditional downtown buildings may occupy the entire lot.
This is a very urban type as the continuous facade steadily defines the public thoroughfare. The front facade may be articulated for functional purposes
such as recess entries or window bays. In its residential form, the rear of the building includes a garage (attached or detached) as in the row house.
For its commercial form, the third tier can be used for accessory surface parking.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-8-5: GENERAL PARKING PROVISIONS:
A. Off Street Parking: Off street parking shall be provided as outlined in table 4 of this section for all new development, or for all changes in function or
major improvement or expansion that results in an increase in occupant load or gross floor area resulting in additional required parking. (Ord. 13-13, 4-
2-2013) TABLE 4
REQUIRED PARKING TABLE
Function
Districts
Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4
Z5
Z6 Z7
Residential 2/dwelling
1.5/dwelling
1/dwelling
1.5/dwelling
n/a
n/a
Lodging 1/room 1/room 1/room 1/room n/a
n/a
Office1 n/a 2/1,000
sq. ft.
2/1,000
sq. ft.
4/1,000
sq. ft.
n/a
4/1,000 sq. ft.
Retail1 2/1,000
sq. ft.
2/1,000
sq. ft.
2/1,000
sq. ft.
4/1,000
sq. ft.
n/a
4/1,000 sq. ft.
Civic To be determined via development review (see chapter 7 of this title)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 281/358
Other To be determined via development review (see chapter
7 of this title)
Minimum 1 per 2 employees of largest shift plus 1/2,000
sq. ft. maximum for principal building
To be
determined
Parking
setbacks:
Principal front
yard
30 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. n/a
10 ft.
Secondary
front yard
10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. n/a
30 ft.
Side yard 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. n/a
15 ft.
Rear yard 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft./15 ft.2
n/a
25 ft./50 ft.2
Notes:
1. For office and retail functions, parking requirements are expressed as maximums.
2. The larger dimension shall be applied for nonresidential uses abutting residential uses.
(Ord. 15-10, 9-15-2015; amd. 2017 Code)
B. Shared Parking: Minimum or maximum effective parking in a development with two (2) or more distinct forms or functions shall be determined utilizing
the appropriate shared parking factor in table 5 of this section.
TABLE 5
SHARED PARKING FACTOR
Function
Combination Residential Lodging Office Retail
Residential 1 1.1 1.4 1.2
Lodging 1.1 1 1.7 1.3
Office 1.4 1.7 1 1.2
Retail 1.2 1.3 1.2 1
Shared Parking Calculation Example:
A 20,000 square foot mixed use building in the Z4 District has 10,000 square feet of office on the upper floor and 10,000 square feet of retail at street
level. Follow the steps below to determine the amount of parking and subsequent efficiency resulting from sharing.
Step 1: Locate site's district and function from table 4, "Required Parking Table", of this section.
TABLE 4
REQUIRED PARKING TABLE
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 282/358
SITE: Z4 District with: 10,000 square feet of office and 10,000 square feet of retail.
Step 2: Calculate maximum parking for each function.
10,000/1,000 = 10. 10 x 4 = 40 spaces max. for office function.
10,000/1,000 = 10. 10 x 4 = 40 spaces max. for retail function.
40 + 40 = 80 spaces max. office and retail combined.
Step 3: Determine sharing factor by locating site's function(s) from table 5, "Shared Parking Factor", of this section.
TABLE 5
SHARED PARKING FACTOR
Step 4: Calculate effective maximum parking.
80 spaces/1.2(sharing factor multiplier) = 66.6 shared parking spaces
(80 - 66.6 = 13.4 spaces saved due to sharing)
C. Bicycles: For multi-family residential and all nonresidential forms and functions, bicycle racks or other form of bicycle storage shall be provided to
accommodate at least one (1) bicycle for every twenty (20) parking spaces provided, up to a maximum of ten (10) bicycles.
D. Parking Surface: All parking shall be on an improved surface designed for the purpose of off street parking. The proposed surface shall be approved by
the Administrative Officer, or by the Development Review Committee following the process outlined in chapter 7 of this title, as applicable. Parking on
grass or lawn is not allowed unless it is on reinforced turf designed for parking and approved by the Administrative Officer.
E. Access: Parking stalls shall be accessed via internal drives and traffic aisles. Public right-of-way shall not be used for maneuvering into or out of off
street parking spaces. This requirement shall not apply to downtown streets where public parking spaces are designated, or to alleys.
F. Landscaping: Off street parking areas shall meet the landscaping standards in section 12-16-5 of this title.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 283/358
G. Deviation: During the site development plan compliance review process, the Development Review Committee, Planning and Zoning Commission or
City Council, as applicable, may authorize a deviation of up to ten percent (10%) from the total minimum or maximum number of parking stalls required
for the development. A denial of a request for a deviation under this section may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, according to chapter
5 of this title. Any deviation in excess of ten percent (10%) shall require approval of a variance by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
H. Off Street Parking Dimensions:
1. Motorcycle and scooter parking spaces, if provided: Width, four foot (4') minimum; length, eight foot (8') minimum.
2. Vehicle parking space width: Nine foot (9') minimum.
3. Vehicle parking space length: Eighteen foot (18') minimum to twenty foot (20') maximum.
4. Width of two-way drive aisle serving any parking space: Twenty four foot (24') minimum to twenty six foot (26') maximum.
5. Width of one-way drive aisle serving greater than sixty degree (60°) parking spaces: Twenty four foot (24') minimum to twenty five foot (25')
maximum.
6. Width of one-way drive aisle serving less than sixty degree (60°) parking spaces: 15.5 foot minimum to 16.5 foot maximum. (Ord. 13-13, 4-2-2013;
amd. 2017 Code)
12-8-6: SPECIFIC PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Use Of Vehicles For Other Than Transport: Except for temporary construction trailers, approved outdoor mobile vendors and mobile services operated
by public service agencies (i.e., bookmobile, bloodmobiles, etc.) as allowed by the City, and trailers parked in a designated and improved loading area,
no vehicle may be used for office, business, industrial manufacturing, testing, or storage of items.
B. Use Of Vehicles For Residential Purposes: A vehicle may not be used for temporary or permanent residential purposes; however, a recreational vehicle
as defined in chapter 2 of this title may be used for short term camping, provided:
1. The vehicle is located upon a designated campground allowed under this title, or is located upon property sanctioned for temporary camping related
to an event allowed under this Code or otherwise approved by the City Council; or
2. The vehicle is parked for up to five (5) continuous days, with the permission of the property owner, upon a residential driveway leading to a garage,
carport or parking space serving a dwelling, or within a residential side or rear yard at least five feet (5') from an adjoining residential lot line. The use
of generators or other potential noise producing equipment shall be subject to the maximum sound levels for residential receiving land uses in title 8,
chapter 6 of this Code.
C. Recreational Vehicle Storage On Residential Lots: Storage of recreational vehicles on any lot with a residential function less than five (5) acres in area
shall be subject to the following:
1. For the purposes of this subsection, "storage" shall mean the seasonal and long term storage of recreational vehicles, when not in use. This
subsection does not apply to recreational vehicles on residential property being prepared for use, routine maintenance, or short term parking for less
than seventy two (72) hours.
2. All recreational vehicles shall display current registration or license plates as required by law.
3. A recreational vehicle shall be stored indoors or, if stored outdoors, shall be stored as follows:
a. If within the first tier, upon an established, continuous hard surfaced driveway leading from the street to a garage, carport or parking space serving
a dwelling; or
b. Within the second or third tier of the lot; provided, that the vehicle shall be located a minimum of five feet (5') from any adjoining property line.
D. Parking Or Storage Of Commercial Vehicles:
1. Z2 Sub-Urban, Z3 General Urban And Z7-1 And Z7-3 Specific Use Districts:
a. No more than one (1) commercial vehicle with a wheelbase not exceeding twenty four feet (24') in length may be parked or stored upon a lot
containing a residential function.
b. Exception: A vehicle that exceeds the above limitation may be parked or stored upon a lot containing a residential function if it is located wholly
indoors or is located in the third tier of the lot; provided, that the vehicle is located at least five feet (5') from any adjoining property line and does
not exceed thirty five feet (35') in total length.
c. Parking or storage must be on a hard surface that is designed for the weight of the vehicle.
d. These requirements shall not apply to a commercial vehicle parked for loading, unloading or rendering service.
2. Z4 Multi-Use, Z5 Central Business, Z7-2 And Z7-4 Specific Use Districts:
a. Up to three (3) commercial vehicles such as delivery and service trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of fourteen thousand (14,000)
pounds or less may be parked without screening if such vehicles relate to the principal function.
b. Parking of more than three (3) vehicles of fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds or less GVWR or any number of vehicles over fourteen thousand
(14,000) pounds GVWR shall be parked or stored so that they shall not be visible from adjoining streets or sidewalks (e.g., parked inside or behind
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 284/358
a building). Parking of vehicles as regulated in this subsection in an area that is visible to adjoining streets or sidewalks shall require screening
according to subsection 12-16-5K of this title.
3. Z6 Industrial District: There shall be no limit to the number of commercial vehicles parked on a lot. Screening shall not be required, unless vehicles
are stored in an outdoor storage area, which shall be screened according to subsection 12-16-5K of this title.
4. Paving: All parking and vehicle storage areas shall be permanently paved with materials that support the gross weights of the intended vehicles.
E. Private Vehicle Sales: Except for an approved vehicle sales/rental function, any parking lot or parking space serving a nonresidential function shall not
be used for displaying vehicles for sale, unless the vehicle is owned by the person or entity that owns the property upon which the parking lot is
located. (2017 Code)
Chapter 9
Z1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
12-9-1: PURPOSE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of the Z1 Agricultural District is to provide areas in which agriculture and related uses are supported and natural ecosystems,
woodlands, wetlands, prairies, etc., are preserved to prevent soil erosion, protect water quality and support biodiversity and natural habitats.
B. Premature Development Restricted: In order to avoid leapfrog development or large tract fragmentation, premature subdivision standards and area
development concept plans ("ghost platting") will be required for all developments within the Z1 Zoning District. See section 11-1-5 of this Code for
premature subdivision standards and ghost platting requirements. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-9-2: PERMITTED FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
A. Permitted forms and functions, which are identified in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that are allowed by right within Mason City. New
development or redevelopment shall be reviewed according to chapter 7 of this title to show compliance with all development standards identified
herein.
B. No more than two (2) single-family dwelling units shall be allowed per zoning lot. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-9-3: CONDITIONAL FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Conditional forms and functions, which are identified in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that must be reviewed and approved by the board for
potential impact on neighboring properties. All conditional forms and functions shall conform to the standards set forth in section 12-5-5 of this title. In all
cases, all new development and redevelopment within Mason City shall require compliance review according to chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-
2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-9-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings shall not exceed a cumulative total area of more than four thousand (4,000) square feet measured at the exterior dimensions of the
ground floor. The following shall not be considered as part of the cumulative accessory building calculation:
A. Farm operation buildings.
B. Structures or buildings such as garden sheds, playhouses, or storage or maintenance sheds measuring no more than one hundred twenty (120) square
feet. (Ord. 11-3, 2-15-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 285/358
12-9-5: PREEXISTING STANDARDS:
Any development, lot of record or structure legally operated prior to July 1, 2010, shall be considered a permitted use and legally conforming within the Z1
Zoning District. Any redevelopment or addition to a development, lot of record or structure shall be required to conform to the forms and functions and
development standards found within this zoning district. Any change in form or function shall conform to permitted and conditional form and function
standards as described in the Z1 Zoning District. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-9-6: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
A. New Subdivision: Refer to section 11-1-5, "Criteria For Subdivisions In Undeveloped Areas", of this Code.
B. Accessory Dwellings: Accessory dwellings in the Z1 District shall meet the following standards in addition to required Building Codes:
1. Limited to one accessory dwelling per primary dwelling;
2. Limited to one occupant per accessory dwelling;
3. Located in the third tier of the lot;
4. Contain at least four hundred (400) and no greater than six hundred (600) gross square feet in total area;
5. Be designed in a compatible style and constructed of the same materials as the primary dwelling; and
6. Either freestanding or located within the second story of a detached garage.
C. Bed And Breakfast: Bed and breakfasts in the Z1 District shall be comprised of a converted freestanding house, provided the conversion meets
applicable Building Codes. Customer parking shall be located in the second or third tier.
D. Restaurant: Restaurants in the Z1 District shall be comprised of a converted freestanding house or farm structure, provided the conversion meets
applicable Building Codes. Customer parking shall be located in the second or third tier. Parking shall be provided for a retail function per section 12-8-
5, table 4 of this title and landscaped per section 12-16-5 of this title.
E. Small Religious Assembly: Small religious assembly in the Z1 District shall meet the following standards:
1. Limited to congregational assembly, small meeting and Sunday school with supportive storage, kitchen and office functions;
2. Weekday, full time educational functions are prohibited;
3. Parking shall be located in the side yard area of the second tier and all of the third tier;
4. Parking shall be limited to a maximum of one parking space per two (2) seats plus three (3) staff parking spaces;
5. Parking shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from all applicable property lines; and
6. Parking lots shall be landscaped per section 12-16-5 of this title. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
F. Agritourism: Agritourism forms and functions shall meet the following standards:
1. No Interference: New agritourism forms and functions shall be located, designed and operated so as not to interfere with normal agricultural
practices on and off site.
2. Rural Theme: Agritourism shall incorporate a rural theme in terms of building style and design. New agritourism uses involving new structures shall
complement or enhance rather than detract from the rural environment.
3. Compliance: Agritourism activities shall comply with all relevant local, State and Federal requirements related to public health, building/construction
standards, safety, health and welfare.
4. Building Scale: Allowed non-agricultural agritourism uses and activities located on land with an agricultural or residential form or function shall be
consistent with the size, scale and intensity of the existing agricultural form or function of the property and the existing buildings on the site.
Nonagricultural forms or functions shall not be located outside the general area already developed for buildings and residential forms or functions.
5. Parking: Vehicular access and customer parking shall be provided on site so that vehicles are not required to back onto public roads. Parking lots
shall be constructed in conformance with section 12-8-5 of this title and landscaped per section 12-16-5 of this title. Impervious surfaces shall be
minimized to the greatest extent possible. Use of pervious paving in parking areas is encouraged. (Ord. 19-2, 3-5-2019)
12-9-7: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
See section 12-8-3, table 2, "Zoning Form And Function Table", of this title. (Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014)
12-9-8: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
TABLE 1
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 286/358
Z1 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Primarily agricultural with related residential and scattered wetlands, woodlands, on and off street trails and two-lane highways.
A. Building Configuration:
1. Principal building 2 stories maximum
2. Accessory building 2 stories maximum
3. Building height shall be measured in number of stories, excluding attics and raised basements
4. Subordinate farm structures shall be permitted at a height not to exceed 75 feet
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
B. Building Disposition: (See section 12-8-4, table 3 of this title.)
1. Edge yard Permitted
2. Side yard Not permitted
3. Split yard Not permitted
4. Rear yard Not permitted
C. Lot Occupation:
1. Lot size 10 acre minimum
2. Lot coverage n/a
3. Lot width 300 foot minimum
D. Setbacks; Principal Building:
1. Principal front setback 50 foot
minimum
2. Secondary front setback 50 foot
minimum
3. Side setback 50 foot
minimum
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 287/358
4. Rear setback 100 foot
minimum
5. An attached front porch shall be allowed to encroach a maximum of 10 feet within the required principal front yard and secondary
front yard setback; encroachment into the side yard setback shall require a variance
SETBACKS; PRINCIPAL BUILDING
E. Setbacks; Accessory Building:
1. Front setback 20 feet plus principal building setback minimum
2. Side setback 25 foot or 50 foot minimum at secondary frontage
3. Rear setback 25 foot minimum
4. A subordinate farm structure shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet
SETBACKS; ACCESSORY BUILDING
F. Parking Provisions: (See section 12-8-5, "General Parking Provisions", of this title.)
1. Residential 2 per dwelling
2. Lodging 1 per room
3. Office n/a
4. Retail 2 per 1,000 square feet
5. Civic To be determined by DRC
6. Other To be determined by DRC
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 288/358
Chapter 10
Z2 SUB-URBAN DISTRICT
12-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Z2 Sub-Urban District is to provide space for a limited range of primarily residential lot sizes, limited neighborhood commercial uses
and public park spaces in areas planned as walkable neighborhoods that are or soon will be served by a full range of public services.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-10-2: PERMITTED FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Permitted forms and functions, which are identified in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that are allowed by right within Mason City. New
development or redevelopment will require a site plan drawn to scale showing that all zoning standards in chapter 16 of this title have been met. (Ord. 10-
003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
No more than one (1) principal building shall be allowed per zoning lot. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-10-3: CONDITIONAL FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Conditional forms and functions, which are identified in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that must be reviewed and approved by the board for
potential impact on neighboring properties. All conditional forms and functions shall conform to the standards set forth in section 12-5-5 of this title. New
development or redevelopment shall be reviewed according to chapter 7 of this title to show compliance with all development standards identified herein.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-10-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
A. Location: Accessory buildings shall be located in the rear yard. A detached accessory garage may be located in a side yard if all other accessory
building setbacks and bulk requirements are met.
B. Cumulative Area:
1. On zoning lots of up to two (2) acres in area, accessory buildings shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard but in any case, up
to six hundred (600) square feet (cumulative) shall be allowed as a minimum. Accessory buildings shall not exceed a cumulative area of more than
one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet measured at the exterior dimensions of the ground floor.
2. On zoning lots greater than two (2) acres, cumulative total area shall not exceed two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet measured at the
exterior dimensions of the ground floor.
3. On any lot, a maximum of two (2) buildings measuring no more than eighty (80) square feet each, such as garden sheds, playhouses, or storage or
maintenance sheds, shall not be considered as part of the overall accessory building square foot calculation.
4. Exception: Agricultural buildings serving a farm on a lot of ten (10) acres or more shall not be counted towards the cumulative area requirement, but
shall conform to all other accessory building requirements.
C. Architectural Style And Building Materials: The architectural style and building materials of all accessory buildings within the Z2 District shall be
compatible with those of the principal building on the lot.
D. Conditional Use Permit: An application for a conditional use permit as set forth in section 12-5-5 of this title may be submitted to request an increase in
accessory building size, but in no case shall the total building area occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 11-09, 8-16-2011;
amd. 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 289/358
12-10-5: PREEXISTING STANDARDS:
Any development, lot of record or structure legally operated prior to July 1, 2010, shall be considered a permitted use and legally conforming within this
zoning district. Any redevelopment or addition to a development, lot of record or structure shall be required to conform to the forms and functions and
development standards found within this zoning district. Any change in form or function shall conform to permitted and conditional form and function
standards as described in this zoning district. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-10-6: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
A. Infill And Conversion:
1. Introduction of new duplex, side yard/zero lot line house and two-flat building types, including conversion of an existing freestanding home to two (2)
or more dwelling units shall be limited to corner lots and shall require compliance review according to chapter 7 of this title.
2. Placement of a corner store form and function shall be limited to one (1) corner store per one-fourth (1/4) mile radius (pedestrian shed) as measured
on a scaled, aerial photograph or plat map.
3. Placement of a corner office form and function shall be limited to one (1) corner office per one-fourth (1/4) mile radius (pedestrian shed) as measured
on a scaled, aerial photograph or plat map.
B. New Development Or Subdivision:
1. For new development or subdivisions less than or equal to five (5) acres in size, side yard or split yard building dispositions may constitute one
hundred percent (100%) of the lots.
2. For new development or subdivisions greater than five (5) acres in size, side yard or split yard building dispositions shall not exceed thirty percent
(30%) of the total lots.
C. Residential Driveways:
1. Residential driveways serving front and side loading attached and detached garages accessed from the street shall be no wider than twenty six feet
(26') at the property line and located in the first and second tier except when the lot is located on a corner, it may be located in the third tier.
2. Residential driveways serving attached and detached garages accessed from an alley shall be no wider than twenty two feet (22') at the property
line.
3. One (1) driveway maximum shall be allowed per zoning lot; however, one (1) additional driveway may be approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 10-
003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
D. Accessory Dwellings: Accessory dwellings in the Z2 District shall meet the following standards in addition to required building codes:
1. Limited to one (1) accessory dwelling per primary dwelling;
2. Limited to one (1) occupant per accessory dwelling;
3. Located in the third tier of the lot;
4. Contain at least four hundred (400) and no greater than six hundred (600) gross square feet in total area;
5. Be designed in a compatible style and constructed of the same materials as the primary dwelling; and
6. Either freestanding or located within the second story of a detached garage. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-10-7: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
See section 12-8-3, "Zoning Form And Function Table", of this title. (Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014)
12-10-8: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
TABLE 1
Z2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Primarily detached, single-family residential, open lawns, corner store, neighborhood and community parks, greenways, on and off street trails,
interconnected streets and multilane thoroughfares with sidewalks.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 290/358
A. Building Configuration:
1. Principal building 2 stories
maximum
2. Accessory building 2 stories
maximum
3. Building height shall be measured in number of stories, excluding attics and raised basements
4. Stories may not exceed 14 feet in height from finished floor to finished ceiling, excluding vaulted spaces serving an assembly
function, except for a first floor commercial function, which must be a minimum of 11 feet with a maximum of 25 feet
5. The height of any accessory building shall not exceed the height of the principal building
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
B. Building Disposition: (See section 12-8-4, table 3 of this title.)
1. Edge yard Permitted
2. Side yard Permitted
3. Split yard Permitted
4. Rear yard Not permitted
C. Lot Occupation:
1. Lot width a. 125 foot maximum to 50 foot minimum for edge yard type
b. 25 foot minimum side yard and split yard type
2. Lot coverage 35 percent maximum
3. Lot depth 150 foot maximum, 100 foot minimum
D. Setbacks; Principal Building:
1. Principal front setback 35 foot maximum, 25 foot minimum
2. Secondary front setback 15 foot minimum
3. Side setback a. Edge yard 6 foot minimum
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 291/358
b. Side yard 0 foot minimum (split yard
and 1 side of side yard building
dispositions only)
4. Rear setback 25 foot minimum
5. Or the predominant setback on lots fronting on the same block
6. An attached front porch shall be allowed to encroach a maximum of 10 feet within the required
principal front yard and secondary front yard setback; encroachment into the side yard setback shall
require a variance
SETBACKS; PRINCIPAL BUILDING
E. Setbacks; Accessory Building:
1. Front setback 20 feet plus principal building setback
minimum
2. Side setback 5 foot minimum, 25 foot minimum at
secondary front setback
3. Rear setback 5 foot minimum
4. Or the predominant setback on lots fronting on the same block
5. Detached garages may be placed in the side yard per subsection 12-10-4A of this chapter; all other
detached accessory buildings must be placed wholly in the rear yard
SETBACKS; ACCESSORY BUILDING
F. Parking/Trash Placement: (See also section 12-8-5, "General Parking Provisions", of this title.)
1. Residential 1.5 per dwelling
2. Lodging 1 per bedroom
3. Office 2 per 1,000
square feet
4. Retail 2 per 1,000
square feet
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 292/358
5. Civic To be determined
by DRC
6. Other To be determined
by DRC
7. Parking spaces for a corner store or a corner office shall be provided within the third tier
8. Parking is allowed in the second and third tiers
9. Parking for one- or two-family residential functions is allowed in the first tier only upon an improved driveway providing
access to a garage, carport or parking space serving the dwelling
10. Trash containers shall be stored only within the third tier
PARKING/TRASH PLACEMENT
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 11
Z3 GENERAL URBAN DISTRICT
12-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Z3 General Urban District is to provide a range of residential lot sizes to support a mix of residential building types at medium densities
with corner offices, corner stores, parks and playgrounds organized in walkable neighborhoods interconnected by landscaped streets and sidewalks.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-11-2: PERMITTED FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Permitted forms and functions, which are identified in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that are allowed by right within Mason City. New
development or redevelopment will require a site plan drawn to scale showing that all zoning standards in chapter 16 of this title have been met. (Ord. 10-
003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-11-3: CONDITIONAL FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Conditional forms and functions, which are identified in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that must be reviewed and approved by the board for
potential impact on neighboring properties. All conditional forms and functions shall conform to the standards set forth in section 12-5-5 of this title. New
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 293/358
development or redevelopment shall be reviewed according to chapter 7 of this title to show compliance with all development standards identified herein.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-11-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
A. Location: Accessory buildings shall be located in and not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. A detached accessory garage may be
located in a side yard if all other accessory building setbacks and bulk requirements are met.
B. Cumulative Area:
1. On zoning lots of up to two (2) acres in area, accessory buildings shall not exceed a cumulative area of more than one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet measured at the exterior dimensions of the ground floor, but in any case, up to six hundred (600) square feet shall be allowed as
a minimum.
2. On zoning lots greater than two (2) acres, a cumulative total area shall not exceed two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet measured at the
exterior dimensions of the ground floor.
3. On any lot, a maximum of two (2) buildings measuring no more than eighty (80) square feet each, such as garden sheds, playhouses, or storage or
maintenance sheds, shall not be considered as part of the overall accessory building square foot calculation.
C. Architectural Style And Building Materials: The architectural style and building materials of all accessory buildings within the Z3 District shall be
compatible with those of the principal building on the lot.
D. Conditional Use Permit: An application for a conditional use permit as set forth in section 12-5-5 of this title may be submitted to request an increase in
accessory building size, but in no case shall the total building area occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 11-09, 8-16-2011;
amd. 2017 Code)
12-11-5: PREEXISTING STANDARDS:
Any development, lot of record or structure legally operated prior to July 1, 2010, shall be considered a permitted use and legally conforming within this
zoning district. Any redevelopment or addition to a development, lot of record or structure shall be required to conform to the forms and functions and
development standards found within this zoning district. Any change in form or function shall conform to permitted and conditional form and function
standards as described in this zoning district. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-11-6: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
A. Infill:
1. Where mansion apartments and/or multiple-flats are introduced, their massing and overall design shall be compatible with the character of the
immediate neighborhood.
2. Up to two (2) corner stores within a one-fourth (1/4) mile radius (pedestrian shed) as measured on a scaled, aerial photograph or plat map of
neighboring residences may be located in the Z3 District. The corner stores shall be located on corner lots clustered around a single roadway
intersection or adjacent to one another on the same block.
3. Up to two (2) corner offices within a one-fourth (1/4) mile radius (single pedestrian shed) as measured on a scaled, aerial photograph or plat map of
neighboring residences may be located in the Z3 District. The corner offices shall be located on corner lots clustered around a single roadway
intersection or adjacent to one another on the same block.
B. Residential Driveways: Residential driveways serving front and side loading attached and detached garages accessed from the street shall be no wider
than twenty six feet (26') at the property line and located in the first and second tier except when the lot is located on a corner, it may be located in the
third tier. Residential driveways serving attached and detached garages accessed from an alley shall be no wider than twenty two feet (22') at the
property line. One (1) driveway maximum allowed per zoning lot unless approved by the City Engineer.
C. Parking:
1. Any deviation from the required parking standards for the Z3 District shall require a variance. In instances where parking is to be determined, the
Administrative Officer or the Administrative Review Body shall determine an adequate amount based upon the request by the applicant, information
provided by the applicant related to the parking impact of the proposed function, the ITE manual (Institute of Transportation Engineers) standards, or
other applicable resources.
2. Surface parking to support a permitted use is allowed on an adjacent lot or a separate lot in close proximity to the permitted use, if a conditional use
permit is approved by the board.
D. Facade: The principal facades of a building in the Z3 District shall face the street and be built parallel to the street or the tangent of a curved street,
unless the primary access to the building is from an internal drive or parking lot. If the principal facade of any building in the Z3 District does not face a
street, any side of the building facing a street shall be a finished facade with fenestration and architectural details similar in style and quality to the
principal facade.
E. Accessory Dwellings: Accessory dwellings in the Z3 District shall meet the following standards in addition to required building codes:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 294/358
1. Limited to one (1) accessory dwelling per primary dwelling;
2. Limited to one (1) occupant per accessory dwelling;
3. Located in the third tier of the lot;
4. Contain at least four hundred (400) and no greater than six hundred (600) gross square feet in total area;
5. Be designed in a compatible style and constructed of the same materials as the primary dwelling; and
6. Either freestanding or located within the second story of a detached garage.
F. Small Box: Small box commercial/retail/service forms and functions in the Z3 District shall be limited to a maximum size of two thousand five hundred
(2,500) gross square feet on the ground floor. Parking shall be provided per section 12-8-5, table 4 of this title. Parking lot landscaping shall be
provided per section 12-16-5 of this title.
G. Restaurant: Restaurant forms and functions in the Z3 District shall be limited to two thousand five hundred (2,500) gross square feet on the ground floor
only. A minimum of four (4) and a maximum of ten (10) parking spaces shall be provided. On street parking may account for up to two (2) of the
required parking spaces. Parking lot landscaping shall be provided per section 12-16-5 of this title.
H. Automotive Gas/Convenience: Automotive gas/convenience forms and functions in the Z3 District shall be limited to two thousand five hundred (2,500)
gross square feet, be located on a corner lot, and provide a minimum of two (2) and a maximum of six (6) parking spaces. Parking lot landscaping shall
be provided per section 12-16-5 of this title.
I. Drive-Through: Drive-through functions in the Z3 District shall meet the following standards:
1. Shall be limited to corner lots with an edge yard building disposition;
2. The drive-through window shall be located in the second or third tier at the rear or street side of the principal building;
3. Traffic circulation and impact data shall meet the requirements of the City Engineer; and
4. The application shall receive a positive recommendation from the City Engineer. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-11-7: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
See section 12-8-3, "Zoning Form And Function Table", of this title. (Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014)
12-11-8: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
TABLE 1
Z3 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Mix of houses, townhouses, small multiple-flat residential, small retail buildings, corner store and office, home offices, neighborhood parks, playgrounds,
miniparks, small surface parking lots and interconnected streets.
A. Building Configuration:
1. Principal building 3 stories
maximum
2. Accessory building 2 stories
maximum
3. Building height shall be measured in number of stories, excluding attics and raised basements
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 295/358
4. Stories may not exceed 14 feet in height from finished floor to finished ceiling, excluding vaulted spaces serving an assembly
function, except for a first floor commercial function, which must be a minimum of 11 feet with a maximum of 25 feet
5. The height of any accessory building shall not exceed the height of the principal building
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
B. Building Disposition: (See section 12-8-4, table 3 of this title.)
1. Edge yard Permitted
2. Side yard Permitted
3. Split yard Permitted
4. Rear yard Permitted
C. Lot Occupation:
1. Lot width a. 25 foot minimum, all dispositions except edge yard
b. 300 foot maximum to 40 foot minimum for edge yard
2. Lot coverage 60 percent maximum
3. Lot depth 400 foot maximum, 100 foot minimum
D. Setbacks; Principal Building:
1. Principal front setback 10 foot minimum
2. Secondary front setback 15 foot minimum
3. Side setback a. 10 foot total, 3 foot minimum, 1 side
for edge yard disposition
b. 0 foot minimum on 1 side, 6 foot
minimum on opposite side, side yard
disposition
c. 0 foot minimum, split yard and rear
yard dispositions
4. Rear setback 25 foot minimum
5. Or the predominant setback on lots fronting on the same block
6. An attached front porch shall be allowed to encroach a maximum of 10 feet within the required
principal front yard and secondary front yard setback; encroachment into the side yard setback shall
require a variance
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 296/358
SETBACKS; PRINCIPAL BUILDING
E. Setbacks; Accessory Building:
1. Front setback 20 feet plus principal building setback minimum
2. Side setback 5 foot minimum; 25 foot minimum at secondary front
setback on corner or double frontage lots
3. Rear setback 5 foot minimum
4. Or the predominant setback on lots fronting on the same block
5. Detached garages may be placed in the side yard per section 12-11-4 of this chapter; all
other detached accessory buildings must be placed wholly in the rear yard
SETBACKS; ACCESSORY BUILDING
F. Parking/Trash Placement: (See also section 12-8-5, "General Parking Provisions", of this title.)
1. Residential 1 per dwelling
2. Lodging 1 per room
3. Office 2 per 1,000
square feet
4. Retail 2 per 1,000
square feet
5. Civic To be determined
by DRC
6. Other To be determined
by DRC
7. Parking spaces shall be provided within the third tier
8. Parking spaces may also be provided within 1/3 of the second tier as shown in the diagram
9. Parking for one- or two-family residential functions is allowed in the first tier upon an improved driveway providing access to
a garage, carport or parking space serving the dwelling
10. Trash containers shall be stored only within the third tier
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 297/358
PARKING/TRASH PLACEMENT
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 12
Z4 MULTI-USE DISTRICT
12-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Z4 Multi-Use District is to provide space for a mixture of retail, personal and business service, office, lodging, automotive service, civic
and medium to high density residential uses necessary to support the needs of the overall community and planned in a walkable arrangement with parks,
interconnected and landscaped sidewalks, streets and parking facilities.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-12-2: PERMITTED FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Permitted forms and functions, which are identified in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that are allowed by right within Mason City. New
development or redevelopment will require a site plan drawn to scale showing that all zoning standards in chapter 16 of this title have been met. (Ord. 10-
003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-12-3: CONDITIONAL FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Conditional forms and functions, which are identified in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that must be reviewed and approved by the board for
potential impact on neighboring properties. All conditional forms and functions shall conform to the standards set forth in section 12-5-5 of this title. New
development or redevelopment shall be reviewed according to chapter 7 of this title to show compliance with all development standards identified herein.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-12-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
A. Cumulative Area:
1. Accessory buildings shall not exceed a cumulative total area of more than thirty five percent (35%) of the principal building's footprint measured at
the exterior dimensions of the ground floor.
2. A maximum of two (2) buildings measuring no more than eighty (80) square feet each, such as storage or maintenance sheds, shall not be
considered as part of the overall accessory building square foot calculation.
3. Exception: Agricultural buildings serving a farm shall not be counted towards the cumulative area requirement, but shall conform to all other
accessory structure requirements.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 298/358
B. Architectural Style And Building Materials: The architectural style and building materials of all accessory buildings within the Z4 District shall be
consistent with those of the principal building on the lot.
C. Trash Enclosures: Structure standards for trash enclosures are defined in section 12-16-12 of this title. (Ord. 11-3, 2-15-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
12-12-5: PREEXISTING STANDARDS:
Any development, lot of record or structure legally operated prior to July 1, 2010, shall be considered a permitted use and legally conforming within the Z4
District. Any redevelopment or addition to a development, lot of record or structure shall be required to conform to the forms and functions and
development standards found within the Z4 District. Any change in form or function shall conform to permitted and conditional form and function standards
as described in the Z4 District. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-12-6: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
A. Infill: Where mansion apartments and/or multiple-flats are introduced, their massing and overall design shall be compatible with the character of the
immediate neighborhood.
B. Residential Driveways: Residential driveways serving front and side loading attached and detached garages accessed from the street shall be no wider
than twenty six feet (26') at the property line and located in the first and second tier except when the lot is located on a corner, it may be located in the
third tier. Residential driveways serving attached and detached garages accessed from an alley shall be no wider than twenty two feet (22') at the
property line. One (1) driveway maximum allowed per zoning lot unless approved by City Engineer.
C. Parking:
1. Any deviation from the required parking standards for the Z4 District shall require a variance. In instances where parking is to be determined, the
Administrative Officer or the Administrative Review Body shall determine an adequate amount based upon the request by the applicant, information
provided by the applicant related to the parking impact of the proposed function, the ITE manual (Institute of Transportation Engineers) standards, or
other applicable resource.
2. Surface parking (allowed as a permitted accessory use in Z4) to support a permitted use is allowed on an adjacent lot or a separate lot in close
proximity to the permitted use.
3. Parking spaces may be located within the first tier, subject to the following: A parking lot within the first tier shall contain no more than two (2) rows of
parking spaces served by a single access aisle that is parallel or tangent to the street and shall have a depth of no more than sixty feet (60'). This
requirement shall not apply to a parking lot in the first tier that extends into the second tier or beyond.
D. Facade: The principal facades of a building in the Z4 District shall face the street and be built parallel to the street or the tangent of a curved street,
unless the primary access to the building is from an internal drive or parking lot. If the principal facade of any building in the Z4 District does not face a
street, any side of the building facing a street shall be a finished facade with fenestration and architectural details similar in style and quality to the
principal facade.
E. Location Of Residential Development: Residential functions shall be located at least six hundred sixty feet (660') from major arterials unless they are a
component of a mixed use development.
F. Duplex, Two-Flat, Side Yard/Zero Lot Line: Duplex, side yard/zero lot line and two-flat building types in the Z4 District shall meet the following standards:
1. Located at least five hundred feet (500') from a major arterial roadway, unless they are a component of a mixed use development;
2. Component of a mixed, or multi-use neighborhood development of at least five (5) acres;
3. Shall share the block with each other and/or other residential building types; and
4. Other than corner store, corner office and bed and breakfast, shall not be located on the same block with other form and functions as described in
section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title.
G. Seasonal Sales/Display: Seasonal sales/display in the Z4 District shall meet the following standards:
1. Be of a temporary nature;
2. Restricted to a portion of surface parking lots;
3. Not block traffic visibility triangles at street intersections or parking lot driveways;
4. Operate during typical business hours;
5. All sales materials and related display apparatus shall be removed from the premises when sales/display period ends; and
6. Subject to sign regulations per chapter 20 of this title.
H. Vehicle Sales And Rental: Vehicle sales and rental in the Z4 District shall be allowed only on lots of at least thirty thousand (30,000) square feet and
shall be the only function on the lot; however, a vehicle sales and rental business may also include vehicle repair. (Ord. 15-10, 9-15-2015; amd. 2017
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 299/358
Code)
12-12-7: Z4 OVERLAY DISTRICTS:
A. Overlay District Requirements: Properties within a Z4 Overlay District as described below shall conform in all respects to the requirements of the Z4
Multi-Use District and all other requirements of this title, except as modified by this section.
B. Z4 Corridor Overlay District Established:
1. Properties: The Z4 Corridor Overlay District shall consist of the properties zoned Z4 Multi-Use District as follows:
a. All property zoned Z4 with frontage on North Federal Avenue/U.S. 65.
b. All property zoned Z4 with frontage on South Federal Avenue, between 6th Street SE/SW and 15th Street SE/SW.
c. All property zoned Z4 with frontage on the east side of South Federal Avenue zoned Z4, between 15th Street SE and 22nd Street SE.
d. All property zoned Z4 with frontage on 5th Street SE/SW, (IA 122 westbound), between South Jefferson Avenue and South Pennsylvania Avenue.
e. All property zoned Z4 with frontage on 6th Street SE/SW (IA 122 eastbound), between South Jefferson Avenue and South Pennsylvania Avenue.
f. All properties zoned Z4 with frontage on the following streets, located between 5th Street SE/SW and 6th Street SE/SW:
(1) Both sides of South Jefferson Avenue;
(2) Both sides of South Adams Avenue;
(3) Both sides of South President Avenue;
(4) Both sides of South Washington Avenue;
(5) Both sides of South Federal Avenue;
(6) Both sides of South Delaware Avenue;
(7) The west side of South Pennsylvania Avenue.
g. All properties zoned Z4 on the south side of 4th Street SE/SW, between South Jefferson Avenue and South Pennsylvania Avenue.
2. Setback Requirements: Principal building, principal front setback: Zero feet (0') minimum; twenty feet (20') maximum.
3. Parking And Landscaping:
a. Parking lots within the Z4 Corridor Overlay District shall be paved with a hard and durable dustless surface and shall provide for stormwater
drainage according to City engineering standards. Permeable non-aggregate surfaces are permitted.
b. Parking shall be allowed in any portion of the second or third tier. Parking shall not be allowed in the first tier; however, a parking lot may be
located within the first tier if it is located on an adjacent lot or on the same lot as the principal building it serves, where the building has a front yard
setback of ten feet (10') or less, and the parking lot is located to the side of the building.
c. Notwithstanding the parking lot setback requirements of section 12-8-5, table 4 of this title, a parking lot adjacent to a public sidewalk or street
shall have a minimum setback of three feet (3'); however, this minimum shall be increased as necessary to provide adequate space to meet the
landscaping requirements of this section.
d. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection 12-16-5I4 of this title, a parking lot adjacent to a public sidewalk or street shall be screened along
the entire perimeter of the parking lot where it is adjacent to the sidewalk or street, as follows:
(1) A continuous shrub border or hedge, no less than three feet (3') and no more than four feet (4') in height comprised of deciduous and/or
evergreen shrubs; or
(2) A decorative barrier consisting of a metal railing system with masonry columns no taller than four feet (4') in height; a solid masonry wall no
taller than four feet (4') in height; or similar architectural barrier consisting of permanent and durable materials as approved by the Development
Review Committee; or
(3) Any combination of existing or proposed landscaping, decorative barrier, and architectural elements.
(4) Parking lot screening shall be approved by the Development Review Committee and shall:
(A) Create a barrier between the parking lot and the sidewalk; and
(B) Create a pedestrian way on the sidewalk, protected from vehicles in the parking lot; and
(C) Screen the parking lot from view of the street and sidewalk; and
(D) Screen headlight glare from adjacent streets and properties; and
(E) Preserve walkability, pedestrian access, and pedestrian safety to and within the site and within the neighborhood.
C. Z4 South Federal Gateway Overlay District:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 300/358
1. Properties: The Z4 South Federal Gateway Overlay District shall consist of properties zoned Z4 Multi-Use District with frontage on South Federal
Avenue, located between the centerline of 27th Street SW extended east across South Federal Avenue to the Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way,
and the south City limits (which is also the north right-of-way line of U.S. 18/IA 27).
2. Forms And Functions: Notwithstanding the forms and functions allowed in the Z4 Multi-Use District as listed in section 12-8-3, table 2, "Zoning Form
And Function Table", of this title the following forms and functions shall be permitted only as conditional uses in the Z4 South Federal Gateway
Overlay District, subject to approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, according to section 12-5-5 of this title:
a. Any outdoor storage accessory to any permitted or conditional form or function allowed in the Z4 District, including seasonal storage and seasonal
outdoor sales.
b. Self storage.
c. Cross docking facilities.
3. Setback Requirements: Notwithstanding the setback requirements in subsections 12-12-9D and E of this chapter, development, redevelopment, or
establishment of a form or function allowed under subsection C2 of this section shall be subject to the following:
a. Principal Buildings:
(1) Principal front setback: Minimum eighty five feet (85'), no maximum.
(2) Secondary front setback: Minimum thirty feet (30'), no maximum.
b. Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings shall be subject to the same setback requirements as a principal building.
4. Parking And Access:
a. A maximum of one access per frontage shall be allowed. Whenever possible, access to any development shall be from frontage roads, rear
access ("backage") roads, or from side streets other than South Federal Avenue.
b. Parking lots shall be paved with a hard and durable, dustless surface and shall provide for stormwater drainage according to City engineering
standards. Permeable non-aggregate surfaces are permitted. However, parking areas dedicated to commercial vehicle storage or other storage
may utilize gravel or similar aggregate material, provided that such outdoor storage areas are located and screened according to the requirements
of this section.
5. Building Design Requirements: In addition to the requirements of subsection 12-12-6D of this chapter, any side of any building facing a principal or
secondary frontage shall:
a. Be finished with high quality materials, including natural materials such as brick, stone, wood, or architectural metals.
b. Vertical-seamed metal siding shall not be allowed on any facade facing a principal or secondary frontage; however, the Development Review
Committee may permit an architectural metal siding treatment, provided that seams, if visible, are flush with the wall surface or otherwise
concealed, and hardware for joining panels is not visible.
6. Landscaping: All development shall, at minimum, meet the requirements of section 12-16-5 of this title; however, the Development Review
Committee or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as applicable, may require additional landscaping as necessary to ensure:
a. All non-residential forms and functions are screened from view of adjacent streets, sidewalks and residential forms and functions;
b. Parking lots do not cause drainage issues;
c. The "heat island" effect is minimized; and
d. The South Federal Gateway is an attractive entrance to the City.
7. Signs: All signs shall conform to the requirements of chapter 20 of this title, except off-premises signs are prohibited.
8. Additional Standards Of Review: In addition to the standards of review for a conditional use, as outlined in subsection 12-5-5D of this title, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall consider the following before approving a conditional use in the Z4 South Federal Gateway Overlay District:
a. The arrangement of buildings, parking areas, outdoor storage areas, fences, landscaping, signs, and any other structure shall conform to one or
more of the design guidelines outlined in appendix A to the comprehensive plan.
b. Development shall result in an attractive gateway to the community from the Avenue of the Saints (U.S. 18/IA 27). (Ord. 18-9, 10-2-2018)
12-12-8: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
See section 12-8-3, "Zoning Form And Function Table", of this title. (Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014)
12-12-9: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
TABLE 1
Z4 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Mixture of retail, personal and business service, office, lodging, automotive service, civic and medium to high density residential uses necessary to support
the needs of the overall community and planned in a walkable arrangement with parks, interconnected and landscaped sidewalks, streets and parking
facilities.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 301/358
A. Building Configuration:
1. Principal building 4 stories
maximum
2. Accessory building 2 stories
maximum
3. Building height shall be measured in number of stories, excluding attics and raised basements
4. Stories may not exceed 14 feet in height from finished floor to finished ceiling, excluding vaulted spaces serving an assembly
function, except for a first floor commercial function, which must be a minimum of 11 feet with a maximum of 25 feet
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
B. Building Disposition: (See section 12-8-4, table 3 of this title.)
1. Edge yard Permitted
2. Side yard Permitted
3. Split yard Permitted
4. Rear yard Permitted
C. Lot Occupation:
1. Lot width a. 25 foot minimum residential function
b. 400 foot maximum to 100 foot minimum all other functions
2. Lot coverage 75 percent
3. Lot depth 100 foot minimum
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
D. Setbacks; Principal Building:
1. Principal front setback 85 foot maximum and 50 foot minimum, if parking is provided in the first tier
as allowed by this chapter; 60 foot maximum, and 10 foot minimum if no
parking is provided in the first tier
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 302/358
2. Secondary front setback 30 foot maximum, 10 foot minimum
3. Side setback a. Edge yard 5 foot minimum
b. 0 foot minimum on 1 side, 6 foot minimum on opposite side, side yard
disposition
c. 0 foot minimum, split yard and rear yard dispositions
4. Rear setback 25 foot minimum
5. On a zoning lot with a multiple principal building development, at
least 1 principal building must meet the required principal front and
secondary front setback
6. Principal buildings shall be distanced from the lot lines as shown
SETBACKS; PRINCIPAL BUILDING
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. Ord. 15-10, 9-15-2015; 2017 Code)
E. Setbacks; Accessory Building:
1. Front setback 20 feet plus principal building setback minimum
2. Side setback 5 foot minimum; 10 foot minimum at secondary frontage on corner or double
frontage lots
3. Rear setback 5 foot minimum
4. Accessory buildings shall be distanced from the lot lines as
shown
SETBACKS; ACCESSORY BUILDING
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
F. Parking/Trash Placement: (See section 12-8-5, "General Parking Provisions", of this title.)
1. Residential 1.5 per dwelling
2. Lodging 1 per room
3. Office 2 per 1,000 square feet
4. Retail 2 per 1,000 square feet
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 303/358
5. Civic To be determined by DRC
6. Other To be determined by DRC
7. Parking spaces may only be located in 1/3 of the second tier and all of the third tier as shown in the diagram
8. Parking spaces may be provided in the first tier, subject to the requirements of subsection 12-12-6C3 of this chapter
9. Trash containers shall be stored only within the third tier
PARKING/TRASH PLACEMENT
G. Loading Dock Placement:
1. Loading docks may only be placed in one-third (1/3) of the second and all of the third tiers as shown in the diagram.
2. Loading docks shall not face the principal or secondary frontage street; however, a loading dock that is set back at least eighty feet (80') may face a
principal or secondary street, provided it is screened according to subsection 12-16-5I of this title.
LOADING DOCK PLACEMENT
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. Ord. 15-10, 9-15-2015; 2017 Code)
Chapter 13
Z5 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
12-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Z5 Central Business District is to provide for higher density, multi-story mixed use buildings that accommodate a variety of retail,
entertainment, business and personal service, office, lodging, residential and civic functions supported by public squares, plazas and miniparks within a
walkable, interconnected grid of landscaped streets with sidewalks.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 304/358
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-13-2: PERMITTED FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Permitted forms and functions, which are identified in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that are allowed by right within Mason City. New
development or redevelopment will require a site plan drawn to scale showing that all zoning standards in chapter 16 of this title have been met. (Ord. 10-
003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-13-3: CONDITIONAL FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Conditional forms and functions, which are identified in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that must be reviewed and approved by the board for
potential impact on neighboring properties. All conditional forms and functions shall conform to the standards set forth in section 12-5-5 of this title. New
development or redevelopment shall be reviewed according to chapter 7 of this title to show compliance with all development standards identified herein.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-13-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
A. Accessory buildings are generally not permitted within this zoning district; however, buildings measuring no more than eighty (80) square feet may be
allowed subject to Development Review Committee site plan compliance review of purpose, context, location, materials and overall relationship to
surrounding properties.
B. Structure standards for trash enclosures are defined in section 12-16-12 of this title. (Ord. 11-3, 2-15-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
12-13-5: PREEXISTING STANDARDS:
Any development, lot of record or structure legally operated prior to July 1, 2010, shall be considered a permitted use and legally conforming within this
zoning district. Any redevelopment or addition to a development, lot of record or structure shall be required to conform to the forms and functions and
development standards found within this zoning district. Any change in form or function shall conform to permitted and conditional form and function
standards as described in this zoning district. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-13-6: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
A. General: Massing and overall design of new buildings shall be compatible with the character of the buildings within the immediate area.
B. Building Design:
1. Height: Building height shall be a minimum two (2) stories to a maximum ten (10) stories. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
2. Building Materials:
a. Facades shall be constructed of approved materials. Approved facade materials include stone, brick, concrete, stucco, wood, architectural metal,
clear glass, and tinted glass. Artificial stucco or brick or similar overlay (e.g., EIFS, Z-brick) may be allowed only in applications where the
Administrative Officer has determined that:
(1) The application does not substantially cover original brick, stone or punched metal facade material.
(2) The application is constructed with two (2) layers of reinforcing mesh or equivalent durability to withstand physical contact.
(3) The application does not alter the historic character of the structure.
b. Prohibited facade skin materials include metal, aluminum, vinyl siding, lap siding, porcelain panels, nontextured concrete panels and asphalt
shingles. However, use of these materials as trim or accent is allowed, provided they do not constitute more than ten percent (10%) of the area of
any facade.
c. Buildings shall have a mix of materials or design features so as to reduce the effect of long, blank walls. Design features may include, among other
features, windows, doorways, cornices and indentations.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 305/358
d. Colors shall be muted or earth tone colors. Accent colors are allowed but may not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the unglazed area of the
facade.
3. Windows And Doors:
a. The design and location of windows and doors shall consider the architectural tradition of the building.
b. Generally clear glass, with allowance for energy efficiency, shall be used for all glazing. Reflective glass shall not be allowed.
c. The replacement of windows with opaque materials, such as plywood, medium density fiberboard, oriented strand board or masonry shall be
prohibited. Openings originally designed as windows shall retain the appearance of being a window. Replacement windows shall fill the entire
opening.
4. Awnings And Canopies:
a. Awnings and canopies shall respect the style and character of the structure, particularly in the material and color.
b. The minimum height of an awning or canopy shall be eight feet (8') from the lowest point to the sidewalk.
C. Drive-Through: Accessory drive-through functions in the Z5 District shall meet the following standards:
1. The drive-through window shall be located in the third tier at the rear or secondary frontage of the principal building;
2. Traffic circulation and impact data shall meet the requirements of the City Engineer; and
3. The application shall receive a positive recommendation from the City Engineer. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
D. Indoor Recreation: Facades facing the primary and secondary frontage of indoor recreation forms and functions in the Z5 District shall include vertically
proportioned (taller than wider) windows and doors with the primary building entrance facing the primary street frontage.
E. Seasonal Sales/Display: Seasonal sales/display in the Z5 District shall meet the following standards:
1. Be of a temporary nature;
2. Restricted to a portion of surface parking lots or, with approval, the public right-of-way;
3. Not block traffic visibility triangles at street intersections or parking lot driveways;
4. Operate during typical business hours;
5. All sales materials and related display apparatus shall be removed from the premises when sales/display period ends; and
6. Subject to sign regulations per chapter 20 of this title. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
F. Vehicle Sales And Rentals: Vehicle sales and rentals in the Z5 District shall meet the following requirements:
1. Limitation: Vehicle sales and rental shall be limited to motorcycles, passenger vehicles and trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of
fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds or less; or any vehicle carrying a "limited use" vehicle plate as permitted under Iowa Code 321.115.
2. Enclosed Building: All activities and storage shall take place within a completely enclosed building, except for new and used vehicle display, off
street loading and unloading, and customer and employee parking.
3. Vehicle Display:
a. Vehicle display areas must be on the same lot as the dealership building.
b. No more than four (4) vehicles for sale or rental may be displayed outdoors at any one time.
c. Vehicles may be displayed outdoors only during business hours and shall be stored indoors at all other times.
d. Minimum area outdoors for display of each vehicle for sale shall comply with the requirements of subsection 12-8-5H of this title, or as required by
Iowa Department of Transportation licensing standards, whichever is greater.
4. Open Areas: All open areas not used for off street parking, loading and unloading shall be landscaped, properly maintained and kept free from
refuse and debris. (Ord. 19-9, 6-18-2019)
12-13-7: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
See section 12-8-3, "Zoning Form And Function Table", of this title. (Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014)
12-13-8: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
TABLE 1
Z5 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Mix of multi-story mixed use buildings that accommodate a variety of retail, entertainment, business and personal service, office, lodging, residential and
civic functions supported by public squares, plazas and miniparks within a walkable, interconnected grid of landscaped streets with sidewalks.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 306/358
A. Building Configuration:
1. Principal building 2 minimum to 10
stories maximum
2. Accessory building With DRC
compliance
review
3. Building height shall be measured in number of stories, excluding attics and raised basements
4. Stories may not exceed 14 feet in height from finished floor to finished ceiling, excluding vaulted spaces serving an assembly
function, except for a first floor commercial function which must be a minimum of 11 feet with a maximum of 25 feet
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
Note: "N" stands for any stories above those shown, up to the maximum.
B. Building Disposition: (See section 12-8-4, table 3 of this title.)
1. Edge yard Not permitted
2. Side yard Permitted
3. Split yard Permitted
4. Rear yard Permitted
C. Lot Occupation:
1. Lot width 1 block maximum, 25 foot minimum
2. Lot coverage 100 percent maximum, 70 percent minimum
3. Lot depth 150 foot maximum, 100 foot minimum
D. Setbacks; Principal Building:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 307/358
1. Principal front setback 5 foot maximum, 0 foot minimum
2. Secondary front setback 5 foot maximum, 0 foot minimum
3. Side setback 0 foot minimum
4. Rear setback 25 foot maximum
5. Principal buildings shall be distanced from the lot lines as shown
SETBACKS; PRINCIPAL BUILDING
E. Parking/Trash Placement: (See section 12-8-5, "General Parking Provisions", of this title.)
1. Residential n/a
2. Lodging n/a
3. Office n/a
4. Retail n/a
5. Civic To be determined by DRC
6. Other To be determined by DRC
7. Covered parking may be provided within the second tier shown in the diagram
8. Uncovered parking spaces shall be provided within the third tier as shown in the diagram
9. Trash containers shall be stored only within the third tier
PARKING/TRASH PLACEMENT
F. Loading Dock Placement:
1. Loading docks may only be placed in one-third (1/3) of the second and all of the third tiers as shown in the diagram.
2. Loading docks shall not face the principal or secondary frontage street.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 308/358
LOADING DOCK PLACEMENT
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 14
Z6 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
12-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Z6 Industrial District is to promote the management and preservation of existing industrial facilities within Mason City as well as the
development and management of new ecologically responsible, sustainable employment centers. Building forms and functions within the Z6 District
require varying degrees of separation from residential and commercial/service districts due to their potential for noise, bright lighting, traffic from heavy
trucks and other large vehicles, rail traffic and round the clock activities associated with research and development, manufacturing, warehousing, freight
terminals and agribusiness.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-14-2: PERMITTED FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Permitted forms and functions, which are identified in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that are allowed by right within Mason City. New
development or redevelopment will require a site plan drawn to scale showing that all zoning standards in chapter 16 of this title have been met. (Ord. 10-
003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-14-3: CONDITIONAL FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Conditional forms and functions, which are identified in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that must be reviewed and approved by the board for
potential impact on neighboring properties. All conditional forms and functions shall conform to the standards set forth in section 12-5-5 of this title. New
development or redevelopment shall be reviewed according to chapter 7 of this title to show compliance with all development standards identified herein.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-14-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
A. All buildings shall be considered principal buildings in this zoning district.
B. Structure standards for trash enclosures are defined in section 12-16-12 of this title. (Ord. 11-3, 2-15-2011)
12-14-5: PREEXISTING STANDARDS:
Any development, lot of record or structure legally operated prior to July 1, 2010, shall be considered a permitted use and legally conforming within this
zoning district. Any redevelopment or addition to a development, lot of record or structure shall be required to conform to the forms and functions and
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 309/358
development standards found within this zoning district. Any change in form or function shall conform to permitted and conditional form and function
standards as described in this zoning district. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-14-6: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
Forms and functions that create hazards, excessive noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, odors, glare or other objectionable influence beyond the property
boundaries shall constitute an open industry designation and be subject to applicable standards. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-14-7: Z6 O; OPEN INDUSTRY:
Open industry development consists of large, relatively self-contained and isolated facilities whose potential nuisance or hazard generation from the
processing, manufacturing, assembly, storage and distribution of materials and products is moderately high or higher. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-
2010; amd. 2017 Code)
Functions that produce emissions of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic materials, odor or glare shall not exceed the standards
set by the Iowa Department of Environmental Quality. Storage, distribution or sale of gas, fuel or oil shall comply with and be approved by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-14-8: Z6 R; RESTRICTED INDUSTRY:
A. Restricted industry development consists of facilities whose manufacturing, assembly, storage and distribution activities do not create appreciable
nuisances or hazards, or that require a pleasant, hazard and nuisance free environment. It is intended that the permitted functions be compatible and
not detrimental to adjacent properties.
B. Live/work building functions shall only be allowed as a conditional use in Z6 R Districts. (Ord. 11-10, 9-6-2011)
12-14-9: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
See section 12-8-3, "Zoning Form And Function Table", of this title. (Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014)
12-14-10: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
TABLE 1
Z6 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Promote the management and preservation of existing industrial facilities within Mason City as well as the development and management of new
ecologically responsible, sustainable employment centers with interconnected streets and sidewalks.
A. Building Configuration:
1. All buildings shall be treated as principal buildings a. Open: 75 foot maximum
b. Restricted: 40 foot maximum
2. Building height shall be measured in feet
3. Structures exceeding height limits shall be reviewed as a P1 for site plan approval
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 310/358
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
B. Building Disposition: (See section 12-8-4, table 3 of this title.)
1. Edge yard Permitted
2. Side yard Not permitted
3. Split yard Not permitted
4. Rear yard Not permitted
C. Lot Occupation:
1. Lot width 100 foot minimum
2. Lot coverage 60 percent
3. Lot depth 150 foot minimum
D. Setbacks; Principal Building:
1. Principal front setback Open: 50 foot minimum
Restricted: 35 foot minimum
2. Secondary front setback 30 foot minimum
3. Side setback Open: 30 foot minimum
Restricted: 20 foot minimum
4. Rear setback 20 foot minimum
5. Side or rear setback abutting a non-Z7 District 50 foot minimum
6. Principal buildings shall be distanced from the lot lines as shown
SETBACKS; PRINCIPAL BUILDING
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
E. Parking/Trash Placement: (See section 12-8-5, "General Parking Provisions", of this title.)
1. Residential n/a
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 311/358
2. Lodging n/a
3. Office 4 per 1,000 square feet
4. Retail 4 per 1,000 square feet
5. Civic To be determined by DRC
6. Industrial Minimum 1 per 2 employees of largest shift, plus 1 per 2,000 square feet maximum for
principal building
7. Parking spaces may be located within any tier
8. Trash containers shall be stored only within the
third tier
PARKING/TRASH PLACEMENT
F. Loading Dock Placement:
1. Loading docks may only be placed in one-third (1/3) of the second and all of the third tiers as shown in the diagram.
2. Loading docks shall not face the principal or secondary frontage street; however, a loading dock that is set back at least eighty feet (80') may face a
principal or secondary street, provided it is screened according to subsection 12-16-5I of this title.
LOADING DOCK PLACEMENT
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. Ord. 15-10, 9-15-2015; 2017 Code)
Chapter 15
Z7 SPECIFIC USE DISTRICT
12-15-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Z7 Specific Use District is to support the ongoing operation and future expansion of specific areas within Mason City. Any future
expansion within these specific districts shall require conformance to an approved site plan as outlined in chapter 7 of this title. Each Specific Use District
is outlined below and is legally described within the official Mason City Zoning Map, as amended.
Z7-1 Mercy Medical Center: The purpose of the Z7-1 District is to provide for the ongoing operations of this medical facility. The Z7-1 District consists of
clinics, hospital, office buildings, accessory uses and open space.
Z7-2 NIACC: The purpose of the Z7-2 District is to provide for the ongoing operations of North Iowa Area Community College. The Z7-2 District consists of
a college, office buildings, dormitory, accessory uses and open space.
Z7-3 Mobile Home Park: The purpose of the Z7-3 District is to provide for the existing forms and functions associated with a mobile home park. The Z7-3
District consists of a mobile home park and accessory buildings related to the operation of the mobile home park.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 312/358
Z7-4 County Fairgrounds: The purpose of the Z7-4 District is to provide for the existing forms and functions associated with a fairgrounds. The Z7-4 District
consists of agricultural, office, racetrack, grandstand and arena structures and accessory buildings and open space.
Z7-5 Conservation Subdivision: The purpose of the Z7-5 District is to allow for residential development of larger lots where City sanitary sewer is not
available and is not anticipated to be provided under an orderly expansion of City services or within the foreseeable future. The Z7-5 District consists of
single-family dwelling functions served by private streets and by private water, private sewer, or both. (Ord. 16-15, 10-4-2016)
12-15-2: PERMITTED FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Permitted forms and functions, which are identified in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title and table 1 of this chapter, are those that are allowed by right
within Mason City. New development or redevelopment will require a site plan drawn to scale showing that all zoning standards in chapter 16 of this title
have been met and that any new development or redevelopment generally conforms to the approved master plan for the district. (Ord. 16-15, 10-4-2016)
12-15-3: PREEXISTING STANDARDS:
Any development, lot of record or structure legally operated prior to July 1, 2010, shall be considered a permitted use and legally conforming within the Z7
District. Any redevelopment or addition to a development, lot of record or structure shall be required to conform to the forms and functions and
development standards found within the Z7 District. Any change in form or function shall conform to permitted and conditional form and function standards
as described in the Z7 District. (Ord. 16-15, 10-4-2016)
12-15-4: Z7-5 DISTRICT:
The following requirements apply to any development or subdivision within the Z7-5 Conservation Subdivision District.
A. All lots (except lots fronting upon an existing public right-of-way) shall be served by a private street approved by the City Engineer:
1. The street shall be paved with a dustless surface;
2. The street shall be built to support emergency vehicles as required by the Fire Department;
3. A turnaround at the end of any cul-de-sac or dead end street shall be provided and approved by the Fire Department;
4. Ownership and maintenance of the street shall solely be the cost and responsibility of the abutting property owners. Covenants, in a form acceptable
to the City Attorney and approved by the Administrative Official, shall be recorded with the plat establishing a Property Owners' Association, outlining
the ownership and maintenance responsibilities of abutting owners.
B. A tree preservation plan meeting the requirements of subsection 12-16-5D of this title shall be submitted along with the preliminary plat or development
plan showing the location and species of all trees over six inches (6") in diameter and including details for protection of trees to be preserved. Trees to
be preserved that are damaged or destroyed shall be mitigated according to subsection 12-16-5D3 of this title.
C. The development shall implement low impact design standards for stormwater runoff, such as rain gardens, vegetated swales and similar low impact
design methods, subject to approval by the City Engineer. (Ord. 16-15, 10-4-2016)
12-15-5: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
TABLE 1
Z7 FORMS AND FUNCTIONS AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
P = Permitted
n/a = Not applicable
Districts
Mercy
Medical
Center
Z7-1
NIACC
Z7-2
Mobile
Home Park
Z7-3
County
Fairgrounds
Z7-4
Conservation
Subdivision
Z7-5
Accessory surface
parking (off site)
P P P P
Active solar equipment P P P P P
Auditorium P P P
Clinic P
College P
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 313/358
Corner office P P
Corner store P
Daycare P P P P
Dormitory P P
Fairgrounds P
Farm P P
Freestanding house P
Home occupations P P
Hospital P
Hotel P
Indoor recreation P P
Mobile home P
Office building P P P
Parking structure P P
Small and dispersed
wind energy conversion
systems
P P P P P
Building configuration 6 stories
maximum
4 stories
maximum
1 story maximum 2 stories
maximum
3 stories maximum
Building disposition:
Edge yard Permitted
Permitted
Permitted Permitted Permitted
Side yard Permitted
Permitted
Not permitted Not
permitted
Not permitted
Split yard Permitted
Permitted
Not permitted Not
permitted
Not permitted
Rear yard Permitted
Permitted
Not permitted Not
permitted
Not permitted
Lot occupation:
Lot width n/a n/a n/a n/a 150' minimum
Lot area n/a n/a 5 acre minimum of gross
development area, 40 acre
maximum
n/a 1 acre minimum or minimum area needed for on
site sewage disposal system, whichever is
greater; 10 acres maximum
Lot coverage n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
Setbacks, minimum:
Principal front 25' 25' 25' 25' 35'
Secondary front 25' 25' 25' 25' 25'
Side yard 15' 15' 5' (7' building separation) 15' 15'
Rear yard 25' 1 25' 1 5' (7' building separation) 25' 25'
Parking provisions See section 12-8-5, "General Parking Provisions", of this title
Note:
1. Where adjacent to residential, then minimum rear yard equals principal building height, measured in feet, to highest point of roof or parapet.
(Ord. 16-15, 10-4-2016)
Chapter 16
ZONING STANDARDS
12-16-1: LOT DEVELOPMENT; GENERAL:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 314/358
A. All buildings shall be placed on a lot so they will not obstruct future streets that may be constructed by the City in conformity with existing streets and
according to the Comprehensive Plan and to the system and standards employed by the City. Furthermore, all buildings shall be placed on a lot so they
will not obstruct future utility routes or the potential resubdivision of the property. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
B. In the Z2 District, no more than one (1) principal building shall be located on a lot. (Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012)
C. On a double frontage lot, both lot lines abutting a street shall be front yards for applying the yard and parking setback regulations of this title.
D. When a development is proposed that is to be located on two (2) or more contiguous lots that are required to meet the minimum district area and
frontage requirement and/or are required to accommodate the use, the lots shall be combined in accordance with the City's subdivision ordinance, prior
to the issuing of a building permit.
E. When two (2) or more contiguous lots are located in the same residential district, one (1) or more of which lacks adequate area or dimensions to qualify
for residential use under the current requirements of this title and are held in one (1) ownership, they shall be combined in accordance with the City's
subdivision ordinance, prior to the issuing of a building permit. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-2: SWIMMING POOLS:
Outdoor swimming pools shall be prohibited in the Z5 and Z6 Districts. All swimming pools shall be located in the rear yard and subject to title 10 of this
Code. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-16-3: FENCES:
Fences shall be permitted in all yards subject to the following:
A. Location: All fences shall be located entirely within the private property of the person, firm or corporation constructing or causing the construction of the
fence.
B. Construction And Maintenance:
1. Every fence shall be constructed in a professional and substantial manner and of substantial material reasonably suitable for the purpose for which
the fence is proposed to be used. The materials and design shall also be compatible with other structures in the area in which the fence is located
and shall not cause blight or a negative impact.
2. Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair or
danger, or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any such fence that is or has become dangerous to the public safety, health or welfare is a public
nuisance, and the City shall commence proper proceedings for the abatement thereof.
3. All posts or similar supporting instruments used in the construction of fences shall be faced inward toward the property being fenced.
4. The decorative side of any fence shall be faced outward from the property being fenced.
C. Access: All fences shall be provided with a gate which affords reasonable and convenient access for public safety.
D. Barbed Wire And Electric Fences: Except as specified in this section, barbed wire fences and electric fences shall only be allowed when related to
farming activities located within the Z1 District.
E. Drainage: Fences shall not obstruct natural drainage.
F. Grade Modifications: Any modifications to the grade or drainage of a property in conjunction with the construction of a fence shall be subject to section
12-16-7 of this chapter.
G. Z2 And Z3 District Fence Standards: All residential district fences shall be placed within the property being fenced.
1. Except in the case of a secondary front yard on a corner lot that abuts a street, fences along side property lines shall not be more than six feet (6') in
height for the distance commencing from a point on the side property line located along the rear lot line and proceeding along the side property line
to a point that would be intersected by the front wall line of the existing principal structure on the lot.
2. Fences along or paralleling any rear property line shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
3. The required screening provisions for residential districts shall supersede, where applicable, the provisions of this section.
4. Fences extending across required principal or secondary front yards shall be no greater than four feet (4') in height.
H. Z4 And Z6 Fence Standards: All commercial and industrial fences shall be placed within the property being fenced.
1. Business and industrial fences may be erected up to eight feet (8') in height. Fences in excess of eight feet (8') shall require a variance.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 315/358
2. Fences within the Z6 District that are primarily erected as a security measure may have arms projecting into the applicant's property on which
barbed wire can be fastened commencing at a point at least seven feet (7') above the ground.
3. Fences or walls that enclose self-storage or outdoor storage areas shall meet the fencing and screening requirements of subsection 12-16-5K of this
chapter. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
I. Z5 Fence Standards: Fences within the Z5 District shall generally be prohibited; however, fences required for security measures or special purposes, or
to meet landscaping and screening requirements, may be allowed subject to Development Review Committee site plan compliance review considering
purpose, context, location, materials and overall relationship to surrounding properties. Approved fences shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. (Ord.
11-4, 2-15-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
J. Z7 Fence Standards: Fence standards for the Z7 District shall be established at the time of site plan compliance review. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-
1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-4: REQUIRED FENCING AND SCREENING:
A. Fencing And Screening: Any nonresidential form or function except agriculture and farming that abuts property zoned Z2 or Z3 shall provide screening
along that boundary. Screening shall also be provided where a nonresidential form or function is across the street from a Z2 or Z3 District. All fencing
and screening specifically required by this title shall consist of either a fence or a greenbelt planting strip as provided for below:
1. A greenbelt planting strip shall consist of coniferous trees and/or deciduous trees and plants and shall be of sufficient width and density to provide an
effective visual screen. This planting strip shall be designed to provide visual screening to a minimum height of six feet (6'). Earth mounding or berms
may be used to achieve up to three feet (3') of the required screen.
2. A required screening fence shall be constructed of masonry, brick, wood, metal or rigid polymer such as vinyl. The fence shall provide a solid
screening effect at least six feet (6') in height. The design and materials used in constructing a required screening fence shall be subject to the
approval of the Administrative Officer.
3. Self-storage and outdoor storage areas in the Z4 and Z6 Districts shall meet the fencing and screening requirements of subsection 12-16-5K of this
chapter. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-5: REQUIRED LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING:
Landscaping and screening shall be located in accordance with the following rules:
A. Landscaping Required:
1. The front, side and rear yards of each site not utilized for parking (where permitted) shall be landscaped utilizing an effective combination of trees,
grass, ground cover and shrubbery. Undeveloped areas in the interior of the site shall be seeded with appropriate grasses or other suitable ground
cover and maintained neat and orderly. All tree trimmings, stumps, and construction debris shall be promptly removed and not be accumulated or
stored on site.
2. Landscaping near street, alley and driveway intersections shall conform to the traffic visibility requirements of section 12-16-6 of this chapter.
B. Site Restoration And Planting: All properties within the City subject to subdividing, development or redevelopment, or renovation, where such
redevelopment or renovation is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of site area or building square footage or where a change in use or other development
or redevelopment results in an increase of five (5) or more parking spaces on the site, shall be subject to the following requirements as a part of plan
approval:
1. All site areas including public rights-of-way and private lots shall be finish graded to control the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff and be
restored with appropriate ground cover, herbaceous and woody vegetation as specified in subsection M, table 1 of this section.
2. All disturbed site areas shall be finish graded with topsoil of sufficient quality and depth to ensure the health and hardiness of all landscaping
materials.
C. Planting Plan:
1. A planting plan shall be submitted as part of the development plan review process per chapter 7 of this title. The planting plan shall be prepared on
the proposed site grading plan or may be on a separate plan and shall indicate the location, quantity and common name of all proposed plantings as
well as other pertinent landscape features such as utility easements, retaining walls, berms, swales, lighting, irrigation extents, etc. Plantings
specified in this section represent minimum requirements. Applicants are encouraged to exceed these requirements.
2. The planting plan shall be prepared by a landscaping professional, as follows:
a. For all multiple residential, commercial and industrial developments with an aggregate development site area of two (2) acres or more, or any such
development where the aggregate gross floor area of the principal buildings exceed seven thousand (7,000) square feet, the planting plan shall be
completed by a landscape architect licensed in the State of Iowa.
b. For all other multiple residential, commercial and industrial developments, the planting plan shall be completed by an experienced and qualified
landscape professional.
(1) For the purposes of this section, a "qualified landscape professional" shall be a nursery owner, nursery employee, or independent landscape
design professional who is an Iowa certified landscape professional, as certified by the Iowa Nursery And Landscape Association, or is an
independent landscape design professional or the owner or experienced employee of a nursery of long standing with an established and
verifiable track record of completing successful landscape designs and installations. (Ord. 13-14, 4-2-2013)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 316/358
(2) The Administrative Officer or the Development Review Committee may require the planting plan submitted by a qualified landscape
professional to be reviewed by a licensed landscape architect approved by the City, for which any cost shall be paid by the applicant. The
planting plan shall be revised as recommended by the landscape architect and resubmitted for approval.
c. For certain simple site plans, the Administrative Officer or the Development Review Committee may waive this requirement and allow a planting
plan that is not completed by a qualified professional; provided, that all requirements of this section are met. (Ord. 13-14, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017
Code)
D. Tree Preservation Plan: With respect to existing trees in new developments, all trees on the site are to be saved unless they must be removed for
street, buildings, utilities, drainage or public recreational purposes.
1. Existing trees and landscaping may be used to meet the requirements of this section.
2. Trees over six inches (6") in diameter that are to remain shall be marked with a red band and be protected with snow fences or other suitable
enclosure prior to excavation. The planting plan and grading plan shall include a detail and instructions for preservation of the existing trees. The City
may further require that the property owner and/or developer retain a professional forester to prepare a Forest Inventory and Management Plan for
the development in order to control and abate any existing or potential shade tree disease and to save trees from construction loss.
3. Any tree over twelve inches (12") in diameter shown to be preserved that is damaged or destroyed during or as a result of construction shall be
mitigated by new trees, of a similar or better species, with an aggregate diameter of at least forty percent (40%) of the diameter of the destroyed or
damaged tree, subject to the following:
a. No new tree required for mitigation need exceed two and one-half inches (2.5") in diameter. (Ord. 13-14, 4-2-2013)
b. No more than three (3) new trees per destroyed/damaged tree shall be required, regardless of the size of the damaged or destroyed tree. The
Administrative Officer or the Development Review Committee may allow substitution of plants other than trees for one (1) or more of the trees
required for mitigation, where it can be shown that the landscape cannot accommodate the required trees due to the density of the landscaping,
soil conditions or other condition that would make long term survival of new trees unlikely.
E. Performance Bond Required: No building permit except for one- and two-unit residential buildings shall be issued until the applicant for the building
permit shall file with the City a performance bond, with a corporation approved by the City as surety thereon, or other guarantee acceptable by the City,
in an amount approved by the City, but for no less than one and one-half (1.5) times the cost of completing the planting plan. The applicant shall
provide an estimate for the cost of completing the plan from a landscape architect or other qualified landscape professional, qualified nursery,
greenhouse or other landscape provider/installer. The performance bond must cover two (2) complete growing seasons subsequent to the completion
and release of the bond must be conditioned upon complete and satisfactory implementation of the approved planting plan.
F. Types And Species Of Trees: All plant species shall be noninvasive, indigenous and/or native to the appropriate USDA hardiness zone and physical
characteristics for Northern Iowa. Prohibited species include:
1. Prohibited in all parts of the City:
a. Ornamental (Callery) pear (Pyrus species and cultivars: Bradford, Cleveland select, redspire, capital, etc.), except those varieties proven to be fire
blight resistant.
b. Ash (all species and cultivars).
c. Poplar (Populus species).
d. Ginkgo (female only).
e. Chinese elm and Siberian elm (Ulmus pumila). Elm species that are certified to be disease resistant may be planted.
f. Tree of heaven (Ailanthus altissima).
g. Austree (Salix alba x matsudana).
h. Box elder (Acer negundo).
i. Mulberry (Morus species).
2. Prohibited in right-of-way only:
a. Catalpa (Catalpa speciosa).
b. Common fruit and large nut bearing trees (walnut, hickory, butternut, etc.).
c. Birch species (river birch, white or paper birch, etc.).
d. American elm. Elm species that are certified to be disease resistant may be planted.
e. Black locust.
f. Soft or silver maple.
g. Cottonwood.
h. Willow (Salix species).
i. Russian olive.
j. Sumac.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 317/358
k. Hawthorn.
l. Conifers (evergreens). (Ord. 13-14, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
G. Minimum Planting Sizes And Equivalents: Plants required in subsection M, table 1 of this section shall meet the following minimum requirements:
1. Deciduous shade trees: Two inches (2.0") to two and one-half inches (2.5") in diameter measured six inches (6") above the ground.
2. Deciduous ornamental trees: One inch (1") to one and one-half inches (1.5") in diameter measured six inches (6") above the ground.
3. Evergreen trees: Six feet (6') in height.
4. Evergreen shrubs used for screening purposes, including those used in conjunction with berming, shall have a minimum spread at planting of thirty
inches (30") to thirty six inches (36") and reach a minimum mature height of three feet (3').
5. The shade tree requirements specified in subsection M, table 1 of this section shall be met with long lived deciduous shade trees; however, up to
thirty percent (30%) of the shade tree requirements may be satisfied using ornamental trees and/or evergreen trees.
H. Slopes And Berms: Final slope grades steeper than the ratio of three to one (3:1) shall not be permitted without special approval of adequate slope
stabilization measures such as ground cover plantings and retaining walls.
I. Landscape And Screening Of Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities:
1. Off street parking facilities containing five (5) or more spaces and all loading facilities shall be screened as follows:
a. Parking facilities shall be screened from abutting sidewalks and streets. Loading facilities shall be screened if abutting or visible from sidewalks
and streets.
b. Parking and loading facilities shall be screened from any lot used for any residential purpose sharing a common property line; however, this shall
not apply to parking or loading facilities located at least eighty feet (80') from the common property line of any single-family residential use and at
least fifty feet (50') from the common property line of any other residential or mixed residential use. Notwithstanding the above, a parking facility
serving a mixed use shall not be required to be screened from an adjacent lot containing a mixed use.
2. All screening shall be arranged to be a minimum eighty percent (80%) opaque throughout the year.
3. The complement of woody shrubs and trees fulfilling requirements for the screening of off street parking and loading described in this title shall
incorporate evergreen trees and shrubs in sufficient quantities to provide year round color and shade, in locations that meet environmental
conditions.
4. Screening adjacent to public sidewalks and streets shall include at least two (2) of the following:
a. A landscape screening strip at least five feet (5') wide, measured perpendicularly to the lot line abutting the street or sidewalk, containing a mix of
shrubs and ornamental trees, in sufficient quantities and arranged to provide an adequate screen;
b. One (1) deciduous shade tree per every forty (40) linear feet of the lot line abutting the street or sidewalk;
c. A continuous shrub border or hedge no less than three feet (3') and no more than four feet (4') in height comprised of deciduous and/or evergreen
shrubs;
d. Earth berm (if space permits); or
e. A decorative barrier consisting of a metal railing system with masonry columns or a solid masonry wall no taller than four feet (4') in height.
5. Screening to buffer single-family residential dwellings within eighty feet (80') of off street parking and loading facilities and to buffer all other
residential and residential mixed use properties within fifty feet (50') of off street parking and loading facilities shall include a combination of at least
three (3) of the following:
a. A landscape screening strip at least ten feet (10') wide, measured perpendicularly to the common lot line, containing a mix of shrubs and
ornamental trees in sufficient quantities and arranged to provide an adequate screen;
b. One (1) tree per every thirty (30) linear feet of lot line contiguous to the residential property with at least forty percent (40%) of trees being
evergreen varieties;
c. A continuous shrub border or hedge no less than five feet (5') and no more than eight feet (8') in height comprised of deciduous and/or evergreen
shrubs;
d. Earth berm (if space permits);
e. Solid, board fence or masonry wall meeting the requirements of section 12-16-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 13-14, 4-2-2013)
J. Internal Parking Lot Landscaping:
1. Parking bays of twelve (12) spaces or more in length shall be subdivided by intermediate landscape islands or peninsulas. Landscape
islands/peninsulas shall provide at least one (1) parking space width of landscape area (10 feet wide by 18 feet long island or peninsula for a single
bay or 10 feet wide by 36 feet long island for a double bay). The Administrative Officer may permit peninsulas or islands of lesser length to allow for
safe turning radii within parking lot aisles and drives. (Ord. 13-14, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 318/358
Internal Parking Lot Landscaping
2. Double parking bays with a length of six (6) or more double parking spaces shall terminate at each end with a planting area of a minimum of a
double parking space of landscape area.
Internal Parking Lot Landscaping
3. Parking bays greater than seven (7) spaces in length shall have one (1) landscaped island or peninsula placed at both ends.
4. A minimum of one (1) deciduous shade tree or two (2) ornamental trees, salt tolerant low shrubs and/or perennial grasses or flowers shall be planted
in each island. Where possible, planting islands should be depressed and surrounded by flat, ribbon curbs to facilitate stormwater filtering.
Internal Parking Lot Landscaping
K. Landscaping Requirements For Outdoor Storage And Self-Storage:
1. In addition to the fence requirements of sections 12-16-3 and 12-16-4 of this chapter, outdoor storage areas and self-storage facilities shall be
effectively screened and meet the applicable standards in this chapter, as follows:
a. A building wall may be used as a screen and may be counted towards meeting the screening requirements.
b. Z4 District: Outdoor storage areas and self-storage in the Z4 Multi-Use District shall be screened from view of any adjacent public street or
sidewalk, and from any adjacent property in the Z2 Sub-Urban or Z3 General Urban Zone Districts, with one (1) or more of the following:
(1) A fence that is at least six feet (6') in height and at least eighty percent (80%) opaque, comprised of weatherproof or treated wood or rigid vinyl
or similar rigid polymer material.
(2) A freestanding masonry wall that is at least six feet (6') in height and at least eighty percent (80%) opaque, comprised of structural foundations,
clad in brick or decorative masonry units, pilasters and/or columns and protective capping. All masonry shall be either integrally colored or
painted in subdued, earth tone colors.
c. Z6 District: Outdoor storage areas and self-storage in the Z6 Industrial District shall be screened from view of any adjacent public street or
sidewalk and from any adjacent property zoned Z2 Sub-Urban or Z3 General Urban, with one (1) or more of the following:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 319/358
(1) A fence that is at least six feet (6') in height and at least forty percent (40%) opaque, comprised of weatherproof or treated wood or rigid vinyl or
similar rigid polymer material.
(2) Galvanized metal mesh (chain-link) with openings no greater than five-eighths of one inch (5/8"). A galvanized metal mesh fence with openings
of up to two inches (2") may be used if slats are integrated into the mesh, the forty percent (40%) opacity requirement can be met, and the slats
are maintained in good condition.
(3) A freestanding masonry wall that is at least six feet (6') in height and at least fifty percent (50%) opaque, comprised of structural foundations,
clad in brick or decorative masonry units, pilasters and/or columns and protective capping. All masonry shall be either integrally colored or
painted in subdued, earth tone colors.
2. Additional landscaping screening requirements beyond those required in subsection M, table 1 of this section are as follows:
a. One (1) additional evergreen tree reaching a height of at least twenty feet (20') at maturity shall be planted for every fifty (50) linear feet of fencing
facing adjacent public rights-of-way, within the yards adjacent to the rights-of-way.
b. Two (2) additional shrubs shall be required per forty (40) linear feet of right-of-way. The shrubs shall be planted along the outside of the fence
within the yards adjacent to the right-of-way, no closer than three feet (3') from the fence or any impervious surfaces and shall meet the applicable
landscaping requirements found in this chapter.
c. For outdoor storage areas within fifty feet (50') of a common property line with any property used for a residential purpose, a landscaped buffer
shall be provided along the entire length of the property line, at least fifteen feet (15') in width, measured perpendicular to the property line. No
structure or parking area, including the required fence or wall, may be located within this buffer area. The buffer area shall contain at least one (1)
deciduous shade tree for each forty feet (40') of length of the buffer, one (1) evergreen tree for each twenty five feet (25') of length of the buffer,
and either one (1) ornamental tree or three (3) shrubs for each forty feet (40') of the length of the buffer. (Ord. 15-10, 9-15-2015)
L. Landscape Maintenance: Landscaping, including plantings required by this chapter and subsection M, table 1 of this section such as lawns, ground
covers, trees, shrubs and herbaceous perennial and annual gardens, shall be kept in healthy condition, free of invasive plants and weeds, in perpetuity.
M.Site Restoration And Planting:
TABLE 1
SITE RESTORATION AND PLANTING
Minimum landscape standards in this table are prescribed on a per lot basis. Up to thirty percent (30%) of the shade tree requirements may be met with
deciduous ornamental or evergreen trees; see subsection G5 of this section.
Edge Yard
Side
Yard Split Yard Rear Yard
Z2
Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree
Front yard: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree, 5 shrubs, of
which at least 2 shall be evergreen shrubs
Side yards: Hardy turf grass
Rear yard: Hardy turf grass
Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade
tree per 40 linear feet
Front yard: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade
tree per 4 dwelling units, 1 deciduous or
evergreen shrub per dwelling unit
Side yards: Hardy turf grass
Rear yard: Hardy turf grass and/or
herbaceous ground cover; 1 shade tree
per 40 linear feet of rear lot line length
Not permitted
Z3
Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree
Front yard: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree, 3
shrubs, of which at least 2 shall be evergreen
shrubs
Side yards: Hardy turf grass
Rear yard: Hardy turf grass
Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree
Front yard: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree, 4
shrubs, of which at least 1 shall be an evergreen
shrub
Side yards: Hardy turf grass
Rear yard: Hardy turf grass
Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade
tree
Rear yard: Hardy turf grass
Z4
Nonresidential:
Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree per 50 linear feet
Front yard: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree per 50 linear feet of building frontage, 2 deciduous or
evergreen shrubs per 20 linear feet of building frontage
Side yards: Hardy turf grass
Rear yard: Hardy turf grass and/or herbaceous ground cover; 1 shade tree per 50 linear feet of rear
lot line length
Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade
tree per 50 linear feet
Rear yard: Hardy turf grass and/or
herbaceous ground cover; 1 shade tree
per 50 linear feet of rear lot line length
Z4
Residential:
Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree per 40 linear feet Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 320/358
Front yard: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree per 4 dwelling units, 2 deciduous or evergreen shrubs
per dwelling unit
Side yards: Hardy turf grass
Rear yard: Hardy turf grass and/or herbaceous ground cover; 1 shade tree per 40 linear feet of rear
lot line length
tree per 40 linear feet
Rear yard: Hardy turf grass and/or
herbaceous ground cover; 1 shade tree
per 40 linear feet of rear lot line length
Z5
Not permitted Right-of-way: Sidewalk with tree well; 1 shade tree per 30 linear feet
Front yard: n/a
Side yards: n/a
Rear yard: n/a
Roofscape: Vegetated, green roof may be installed in lieu of yard landscaping
Z6
Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree
per 50 linear feet
All yards: New industrial developments or
uses shall require 1 new tree per 1,000
square feet of gross building floor area
For building sites that have over 40,000
square feet of gross floor area, the maximum
number of trees required shall be 50
Not
permitted
Not permitted Not permitted
Z7
Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree per 50 linear feet
Front yard: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree per 50 linear feet of building frontage, 2 deciduous or
evergreen shrubs per 20 linear feet of building frontage
Side yards: Hardy turf grass
Rear yard: Hardy turf grass and/or herbaceous ground cover; 1 shade tree per 50 linear feet of rear
lot line length
Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade
tree per 50 linear feet
Rear yard: Hardy turf grass and/or
herbaceous ground cover; 1 shade tree
per 50 linear feet of rear lot line length
(Ord. 13-14, 4-2-2013)
12-16-6: TRAFFIC VISIBILITY:
A. Corner Lots: On corner lots in all zoning districts, except for buildings in the Z5 District, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in
such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of three feet (3') and ten feet (10') within twenty feet (20') from the intersecting property
lines. Any such obstruction shall not be wider than two feet (2').
B. Alleys And Driveways: Except as may be erected by a governmental agency, no fence, wall or hedge shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to
grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two feet (2') and eight feet (8') where it will interfere with traffic or pedestrian
visibility from a driveway or alley to a public way. In required principal front yards or a required secondary front yard on a corner lot, fences, walls,
hedges, or structures shall be at least seventy five percent (75%) open for passage of air and light. These regulations shall apply unless it can be
demonstrated to the Administrative Officer that the structure provides an unobstructed view so as not to create a safety hazard. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-
2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-7: DRAINAGE PLANS, SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
A. No land shall be developed and no form and function shall be permitted that results in water runoff causing flooding, erosion, or deposit of minerals on
adjacent properties. Such runoff shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, watercourse, ponding area, or other public facilities subject to the
review and approval of the City Engineer and in accordance with storm drainage plans as may be established by the City.
B. In the case of all residential subdivisions of three (3) or more lots, business and industrial developments, the drainage plans with appropriate spot site
elevations shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review and the final drainage plan shall be subject to written approval. In the case of such uses,
no modifications in grade and drainage flow through fill, erection of retaining walls or other such actions shall be permitted until such plans have been
reviewed and received written approval from the City Engineer.
C. The following standards shall apply to all development and activity that necessitates the grading, stripping, cutting, filling, or exposure of soils.
1. General Standards:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 321/358
a. The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented by topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil erosion.
b. Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with the different stages of development. Appropriate control measures shall be
installed prior to development when necessary to control erosion.
c. Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that adequate erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction
progresses. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one period of time.
d. The drainage system shall be constructed and operational as quickly as possible during construction.
e. Whenever possible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
f. Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for respreading over the developed area. The soil shall be restored to a depth
of four inches (4") and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil quality prior to development.
g. When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible period of time. No exposure shall be planned to exceed sixty (60) days. Said
time period shall be extended only if the City Engineer is satisfied that adequate measures have been established and will remain in place.
h. The natural drainage system shall be used as far as is feasible for the storage and flow of runoff. Stormwater drainage shall be discharged to
marshlands, swamps, retention basins or other treatment facilities. Diversion of stormwater to marshlands or swamps shall be considered for
existing or planned surface drainage. Marshlands and swamps used for stormwater shall provide for natural or artificial water level control.
Temporary storage areas or retention basins scattered throughout developed areas shall be encouraged to reduce peak flows, erosion damage,
and construction costs.
2. Exposed Slopes: The following control measures shall be taken to control erosion during any activity where soils are exposed:
a. No slope should be steeper in grade than four feet (4') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical (4:1).
b. Exposed slopes steeper in grade than ten feet (10') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical (10:1) should be contour plowed to minimize direct runoff of
water.
c. At the foot of each exposed slope, a channel and berm should be constructed to control runoff. The channelized water should be diverted to a
sedimentation basin (debris basin, silt basin or silt trap) before being allowed to enter the natural drainage system.
d. Along the top of each exposed slope, a berm should be constructed to prevent runoff from flowing over the edge of the slope. Where runoff
collecting behind said berm cannot be diverted elsewhere and must be directed down the slope, appropriate measures shall be taken to prevent
erosion. Such measures should consist of either an asphalt paved flow apron and drop chute laid down the slope or a flexible slope drain. At the
base of the slope drain or flow apron, a gravel energy dissipator should be installed to prevent erosion at the discharge end.
e. Exposed slopes shall be protected by whatever means will effectively prevent erosion considering the degree of slope, soil material, and expected
length of exposure. Slope protection shall consist of mulch, sheets of plastic, burlap or jute netting, sod blankets, fast growing grasses or
temporary seedings of annual grasses. Mulch consists of hay, straw, wood chips, corn stalks, bark or other protective material. Mulch should be
anchored to slopes with liquid asphalt, stakes, and netting, or should be worked into the soil to provide additional slope stability.
f. Control measures, other than those specifically stated above, may be used in place of the above measures if it can be demonstrated that they will
as effectively protect exposed slopes. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
3. Design Standards:
a. Manmade Waterways:
(1) The natural aboveground drainage system shall be utilized to the extent possible to dispose of runoff. Storm sewers are only to be used where
it can be demonstrated that the use of the aboveground natural drainage system will not adequately dispose of runoff. Aboveground runoff
disposal waterways may be constructed to augment the natural drainage system. To the extent possible, the natural and constructed waterways
shall be coordinated with an open space trail system. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
(2) The widths of a constructed waterway shall be sufficiently large to adequately channel runoff from a ten inch (10") storm. Adequacy shall be
determined by the expected runoff when full development of the drainage area is reached.
(3) No fences or structures shall be constructed across the waterway that will reduce or restrict the flow of water.
(4) The banks of the waterway shall be protected with a permanent turf vegetation.
(5) The banks of the waterway shall not exceed five feet (5') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical (5:1) in gradient.
(6) The gradient of the waterway bed shall not exceed a grade that will result in a velocity that will cause erosion of the banks of the waterway.
(7) The bed of the waterway shall be protected with turf, sod, or concrete. If turf or sod will not function properly, riprap may be used. Riprap shall
consist of quarried limestone, fieldstone (if random riprap is used) or construction materials, provided said construction materials are limited to
asphalt cement and concrete. The riprap shall be no smaller than two inches (2") square nor larger than two feet (2') square. Construction
materials shall be used only in those areas where the waterway is not used as part of a recreation trail system.
(8) If the flow velocity in the waterway is such that erosion of the turf sidewall will occur and said velocity cannot be decreased via velocity control
structures, then other materials may replace turf on the sidewalls. Either gravel or riprap may be allowed to prevent erosion at these points.
b. Water Velocity:
(1) The flow velocity of runoff in waterways shall be controlled to a velocity that will minimize erosion of the waterway.
(2) Flow velocity shall be controlled through the installation of diversions, berms, slope drains, and other similarly effective velocity control
structures.
c. Sediment Control:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 322/358
(1) To prevent sedimentation of waterways, pervious and impervious sediment traps and other sediment control structures shall be incorporated
throughout the contributing watershed.
(2) Temporary pervious sediment traps could consist of a construction of bales of hay with a low spillway embankment section of sand and gravel
that permits a slow movement of water while filtering sediment. Such structures may serve as temporary sediment control features during the
construction stage of a development.
(3) Permanent impervious sediment control structures consist of sediment basins (debris basins, silt basins, or silt traps) and shall be utilized to
remove sediment from runoff prior to its disposal in any permanent body of water.
d. Maintenance Of Erosion Control System:
(1) The erosion and velocity control structures shall be maintained in a condition that will ensure continuous functioning according to the provisions
of this title.
(2) Sediment basins shall be maintained as the need occurs to ensure continuous desilting action.
(3) The areas utilized for runoff waterways and sediment basins shall not be allowed to exist in an unsightly condition. The banks of the sediment
basins and waterways shall be landscaped.
(4) Prior to the approval of any development, the developer shall make provision for continued maintenance of the erosion and sediment control
system.
D. The top of any exterior foundation shall extend above the elevation of the street, gutter or inlet of an approved drainage device a minimum of twelve
inches (12") plus two percent (2%). Exceptions to this standard may be approved by the City Engineer when it can be demonstrated that required
drainage to the point of discharge and away from the structure is provided at all locations on the site. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-16-8: DARK SKY CONDITIONS AND GLARE RESTRICTIONS:
Lighting used to illuminate an off street parking area, sign or other structure shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining property and from
public rights-of-way. Direct or sky reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding, shall not be
directed into any adjoining property. The source of lights shall be hooded or controlled in some manner so as not to light adjacent property or the public
right-of-way. Bare luminaries (light bulbs) shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way.
Lighting standards for Zoning Districts Z1 through Z6 as well as the Z7 Specific Use Districts are described below. For Zoning Districts Z1, Z2, Z3 and
Specific Use District Z7-3, the following standards (table 2 of this section) shall be considered dark sky guidelines. These suggested guidelines will serve
as a connection between general planning practices and zoning regulations. For Zoning Districts Z4, Z5, Z6 and Specific Use Districts Z7-1, Z7-2 and Z7-
4, the following standards shall be required as a part of development standards.
TABLE 2
PUBLIC DARKNESS
This table outlines standards for preserving public darkness.
Z1
Z2, Z7-3,
Z7-5 Z3 Z4, Z7-2 Z5, Z7-1, Z7-4 Z6
Ambient light
levels
None Very low Low Medium High High
Guidelines Standards
Maximum
lighting
standards
Minimal
electric
lighting; should
be turned off
most of the
time
Minimal
lighting, all
full cutoff
Minimal
lighting, all
full cutoff
Full cutoff lighting, some low
wattage, nonfull cutoff
lighting; controlled with
dimmers, time switch or
motion sensors
Full cutoff lighting, some
nonfull cutoff lighting;
controlled with dimmers,
time switch or motion
sensors
Full cutoff lighting, some
nonfull cutoff lighting;
controlled with dimmers,
time switch or motion
sensors
Maximum
allowed initial
lamp
lumens/sf1
1.25 - 1.6 2.5 - 3.2 3.3 - 4.2 7.6 - 9.7 10.9 - 13.9 10.9 - 13.9
Maximum 6,500 17,000 24,000 44,000 60,000 60,000
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 323/358
lamp
allowance
(lumens)
Required
shielding
Fully shielded
luminaire with
no uplight
Fully
shielded
luminaire
with no
uplight
Fully
shielded
luminaire
with no
uplight
Fully shielded luminaire2 Fully shielded luminaire2 Fully shielded luminaire2
Lighting
curfew for
nonresidential
8:00 P.M. or
close of
business,
whichever is
later
10:00 P.M.
or close of
business,
whichever
is later
10:00 P.M.
or close of
business,
whichever
is later
10:00 P.M. or close of
business, whichever is later
12:00 midnight or close of
business, whichever is
later
10:00 P.M. or close of
business, whichever is
later
Notes:
1. A lumen is equal to 1 foot-candle falling on 1 square foot of surface area and 1 foot-candle is equal to 1 lumen per square foot.
2. The Administrative Officer or the Development Review Committee may permit a luminaire that is partially shielded if it can be shown that a partially
shielded luminaire is necessary to provide adequate light for the conditions specific to its location and that adjoining properties are not negatively affected.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-9: SMOKE:
The emission of smoke by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Iowa Pollution Control Standards, as amended. (Ord. 10-003,
1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-16-10: DUST AND OTHER PARTICULATE MATTER:
The emission of dust, fly ash or other particulate matter by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Iowa Pollution Control
Standards, as amended. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-16-11: AIR POLLUTION:
The emission of air pollution, including potentially hazardous emissions, by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by Iowa Statutes, as
amended. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-16-12: REFUSE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIAL:
A. Location And Screening:
1. New Development:
a. All refuse and refuse handling containers, including, but not limited to, garbage cans, carts and dumpsters, shall be stored within the principal
structure, within an accessory building, or screened from eye level view from any public right-of-way, except alleys. Exceptions shall be made for
garbage cans and carts provided for public and/or customer use and convenience.
b. Screening shall be of sufficient height to conceal the container and provide a minimum opaqueness of eighty percent (80%). Screening may be
partially accomplished with landscape materials if deemed of sufficient height and opaqueness year round.
c. Screened containers shall generally be located in the third tier of a property, being that area measured from a point twenty feet (20') back from the
principal structure's front facade and extending to the rear lot line.
d. Screened containers shall generally comply with minimum setback requirements for accessory buildings. (Ord. 11-08, 8-16-2011)
e. The design, construction and location of all required screening shall be subject to Development Review Committee (DRC) compliance review. New
one- and two-family residential functions shall be subject to the standards of this subsection; however, DRC review and approval is not required.
2. Existing Development:
a. While not required, screening of existing refuse handling containers from eye level view from any public right-of-way, except alleys, is highly
recommended. Every effort shall be made to locate existing containers where they will have the least visual impact while maintaining adequate
vehicular circulation and parking on the premises.
b. The placement of refuse handling containers on premises where no refuse containers were previously located shall be required to meet the
requirements for new development above.
3. Development, General Requirements:
a. All refuse handling containers and screening shall be kept in a state of good repair and appearance at all times.
b. In outside locations, all refuse shall be placed inside the container or within the screened area, not outside or alongside the container or screened
area. Refuse handling container capacity shall be "right sized" to handle the typical waste stream resulting from uses operating on the premises.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 324/358
c. All refuse handling containers located outside of a building shall have tightfitting lids to prevent spilling and spreading of debris. Exceptions will be
made if open, no lid containers are necessary for construction debris or for similar purposes where spreading of debris is not likely or if the use is
for a temporary period of time.
d. If being used temporarily for construction, moving or similar limited purposes occurring on the premises, refuse handling containers do not have to
meet the screening or location requirements. However, in no case shall a container remain on a premises for these purposes longer than three (3)
months within any twelve (12) month period if located in a Z2 or Z3 Zoning District or six (6) months within any twelve (12) month period if located
in any other zoning district, unless a limited extension is approved for good cause by the Administrative Officer. If the container is being used for a
construction purpose, a valid building permit must be issued for an active construction project on the premises. (Ord. 11-08, 8-16-2011; amd. 2017
Code)
B. Dumping And Disposal:
1. Except if associated with a permitted use, the use of land within the City for dumping and disposal of sewage, rubbish, scrap iron, junk, garbage,
ashes, slag industrial waste byproducts, and petroleum contaminated soil is not permitted in any zoning district of the City. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010,
eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-13: OUTSIDE STORAGE; RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL USES:
A. General Standards:
1. The Administrative Officer may order the owner of the property to cease or modify open storage uses including existing uses, provided it is found
that such use constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare.
2. Parking and storage of vehicles on private lots, including recreational and commercial vehicles, shall be subject to the requirements of section 12-8-5
of this title.
B. Residential Uses:
1. Exceptions: The storage of materials and equipment for residential uses (excluding farms) shall be stored within a building or fully screened so as
not to be visible from adjoining properties, except for the following:
a. Clotheslines, pole and wire.
b. Patio equipment, including chairs, tables and grills.
c. Play and recreational equipment.
d. On and off street parking of currently registered and operable passenger vehicles and trucks owned for personal, noncommercial purposes, not to
exceed a gross vehicle weight of fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds.
e. Rear or side yard exterior storage of firewood for the purpose of consumption only by the person or persons on whose property it is stored.
C. Nonresidential Uses:
1. Exterior Storage/Display: Outside storage shall be governed by the respective zoning district in which the use is located.
2. Additional Standards: All outside storage shall be screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties and public streets, in accordance with
subsection 12-16-5K of this chapter, except for the following:
a. Merchandise being displayed for sale in accordance with zoning district requirements.
b. Materials and equipment currently being used for construction on the premises. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-14: WASTE MATERIAL:
Waste material resulting from or used in industrial or commercial manufacturing, fabricating, servicing, processing or trimming shall not be washed into the
public storm sewer system, the sanitary sewer system or any public water body, but shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the Iowa State Fire
Marshal, appropriate State or Federal agencies and the Administrative Officer. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-16-15: BULK STORAGE (LIQUID):
All uses associated with the bulk storage of all gasoline, liquid fertilizer, chemical, flammable and similar liquids shall comply with requirements of the Iowa
State Fire Marshal, the Iowa Department of Agriculture and other agencies with jurisdiction, and shall have documents from those offices stating the use is
in compliance. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-16: RADIATION EMISSION:
All activities that emit radioactivity shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, as amended. (Ord. 10-003,
1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-16-17: ELECTRICAL EMISSION:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 325/358
All activities that create electrical emissions shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Federal Communications Commission, as amended. (Ord.
10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-18: TEMPORARY STORAGE OF FILL:
A. The temporary storage of fill from building excavations or construction projects shall be allowed in all zoning districts subject to the following conditions:
1. Storage shall not exceed the term of the building permit.
2. The storage shall be in compliance with requirements and approved by the City building official and the City Engineer.
3. Provisions as approved by the City building official and the City Engineer shall be made for erosion control.
B. The storage of fill beyond that allowed in subsection A of this section shall be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter as may be applicable and
allowed but only within those zoning districts of the City where outside storage is allowed. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-19: OUTDOOR CUSTOMER DINING:
A. Contiguous To Principal Building: The outdoor customer dining area must be contiguous to the building housing the principal restaurant use; however,
the area may be separated from the building by a pedestrian walkway, with a width meeting the requirements of this section and applicable regulations.
The outdoor customer dining area may be located on an adjoining property so long as the contiguity is maintained. (Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014; amd. 2017
Code)
B. Encroachment Into Setbacks: The outdoor customer dining area may encroach into the required setbacks of the principal building.
C. Off Street Parking: The outdoor customer dining area cannot displace required off street parking.
D. Roof Cover:
1. If the outdoor customer dining area is enclosed on three (3) sides by the same principal building, it cannot have a solid roof cover.
2. If the outdoor customer dining area is enclosed by one (1) of two (2) sides of the building, the area may be roofed by a solid roof cover, however
such a cover is not required.
E. Areas Serving Alcohol: If alcohol is being served, the outdoor customer dining area must be delineated by a short fence, rope or chain barrier to comply
with applicable alcoholic beverage regulations.
F. Food Preparation: Food preparation is prohibited in the outdoor customer dining area.
G. Takeout Or Self-Service Food Sales: An outdoor customer dining area that is associated with a restaurant offering "takeout" or "self-service" food sales
must provide and maintain a trash container with a self-closing lid.
H. Capacity: The capacity of the outdoor customer dining area shall not be considered as part of the occupant load used to calculate the minimum or
maximum number of parking stalls required for the principal restaurant function. (Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014)
12-16-20: PERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS INTO SETBACKS:
In addition to encroachments into setbacks stated in this title for specific zoning districts, the following shall be permitted in any zoning district:
A. An access ramp meeting accessibility requirements and serving a residential function may encroach into any required setback. A ramp serving any
other function may encroach into a required side or rear setback, but not into a principal front or secondary front setback.
B. A roof overhang or eave may extend up to twenty four inches (24") into any required setback. (2017 Code)
12-16-21: HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS:
The following may exceed the maximum height for structures as required in each zoning district:
A. Ornamental elements, such as church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, ornamental towers, flag poles and monuments.
B. Necessary appurtenances, such as: chimneys and smokestacks, water tanks, elevator and stairwell penthouses, ventilators, and similar structures;
provided, that any such structures that exceed height limitations be limited to the minimum necessary height to meet the operational needs of the
building.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 326/358
C. Structural extensions appropriate to the building design, such as cornices and parapets.
D. Structures serving public utilities.
E. Wind energy conversion systems, subject to the requirements of chapter 17 of this title.
F. Communication towers, subject to the requirements of chapter 19 of this title.
G. Buildings (including accessory buildings) in the Z6 District may exceed height limitations if reviewed and approved as P1 by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. (2017 Code)
12-16-22: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
A home occupation is a permitted accessory use to any residential function, subject to the following requirements:
A. A home occupation shall be clearly accessory and incidental to the principal residential function.
B. Only those members of the family residing within the dwelling may be employed in the home occupation.
C. A home occupation shall not have a sign, other than a nameplate not more than two (2) square feet in area, nor any display that will indicate from the
exterior that the building is being utilized in whole or in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
D. There shall be no stock in trade nor commodity sold upon the premises.
E. No mechanical equipment shall be used except equipment common to domestic or household purposes.
F. The home occupation shall occupy no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the residence. (2017 Code)
Chapter 17
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
12-17-1: INTENT:
In order to balance the need for clean, renewable energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community, the
City finds that these regulations are necessary in order to ensure that wind energy conversion systems are appropriately designed, sited and installed.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-17-2: COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS ILLEGAL:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain a commercial wind energy conversion system within Mason City. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-17-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter or locate any wind energy conversion system until all required building and
electrical permits have been issued and all conditions imposed by the Chief Building Official and (if applicable) the board are met. The owner/operator
of any wind energy conversion system must also obtain any other permits required by other Federal, State and local agencies/departments prior to
erecting the system.
B. Dispersed WECS; Conditional Use: A dispersed wind energy conversion system shall be allowed only as a conditional accessory use to a permitted
principal or approved conditional principal use. A dispersed WECS shall not be installed and operated until a conditional use has been approved by the
board and all conditions imposed by the board are met. The conditional use permit may be revoked at any time the approved system does not comply
with the rules set forth in this chapter and the conditions imposed by the board.
C. Number Of Systems Per Zoning Lot:
1. Dispersed WECS: A maximum of five (5) dispersed wind energy conversion systems may be placed on any zoning lot, provided the minimum lot
size and setbacks stipulated in section 12-17-4 of this chapter are met.
2. Small WECS: Multiple small wind energy conversion systems may be placed on a lot, but the total rated capacity of all systems shall not exceed fifty
(50) kilowatts. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 327/358
12-17-4: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Minimum Lot Size:
1. Dispersed WECS: A dispersed wind energy system shall not be erected on a zoning lot smaller than seven (7) acres. If four (4) dispersed wind
energy systems are placed on the lot, the zoning lot shall measure at least ten (10) acres. If five (5) dispersed wind energy systems are placed on
the lot, the zoning lot must measure at least thirteen (13) acres.
2. Small WECS: No minimum lot size shall apply to small wind energy conversion systems.
B. Maximum Tower Height: Tower height shall be measured from the ground to the top of the tower, excluding the wind turbine generator and blades.
1. Dispersed WECS: There shall be no maximum tower height for dispersed wind energy conversion systems.
2. Small WECS: The maximum tower height for small wind energy conversion systems shall be one hundred feet (100').
C. Setbacks:
1. Dispersed WECS:
a. The minimum distance between a dispersed wind energy conversion system and any property line shall be a distance that is equivalent to one
hundred ten percent (110%) of the total system height.
b. A dispersed wind energy conversion system shall be set back at least seven hundred fifty feet (750') from any public right-of-way.
c. The board may authorize a lesser setback distance if a registered engineer licensed by the State of Iowa specifies in writing that the collapse of
the system will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances.
2. Small WECS: There shall be no setback required for a small wind energy conversion system. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-17-5: LOCATION:
A. No part of a wind energy conversion system shall be located within or over drainage, utility or other established easements, or on or over property lines.
B. A wind energy conversion system shall not be located in any required principal front or secondary front yard setback.
C. A wind energy conversion system shall be located in compliance with the guidelines of the Federal Aviation Regulations with regard to airport approach
and clearance around VOR (VHF omnirange beacon) and DVOR (Doppler VHF omnirange beacon) stations.
D. A dispersed wind energy conversion system shall be located a minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') from the nearest inhabitable residential structure,
school, hospital, park or place of worship not on property owned or controlled by the owner/operator of the dispersed wind energy system. This setback
can be reduced by up to fifty percent (50%), at the discretion of the board, upon a positive determination that: (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010;
amd. 2017 Code)
1. A noise study, prepared by a qualified professional, demonstrates that except for intermittent episodes, the dispersed wind energy system shall not
emit noise in excess of the limits established by this Code. The noise study shall include:
a. A description and map of the project's noise producing features, including the range of noise levels expected, and the basis of the expectation.
b. A description and map of the noise sensitive environment, including any sensitive noise receptors, e.g., residences, hospitals, libraries, schools,
places of worship, parks, areas with outdoor workers and other facilities where quiet is important or where noise could be a nuisance within one
thousand feet (1,000').
c. A survey and report prepared by a qualified engineer that analyzes the preexisting ambient noise (including seasonal variation) and the affected
sensitive receptors located within one thousand feet (1,000').
d. A description and map of the cumulative noise impacts of any problem areas identified.
e. A description of the project's proposed noise control features and specific measures proposed to mitigate noise impacts for sensitive receptors as
identified above to a level of insignificance. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
2. A shadow flicker model demonstrating that shadow flicker shall not fall on, or in, any existing residential structure regardless of distance from the
WECS. Shadow flicker expected to fall on a roadway or a portion of a residentially zoned parcel may be acceptable if the flicker does not exceed
thirty (30) hours per year and the traffic volumes are less than five hundred (500) vehicles on the roadway. The shadow flicker model shall:
a. Map and describe within a one thousand foot (1,000') radius of the proposed dispersed wind energy system the topography, existing residences
and location of their windows, locations of other structures, wind speeds and directions, existing vegetation and roadways. The model shall
represent the most probable scenarios of wind constancy, sunshine constancy, and wind directions and speed;
b. Calculate the locations of shadow flicker caused by the proposed project and the expected durations of the flicker at these locations, calculate the
total number of hours per year of flicker at all locations;
c. Identify problem areas where shadow flicker will interfere with existing or future residences and roadways and describe proposed mitigation
measures, including, but not limited to, a change in siting of the wind energy conversion system, a change in the operation of the wind energy
conversion system, or grading or landscaping mitigation measures. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 328/358
12-17-6: DESIGN AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
The following standards are required of all small and dispersed wind energy conversion systems:
A. Color: The wind energy conversion system shall be white or light gray in color. Other neutral colors may be allowed at the discretion of the board. The
surface shall be nonreflective.
B. Lighting: No lights shall be installed on the tower, unless required to meet FAA regulations.
C. Signs: One (1) sign, limited to four (4) square feet, shall be posted at the base of the tower. The sign shall include a notice of no trespassing, a warning
of high voltage, and the phone number of the property owner/operator to call in case of emergency.
D. Climbing Apparatus: All climbing apparatus shall be located at least twelve feet (12') above the ground, and the tower must be designed to prevent
climbing within the first twelve feet (12').
E. Fence: To limit access to the tower, a fence six feet (6') high with smooth side to the outside, with no more than one inch (1") gaps and a locking portal
shall be placed around the wind energy conversion system, unless the system is a small WECS located within a fenced or otherwise secured yard, or
is a small WECS mounted on a rooftop.
F. Maintenance: Facilities shall be well maintained in an operational condition that poses no potential safety hazard.
G. Displacement Of Parking Prohibited: The location of the wind energy conversion system shall not result in the net displacement of required parking as
specified in this title.
H. Restriction On Use Of Electricity Generated: A wind energy conversion system shall be used exclusively to supply electrical power for on site
consumption, except that when a parcel on which a wind energy conversion system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility
company, excess electrical power generated by the wind energy conversion system and not presently needed for on site use may be used by the utility
company in accordance with section 199, chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code.
I. Clearance Of Blade Aboveground: No portion of a small wind energy conversion system blade or rotor shall extend within twenty feet (20') of the ground.
No portion of a dispersed wind energy conversion system blade or rotor shall extend within fifty feet (50') of the ground. No blades or rotors may extend
over parking areas, driveways or sidewalks.
J. Automatic Overspeed Controls: All wind energy conversion systems shall be equipped with manual and automatic overspeed controls to limit the blade
rotation speed to within the design limits of the wind energy conversion system.
K. Noise: Except during short term events including utility outages and severe wind events, a wind energy conversion system shall be designed, installed
and operated so that the noise generated does not exceed the maximum noise levels established by this Code.
L. Electromagnetic Interference: All blades shall be constructed of a nonmetallic substance. A wind energy conversion system shall not be installed in any
location where its proximity with existing fixed broadcast, retransmission, or reception antenna for radio, television, wireless phone or other
communication systems would produce electromagnetic interference with signal transmission or reception. A wind energy conversion system shall not
be installed in any location along the major axis of an existing microwave communications link where its operation is likely to produce electromagnetic
interference in the link's operation. If it is determined that the wind energy conversion system is causing electromagnetic interference, the operator shall
take the necessary corrective action to eliminate this interference, including relocation or removal of the facilities, subject to the approval of the board
(in the case of a dispersed WECS) or the Administrative Officer (in the case of a small WECS). The board may revoke a conditional use permit granting
a dispersed wind energy conversion system if electromagnetic interference from the system becomes evident.
M. Interconnection: The wind energy conversion system, if interconnected to a utility system, shall meet the requirements for interconnection and operation
as set forth by the utility and the Iowa Utilities Board.
N. Wind Access Easements: The enactment of this chapter does not constitute the granting of an easement by the City. The owner/operator shall provide
covenants, easements, or similar documentation to assure sufficient wind to operate the wind energy conversion system unless adequate accessibility
to the wind is provided by the site.
O. Insurance: The owner/operator of a wind energy conversion system must demonstrate adequate liability insurance.
P. Complaint Resolution: The owner/operator of a dispersed wind energy conversion system shall develop a process to resolve complaints from nearby
residents. The process shall use an independent mediator or arbitrator and include a time limit for acting on a complaint. The owner/operator shall
make every reasonable effort to resolve any complaint.
Q. Removal: If the wind energy conversion system remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous period of one (1) year, the system shall be
deemed to be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner/operator shall remove the abandoned system at their expense. Removal of
the system includes the entire structure including foundations, transmission equipment and fencing from the property. Nonfunction or lack of operation
may be proven by reports from the interconnected utility. The owner/operator and successors shall make available to the Administrative Officer all
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 329/358
reports to and from the purchaser of energy from the wind energy conversion system if requested. If removal of towers and appurtenant facilities is
required, the Administrative Officer shall notify the owner/operator. If the City removes a tower and appurtenant facilities, it may sell the salvage to
defray the cost of removal. Any remaining cost shall be reimbursed by the owner/operator.
R. Right Of Entrance: By the acceptance of a conditional use permit, the owner/operator of a dispersed WECS grants permission to Mason City to enter
the property to remove the wind energy conversion system pursuant to the terms of the conditional use permit and to assure compliance with the other
conditions set forth in the permit. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-17-7: APPLICATION AND APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS:
Approval or denial of an application for a conditional use permit to allow construction of a dispersed wind energy conversion system shall be made by the
board as outlined in chapter 5 of this title.
A. Application: An application for a conditional use permit for a dispersed wind energy conversion system shall be made on the forms provided by the
Administrative Officer and shall be accompanied by the following information:
1. A site plan showing the following:
a. Complete property dimensions.
b. Location and full dimensions of all buildings existing on property including exterior dimensions, height of buildings and all uses on property.
Location and full dimensions of all buildings within two hundred feet (200') of the property including exterior dimensions, height and uses on
property.
c. Location and dimensions of any other natural or manmade features within two hundred feet (200') of the property such as trees, ridges, highways,
streets, bridges and underpasses.
d. Proposed location of tower including height, setbacks and distance to all buildings on the property and all buildings within two hundred feet (200')
of the base of the tower.
2. A map showing the location of the tower and all property within a one thousand foot (1,000') radius of the base of the tower, showing lot lines and the
location of all habitable residential structures, schools, hospitals, parks, or places of worship within that radius, along with the distance to such
functions from the base of the proposed tower, or showing that none of the above listed functions are located within the indicated radius.
3. Drawings, to scale, of the structure, including the tower, base, wind turbine generator, rotors, footings and guywires, if any, including dimensions
necessary to show compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The drawings and any necessary calculations shall be certified by a licensed
engineer as meeting the requirements of the Mason City Building Code.
4. Line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation will meet the Mason City
Electrical Code.
5. Certification from a licensed engineer or qualified person that the rotor and overspeed control have been designed for the proposed use on the
proposed site.
6. Evidence that the applicant has notified the utility that the customer intends to install an interconnected customer owned generator, and that the
generator meets the minimum requirements established by the utility and the Iowa Utilities Board. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement.
7. Evidence from a qualified individual that the site is feasible for a wind energy conversion system, or that covenants, easements and other
assurances to document sufficient wind to operate the wind energy conversion system have been obtained.
8. Evidence that the proposed wind energy conversion system will comply with applicable Federal Aviation Regulations, including any necessary
approvals from the Federal Aviation Administration.
9. Evidence that the applicant can obtain and maintain adequate liability insurance for the facility.
10. A noise study, if applicable.
11. A shadow flicker model, if applicable.
12. A site specific electromagnetic compatibility analysis assessing the impact to existing microwave bands with frequencies between nine hundred
megahertz (900 MHz) and forty gigahertz (40 GHz). The report shall include the following elements:
a. An inventory of existing microwave links operating in the nine hundred megahertz (900 MHz) to forty gigahertz (40 GHz) range within ten (10)
miles of the dispersed wind energy system.
b. An obstruction analysis of these links including the Fresnel zone of the microwave path.
c. Any recommended mitigation actions necessary to ensure that the dispersed wind energy system will not obstruct the first Fresnel zone.
d. An inventory of licensed television stations in a one hundred fifty (150) mile radius of the proposed dispersed wind energy system that are
providing programming services to Mason City.
e. A baseline measurement of signal strength and picture quality.
f. Recommended means of mitigation, avoidance or remedy to minimize or eliminate signal degradation or interference.
13. Any other evidence or information as required by the Administrative Officer or board.
14. An application fee plus charge for each additional public notice sign.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 330/358
B. Public Notice: The Administrative Officer shall cause notice to be published in the time and manner set forth in section 12-5-5 of this title. Notices shall
be mailed to the owners of all properties within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the zoning lot on which the dispersed WECS would be
constructed. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
Chapter 18
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
12-18-1: STATUTORY AUTHORITY AND INTENT:
The legislature of the State of Iowa has in chapter 414, Code of Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to secure
safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property
of Mason City and its residents and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and convenience of its residents by minimizing
flood losses with provisions designed to:
A. Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially. (Ord. 12-03,
4-3-2012)
B. Restrict or prohibit forms and functions that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or that cause excessive increases in flood
heights or velocities.
C. Require that forms and functions vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction or substantial improvement. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
D. Protect individuals from buying lands that may not be suited for intended purposes because of flood hazard.
E. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012)
12-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms and definitions are unique to this chapter. Other terms not included may be found in the general definitions of this title or in any
standard dictionary or may be inferred by context.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT: Any enclosed area of a building that has its floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see definition of lowest floor.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. Development does not include "minor projects" or "routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities" as defined in this section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices that do not involve filling or grading.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map. May also be referred to as "existing structure".
EXISTING FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Factory built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory built homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
EXPANSION OF EXISTING FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory built homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FACTORY BUILT HOME: Any structure, designed for residential use, which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site. For the purpose of this chapter, factory built homes include mobile
homes, manufactured homes and modular homes and also include "recreational vehicles" that are placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty
(180) consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two (2) or more factory built home lots for sale or lease.
FLOOD: General and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or
from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the base flood
elevation is the elevation of floodwaters related to the occurrence of the one percent (1%) flood.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map prepared as part of (but published separately from) the flood insurance study that delineates
both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result of a flood.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 331/358
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: An overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary
facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the channel that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge floodwaters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood by more than one foot (1').
FLOODWAY FRINGE: Those portions of the floodplain, other than the floodway, that can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed without causing
substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of the National Register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states with historic preservation programs that have been approved by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local Inventory of Historic Places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by either: 1) an
approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a basement except when all the following criteria are met:
A. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of subsection
12-18-13B5a of this chapter; and
B. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage; and
C. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least three feet (3')
above the base flood level; and
D. The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this section.
E. In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria in subsections A, B, C, and D of this definition, the lowest floor is the floor of the next
highest enclosed area that does not satisfy the criteria above.
MINOR PROJECTS: Small development activities (except for filling, grading and excavating) valued at less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
NEW CONSTRUCTION (NEW BUILDINGS, FACTORY BUILT HOME PARKS): Those structures or development for which the start of construction
commenced on or after May 16, 2012, the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
NEW FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A factory built home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the factory built homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure, excluding the value of the
land on which the structure is located, before the damage occurred.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES: Repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 332/358
not trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs
include:
A. Normal maintenance of structures such as reroofing, replacing roofing tiles and replacing siding;
B. Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and similar finish work;
C. Basement sealing;
D. Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
E. Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The land within a community subject to the "base flood". This land is identified as Zone A, Zone AE and shaded Zone
X on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the floodplain development permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory built home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins,
factory built homes, storage tanks, and other similar forms.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Any damage to a structure that satisfies any of the following criteria:
A. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure, excluding the value of the land upon which the structure is located, before the damage occurred.
B. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure designated as a "repetitive loss structure" by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the
National Flood Insurance Program whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure, excluding the value of the land upon which the structure is located, before the damage occurred.
C. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs at the time
of such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure, excluding the value of the land
upon which the structure is located, before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any improvement to a structure that satisfies either of the following criteria:
A. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure, excluding the value of the land upon which the structure is located, either: 1) before the "start of construction" of the improvement, or 2) if
the structure has been "substantially damaged" and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term includes structures that have incurred
"repetitive loss" or "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. This term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, or safety Code specifications that are solely necessary to assure
safe conditions for the existing use, so long as the property owner has been cited for these Code violations prior to commencement of the work. This
term also does not include any alteration of a "historic structure", provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's designation as a "historic
structure".
B. Any addition that increases the original floor area of a building by twenty five percent (25%) or more. The floor area of all additions constructed after
May 16, 2012, shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed twenty five
percent (25%).
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the City's floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012;
amd. 2017 Code)
12-18-3: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of Mason City shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map as being within the
boundaries of the Floodway, Floodway Fringe, General Floodplain and Shallow Flooding (Overlay) Districts, as established in section 12-18-4 of this
chapter. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012)
12-18-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 333/358
The Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) prepared as part of the flood insurance study for Cerro Gordo County and incorporated areas, City of Mason City,
panels 19033C0142C, 0144C, 0161C, 0162C, 0163C, 0164C, 0166C, 0167C, 0168C, 0169C, 0186C, 0188C, 0251C, 0252C, dated May 16, 2012, are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained with the flood
insurance study are also declared to be a part of this chapter. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
12-18-5: RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of the zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. When an interpretation is
needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Administrative Officer shall make the necessary interpretation. The Mason City Zoning Board of
Adjustment, hereinafter referred to as the board, shall hear and decide appeals, in accordance with section 12-5-2 of this title when it is alleged that there
is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Administrative Officer in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 12-
03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
12-18-6: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations that apply to forms and functions within the City of Mason City. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017
Code)
12-18-7: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other chapters inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent
of the inconsistency only. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012)
12-18-8: INTERPRETATION:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of
the Governing Body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State Statutes. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012)
12-18-9: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The standards required by this chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does not imply that areas outside the designated
floodplain overlay district areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Mason City or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that arise from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-
2012)
12-18-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this
chapter shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012)
12-18-11: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS:
The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided into the following districts:
A. Floodway Overlay District (FW): The Floodway Overlay District shall include the floodway shown on the Floodplain Zoning Map adopted in section 12-
18-4 of this chapter.
B. Floodway Fringe Overlay District (FF): The Floodway Fringe Overlay District shall include the following areas depicted on the Floodplain Zoning Map
adopted in section 12-18-4 of this chapter:
1. Those areas outside the Floodway Overlay District designated as Zone AE, and
2. Those areas designated as shaded Zone X, excluding those shaded Zone X areas within the Winnebago River floodplain and those shaded Zone X
areas within the Cheslea Creek floodplain extending from Cross Section J to the confluence with Willow Creek.
C. General Floodplain Overlay District (FP): The General Floodplain Overlay District shall include those areas designated as unnumbered Zone A and
those areas of the community within fifty feet (50') of those areas designated as unnumbered Zone A on the Floodplain Zoning Map adopted in section
12-18-4 of this chapter.
D. Shallow Flooding Overlay District (SF): The Shallow Flooding Overlay District shall include those areas designated as Zone AO or Zone AH on the
Floodplain Zoning Map adopted in section 12-18-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 334/358
The boundaries shall be as shown on the official Floodplain Zoning Map. Within these districts, all forms and functions not allowed as permitted or
conditional forms or functions as identified in section 12-8-3, table 2 of this title are prohibited. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
12-18-12: FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT (FW):
A. Permitted Forms And Functions: The following forms and functions shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the extent they are not prohibited
by any other chapter (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not include placement of structures, factory built homes, fill or other
obstruction, storage of material or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse:
1. Agricultural functions such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming,
and wild crop harvesting.
2. Industrial-commercial forms and functions such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips.
3. Private and public recreational forms and functions such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and
skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
4. Residential forms and functions such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
5. Such other open space forms and functions similar in nature to the above uses.
B. Conditional Forms And Functions: The following forms and functions that involve structures (temporary or permanent), fill, storage of materials or
equipment, excavation, or alteration of a watercourse may be permitted only upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the board as provided for in
section 12-18-16 of this chapter. Such uses must also meet the applicable provisions of the Floodway District performance standards.
1. Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement enterprises.
2. Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands, signs and billboards.
3. Extraction of sands, gravel and other materials.
4. Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers and wharves.
5. Forms or functions accessory to open space forms or functions.
6. Utility transmission lines and underground pipelines.
7. Other forms and functions similar in nature to the forms and functions described in subsection A of this section or this subsection B that are
consistent with the provisions of subsection C of this section and the general spirit and purpose of this chapter.
C. Performance Standards: All Floodway District forms and functions allowed as a permitted or conditional form or function shall meet the following
standards:
1. No form or function shall be permitted in the Floodway District that would result in any increase in the base flood level. Consideration of the effects of
any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated
lands.
2. All forms and functions within the Floodway District shall:
a. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
b. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
c. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
3. No form or function shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any
other drainage facility or system. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
4. Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe District
and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
5. Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and shall not be for human habitation.
6. Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other
material may be allowed if readily removable from the Floodway District within the time available after flood warning.
7. Watercourse alterations, relocations, channel changes, and modifications must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered
or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
8. Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
9. Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the stream bed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012)
12-18-13: FLOODWAY FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT (FF):
A. Permitted Forms And Functions: All forms and functions within the Floodway Fringe District shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited
by any other Code (or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe District.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 335/358
B. Performance Standards: All forms and functions must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable
performance standards:
1. Fill: Fill shall be allowed subject to the following standards:
a. No more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the lot located in the Floodway Fringe District shall be filled above the grade depicted on the
City's 2006 Topographic Maps.
b. The fill material must be compacted to at least ninety five percent (95%) of Standard Laboratory Maximum Dry Density (Standard Proctor),
according to ASTB Standard D-698. Fill soils must be fine grained soils of low permeability such as those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML
according to ASTM Standard D-2487, "Classification of Soils for Engineering Purposes". The fill material must be homogenous and isotropic.
c. The fill cannot alter existing drainage patterns on the lot.
d. All fill added to the lot since May 1, 2006, shall be added to the proposed fill in determining whether more than twenty percent (20%) of the lot has
been filled.
e. A certification from an accredited soil testing professional, certifying that the requirements of this subsection are met, shall be submitted prior to
issuance of any permits for further construction on the site.
2. Structures: All structures shall:
a. Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
b. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
c. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
3. Residential Buildings: All new or substantially improved residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of
three feet (3') above the base flood level. Construction shall be upon compacted fill meeting the requirements outlined in this subsection B, which
shall, at all points, be no lower than three feet (3') above the base flood level and extend at such elevation at least eighteen feet (18') beyond the
limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed subject to approval by the board, where
existing topography, street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the
structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential structures shall be provided with a means
of access that will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the base flood. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
4. Nonresidential Buildings: All new or substantially improved nonresidential buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a
minimum of three feet (3') above the base flood level, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When
floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the base flood; and that the structure,
below the base flood level, is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the
specific elevation (in relation to North American vertical datum) to which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
5. All New And Substantially Improved Structures:
a. Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" (not including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
(4) Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and low damage potential storage.
b. New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
c. New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions
of flooding.
6. Factory Built Homes:
a. All factory built homes, including those placed in existing factory built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of three feet (3') above the base flood level.
b. All factory built homes, including those placed in existing factory built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors.
7. Utility And Sanitary Systems:
a. On site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the
system during flooding.
b. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into floodwaters. Wastewater treatment facilities (other than on site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood
protection equal to or greater than three feet (3') above the base flood level elevation.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 336/358
c. New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. Water supply
treatment facilities (other than on site systems) shall be provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than three feet (3') above the base
flood level elevation.
d. Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
8. Storage Of Materials And Equipment: Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited unless elevated a minimum of three feet (3') above the base flood level elevation. Other material and equipment must either be similarly
elevated or: a) not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to floodwaters, or b) be readily removable from the
area within the time available after flood warning.
9. Flood Control Structural Works: Flood control structural works such as levees, floodwalls, etc., shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a base
flood with a minimum of six feet (6') of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition, structural flood control works
shall be approved by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
10. Watercourse Alterations Or Relocations: Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources. (Ord. 12-03,
4-3-2012)
11. Subdivisions: Subdivisions (including factory built home parks and subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the
installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for primarily residential
forms and functions shall provide all lots with a means of access that will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the base flood. Preliminary and
final plats for all new subdivisions shall include base flood elevation data for those areas located within the Floodplain Overlay District.
12. Accessory Structures:
a. Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures accessory to a residential form or function are exempt from the base flood elevation requirements
where the following criteria are satisfied:
(1) The structure shall not be used for human habitation.
(2) The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.
(3) The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
(4) The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation that may result in damage to other structures.
(5) The structure's service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least three feet (3') above the
base flood elevation.
(6) The structure's walls shall include openings that satisfy the provisions of subsection B5a of this section. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017
Code)
b. Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of
the structure and its contents.
13. Recreational Vehicles:
a. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of subsection B6 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory built homes
when the following criteria are satisfied:
(1) The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and
(2) The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
b. Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must
satisfy requirements of subsection B6 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory built homes.
14. Pipeline River And Stream Crossings: Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the stream bed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently
protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation, meandering, and the action of flood flows. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012)
12-18-14: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT (FP):
A. Permitted Forms And Functions: The following forms and functions shall be permitted within the General Floodplain District to the extent they are not
prohibited by any other Code (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not include placement of structures, factory built homes, fill or other
obstructions, the storage of materials or equipment, excavation, or alteration of a watercourse:
1. Agricultural functions such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming,
and wild crop harvesting.
2. Industrial-commercial forms and functions such as loading areas, parking areas, airport landing strips.
3. Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting
and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
4. Residential forms and functions such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 337/358
B. Conditional Forms And Functions: Any form or function that involve placement of structures, factory built homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of
materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be allowed only upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the board as
provided for in section 12-5-5 of this title and section 12-18-16 of this chapter. All such conditional uses shall be reviewed by the Department of Natural
Resources to determine: 1) whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the Floodway or Floodway Fringe, and 2) the base flood level. The
applicant shall be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make the determination. (Ord.
12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
C. Performance Standards:
1. All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the Floodway as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the
applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway Overlay District in section 12-18-12 of this chapter.
2. All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the Floodway Fringe as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the
applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway Fringe Overlay District in section 12-18-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012)
12-18-15: SHALLOW FLOODING OVERLAY DISTRICT (SF):
A. Permitted Forms And Functions: All forms and functions within the Shallow Flooding District shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited
by any other Code (or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet the applicable performance standards of the Shallow Flooding District. (Ord.
12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
B. Performance Standards: The performance standards for the Shallow Flooding District shall be the same as the performance standards for the Floodway
Fringe District with the following exceptions:
1. In shallow flooding areas designated as an AO Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection elevation shall be
equal to the number of feet as specified on the FIRM (or a minimum of 4 feet if no number is specified) above the highest natural grade adjacent to
the structure.
2. In shallow flooding areas designated as an AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection elevation shall be
equal to the elevation as specified on the FIRM.
3. In Zones AO and AH, required drainage paths shall be constructed around structures on slopes to guide water away from structures. (Ord. 12-03, 4-
3-2012)
12-18-16: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Appointment, Duties And Responsibilities Of Administrative Officer: The Administrative Officer is hereby appointed to implement and administer the
provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the Administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following:
1. Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
2. Review floodplain development applications to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from Federal, State and local governmental
agencies including approval when required from the Department of Natural Resources for floodplain construction. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012)
3. Record and maintain a record of:
a. The elevation (in relation to North American vertical datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures
located within the City's special flood hazard area, or
b. The elevation to which new or substantially improved structures located within the City's special flood hazard area have been floodproofed. (Ord.
12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
4. Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
5. Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
6. Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report concerning the community's participation, utilizing the annual report form supplied by
the Federal Insurance Administrator.
7. Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency of any annexations or modifications to the community's boundaries. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012)
8. Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council of potential conflict.
B. Floodplain Development Permit:
1. Permit Required: A floodplain development permit issued by the Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any manmade
change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations) or any change in function located in or on a property located wholly or partly on land in the City's special flood hazard area,
including the placement of factory built homes. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
2. Application For Permit: Application shall be made on forms furnished by the Administrator and shall include the following:
a. Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which application is to be made.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 338/358
b. Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done (i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that will readily identify
and locate the work to be done.
c. Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
d. Elevation of the base flood.
e. Elevation (in relation to North American vertical datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a building is to
be floodproofed.
f. For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
g. Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
3. Action On Permit Application: The Administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be
informed, in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The Administrator shall not issue permits for variances except as directed by the board. (Ord.
12-03, 4-3-2012)
4. Construction And Use To Be As Provided In Application And Plans: Floodplain development permits based on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the form, function, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications and no other form,
function, arrangement or construction. Any form, function, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the
State of Iowa, that the finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.
C. Conditional Uses, Appeals And Variances:
1. Conditional Uses: Requests for conditional uses shall be submitted to the Administrator in the manner described in section 12-5-5 of this title, who
shall forward such to the board for consideration. Such requests shall include information ordinarily submitted with applications as well as any
additional information deemed necessary by the Administrative Officer or the board.
2. Appeals: Where it is alleged there is any error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal such action within ten (10) days of the decision in the manner established in section 12-
5-2 of this title.
3. Variance:
a. The board may authorize upon request in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the public
interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. No variance
shall be granted unless it meets the standards outlined in subsection 12-5-4F of this title.
b. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood would result. Consideration of
the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for
similarly situated lands.
c. Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
d. In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the applicant
shall be notified in writing over the signature of the administrator that:
(1) The issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and
(2) Such construction increases risks to life and property.
e. All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the Department of Natural Resources.
4. Hearings And Decisions Of The Board:
a. Hearings: Upon the filing with the board of an appeal, an application for a conditional use or a request for a variance, the board shall hold a public
hearing in the manner established in chapter 5 of this title. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as
well as due notice to parties in interest. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney and present written or oral
evidence. The board may require the appellant or applicant to provide such information as is reasonably deemed necessary and may request the
technical assistance and/or evaluation of a professional engineer or other expert person or agency, including the Department of Natural
Resources. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
b. Decisions: The board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal, conditional use or variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an appeal, the
board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for
its decision. In granting a conditional use or variance, the board shall consider such factors as contained in this section and all other relevant
sections of this chapter and may prescribe such conditions as contained in subsection C4d of this section.
c. Factors Upon Which Decision Of Board Shall Be Based: In passing upon applications for variances, the board shall consider all relevant factors
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.
(2) The danger that materials may be swept onto other land or downstream to the injury of others.
(3) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 339/358
(4) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(5) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the City.
(6) The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
(7) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
(8) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
(9) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area.
(10) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwater expected at the site.
(12) The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.
(13) Such other factors that are relevant to the purpose of this chapter.
d. Conditions Attached To Variances: Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
(1) Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
(2) Limitation of periods of use and operation.
(3) Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
(4) Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
(5) Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, durations, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with the regulatory flood. The board shall require that the applicant
submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory
flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
5. Appeals To Court: Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board may present to a court of record a petition, duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the
court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012)
12-18-17: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following conditions:
1. If such use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
2. Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
3. If any nonconforming use or structure is damaged by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
4. If any nonconforming structure that has been designated as a repetitive loss structure by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the
National Flood Insurance Program is damaged by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than twenty five percent
(25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Except as provided in subsection A2 of this section, any use which has been permitted as a conditional use or variance shall be considered a
conforming use. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012)
12-18-18: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of conditional uses or variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as outlined in this Code. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy a violation.
(Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012)
Chapter 19
COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
12-19-1: EXISTING ANTENNAS AND TOWERS:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 340/358
A. Nonconforming Antennas And Towers: Antennas and towers in existence as of July 1, 2010, that do not conform to or comply with this chapter, are
subject to the requirements of chapter 6 of this title. In addition, if a nonconforming tower is hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or
cause whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its former use, location, and physical dimensions upon obtaining required permits;
provided, however, that if the cost of repairing the tower to the former use, physical dimensions, and location would exceed the cost of a new tower of
like kind and quality, then the tower may not be repaired or restored except in full compliance with this chapter.
B. Substantial Changes: Any modification to wireless telecommunication equipment associated with an existing tower or an existing support structure shall
be approved, unless the modification is a substantial change. A "substantial change" shall mean any one (1) or more of the following:
1. Increase in the height of an existing tower, other than a tower in the public right-of-way, by more than ten percent (10%) or by the height of one (1)
additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna, not to exceed twenty feet (20'), whichever is greater.
2. Increase in the height of existing support structures by more than ten percent (10%) or more than ten feet (10'), whichever is greater.
3. Addition of an appurtenance to the body of the tower, other than a tower in the public right-of-way, that would protrude from the edge of the tower
more than twenty feet (20'), or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater.
4. Addition of an appurtenance to an existing support structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet (6').
5. Installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four (4) cabinets.
6. Installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground, if no preexisting ground cabinets are associated with the existing support structure or the
existing tower.
7. Installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten percent (10%) larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated
with an existing support structure or an existing tower.
8. Excavation, construction or deployment of wireless telecommunication towers or equipment outside the current site.
9. Removal or reduction of any element of the existing support structure designed or intended to camouflage or conceal the tower or equipment.
10. Noncompliance with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the tower or the existing support structure,
unless the change does not exceed the thresholds identified in this subsection. (2017 Code)
12-19-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Antennas Mounted To Existing Towers Or Existing Support Structures: An antenna may be mounted to an existing tower or may be mounted on an
existing support structure; however, if the installation of the equipment results in a "substantial change" as outlined in subsection 12-19-1B of this
chapter, it shall be considered a new tower and shall be subject to the review process for a new tower as outlined below.
B. Zoning District Requirements:
1. Z2 And Z3 Zoning Districts:
a. Towers supporting amateur radio antennas, television antennas, broadcast radio antennas, citizen band radio antennas, and shortwave listening
antennas, etc., and conforming to all applicable provisions of this chapter and the requirements of the zoning district shall be allowed only in the
rear yard and/or side yard.
b. Freestanding towers or existing support structures supporting wireless telecommunication antennas and conforming to all applicable provisions of
this chapter shall be allowed only in the following sites in the Z2 and Z3 Districts:
(1) Church sites, when mounted on existing support structure and camouflaged as a steeple or bell tower;
(2) Park sites, when compatible with the nature of the park; and
(3) Government, school, utility, and hospital sites.
2. Z5 District: New towers are not permitted within the Z5 Central Business District. Antennas in the Z5 District may be located on existing support
structures.
3. Z7 Specific Use District: A freestanding tower is permitted in the Z7-2 (NIACC) and Z7-4 (County Fairgrounds) Districts. In the Z7-1 (Mercy Medical
Center) and Z7-3 (Mobile Home Park) Districts, antennas may only be mounted to existing support structures; however, where at least thirty five
percent (35%) of contiguous property under the same ownership in the Z7-1 or Z7-3 District is maintained in open space, a freestanding tower may
be erected; provided, that all other requirements of this chapter are met.
4. All Other Districts: A new tower may be erected on any lot within the Z1 Agricultural District, Z4 Multi-Use District or Z6 Industrial District, except
upon a lot where the principal function is residential.
C. Maximum Height: The maximum height of any tower or tower and antenna(s) in combination shall be subject to the setback and fall zone requirements
outlined below; however, in no case shall any tower or tower/antenna combination exceed the following:
1. Z1, Z6, Z7-2 and Z7-4 Districts: Three hundred feet (300').
2. Z2, Z3, Z7-1 and Z7-3 Districts: One hundred feet (100'); however, on land in the Z7-1 District where at least thirty five percent (35%) of contiguous
property under the same ownership is maintained in open space, a tower may have a maximum height of three hundred feet (300').
3. Z4 District: Two hundred feet (200').
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 341/358
D. Setback And Fall Zone Requirements:
1. The setback and fall shall be measured between the base of the tower located nearest the property line and the actual property line.
2. A tower or antenna in the Z1, Z2, Z3 or Z7-3 Districts shall not encroach into any easement or required yard setback in those districts as specified in
this title.
3. A tower or antenna in the Z4, Z5, Z6, Z7-1, Z7-2 or Z7-4 Districts shall not encroach upon any easements. The minimum distance to the nearest
property line shall be equal to the height of the tower.
4. In any zoning district, the minimum fall zone distance from the base of the tower to the nearest point of the nearest habitable building shall be one
and one-half (1.5) times the height of the tower.
5. A tower shall not be located within the first tier of the lot; however, on sites adjacent to public rights-of-way on three (3) or more sides, a tower may
be placed within a secondary front yard abutting a public right-of-way if the setbacks are met from all other property lines as specified by this title.
6. The required setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a public street varied at the discretion of the Administrative Officer to allow the
integration of an antenna or tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a church steeple, light standard, power line support device or similar
structure.
7. A lesser setback or fall zone distance may be permitted if a registered engineer licensed by the State of Iowa specifies in writing that the collapse of
the tower will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable circumstances; but in no case shall the setback or fall zone be less than one-half
(1/2) the height of the tower. (2017 Code)
12-19-3: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW TOWERS:
A. Type: A tower shall be a monopole or other structure that is stabilized at the base. Guy wires may not be used.
B. Colors: Towers shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment to the maximum extent possible through the use of color, except in
instances where the color is dictated by Federal or State authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
C. Tower Lighting: Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the
Federal Aviation Administration or other Federal or State authority for a particular tower, or if required by the Administrative Officer for security or safety
reasons. This provision shall not preclude the placement of an antenna on an existing or proposed lighting standard.
D. Signs And Advertising: The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited. Upon completion of
tower site construction, a placard containing the name, address, and telephone number of the principal owner or operator of the tower structure is
required. This placard shall be affixed in a location so that it is clearly visible at the perimeter of the site. Said placard shall not exceed four (4) square
feet in area. The pertinent ownership information on the placard shall be kept current and updated as needed. No additional signage shall be allowed
other than those required by the FCC.
E. Accessory Utility Buildings: All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding
environment and shall meet such setback requirements as are compatible with the actual placement of the tower. Ground mounted equipment shall be
screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of nonvegetative screening better reflects and complements the architectural
character of the surrounding neighborhood. Acceptance of design from a registered engineer licensed by the State of Iowa shall be left to the discretion
of the Administrative Officer.
F. Collocation On New Towers: New towers shall be designed to support at least three (3) wireless telecommunications providers, including the initial
provider (3 total). (2017 Code)
12-19-4: NEW TOWERS AND ANTENNAS; REVIEW PROCESS:
A. New Antennas On Existing Towers And Existing Support Structures: A new antenna to be collocated on an existing tower or mounted on an existing
support structure (with or without collocation) shall be reviewed administratively for compliance with this chapter by the Development Services
Department.
1. A request for an antenna that is to be collocated on an existing tower or an existing support structure shall be reviewed and a decision rendered in
no less than ninety (90) days from the date the application is determined to be complete.
2. A request for a new antenna that is the first or only antenna to be mounted on an existing support structure shall be reviewed and a decision
rendered no less than one hundred fifty (150) days from the date the application is determined to be complete.
3. Any installation that results in a "substantial change" as outlined in subsection 12-19-1B of this chapter shall be considered a new tower and shall be
reviewed according to the process outlined for a new tower.
B. New Towers: All new freestanding towers or any antenna installation that meets the requirements for a "substantial change" as outlined in subsection
12-19-1B of this chapter shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee as outlined in chapter 7 of this title. A decision on a new tower shall
be rendered in no less than one hundred fifty (150) days from the date the application is determined to be complete.
C. Required Submittals For New Towers: In addition to the required submittals for a concept plan or major site plan as outlined in chapter 7 of this title, a
request for a new tower shall include the following:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 342/358
1. A report from a registered engineer licensed by the State of Iowa indicating the following:
a. Description of the tower/antenna height and design including a cross section and elevation;
b. Documentation of the approximate height above grade for potential mounting positions for the initial and the collocated antennas (minimum of 3
total) and the approximate minimum separation distance between antennas; and
c. Description of the tower's general capacity including the number and type of antennas that can be accommodated on the tower (minimum of 3).
2. A letter of intent committing the tower owner and his/her successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to
meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use, including, without limitation, reasonable rental rates for such shared use.
3. Documentation showing that the applicant has completed a survey of existing collocation opportunities within one-half (1/2) mile of the proposed new
tower location and, if collocation opportunities exist, a statement regarding the reason for choosing the proposed location instead of collocation. The
explanation shall include a sworn statement from an individual who has responsibility over placement of the tower, attesting that one (1) or more of
the following exists:
a. Collocation within the half-mile radius would not result in the same mobile service functionality, coverage, and capacity.
b. Collocation within the half-mile radius is technically infeasible.
c. Collocation within the half-mile radius is economically burdensome to the applicant.
4. The tower owner, if he/she is not the wireless telecommunication provider, shall provide proof of a lease agreement with a wireless
telecommunication provider for the location of at least one (1) antenna on the proposed structure.
D. Approval: Construction of an approved new antenna or new tower must commence within two (2) years of the date of approval, and shall be diligently
pursued until completion. Failure to meet this requirement voids the approval and any associated permits.
E. Denial: If an application is denied, the reasons for denial shall be provided to the applicant in writing, along with minutes of meetings and other
documents that support the denial. (2017 Code)
12-19-5: ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS OR PORTIONS OF TOWERS:
The operator/owner of a tower shall provide the City with a copy of the notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations. All abandoned or unused towers
and associated aboveground facilities shall be removed within twelve (12) months of the cessation of operations of an antenna facility at the site unless the
Administrative Officer approves a time extension. In the event that a tower is not removed within twelve (12) months of the cessation of operations at a
site, the City may remove the tower and associated facilities and the costs of removal assessed against the property. (2017 Code)
12-19-6: TELECOMMUNICATIONS OPERATIONS:
No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety telecommunications or private telecommunications, including, without
limitation: radio, television, and personal communications. Any violation shall be enforced in accordance with rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC). (2017 Code)
Chapter 20
SIGN REGULATIONS
12-20-1: INTRODUCTION:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to promote, preserve and protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the City, to alleviate the congestion
of public streets, to provide for the promotion of traffic safety, to conserve the value of buildings, and to enhance and protect the appearance of the
community by providing reasonable regulations and standards relating to the type, placement and physical dimensions of signs. This chapter
recognizes and subscribes to the right of businesses to advertise and the right of advertising companies to pursue their business, subject to reasonable
regulations as adopted in this chapter.
B. Scope: This chapter shall apply to all on premises signs and off premises signs within the City. All signs erected, repaired, altered, relocated or
maintained within the City shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 14-2, 2-4-2014)
12-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms and definitions are unique to this chapter. Other terms not included may be found in the general definitions of this title, or in any
standard dictionary or may be inferred by context.
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which, for more than ninety (90) days, does not display any advertisement, copy or message or any sign which identifies or
advertises a business, lessor, service, owner, product, or activity, which is no longer provided or available at the indicated location or for which no legal
owner can be found.
ABANDONED SIGN STRUCTURE: A sign support, frame, pole or structure which, for more than ninety (90) days, does not support a sign.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 343/358
ANIMATED SIGN: A sign that uses movement or change of light to depict action or to create a special effect or scene. This definition does not include
message center or time and temperature signs.
ATTACHED SIGN: A sign attached to any building or habitable structure. Types of attached signs include wall, window, projecting and blade signs.
BALLOON SIGN: A transient sign consisting of graphics or any three-dimensional figure erected for the purposes of advertising, that is inflated with or
supported by air or other gas.
BANNER SIGN: A transient sign made of fabric or other nonrigid materials with no enclosing framework. This definition includes "feather" signs or similar
banner signs which are supported on fewer than three (3) sides with a rigid post or similar support.
BLADE SIGN: A small attached sign mounted perpendicularly to a building and projecting no more than fifteen inches (15") from the wall, intended to
direct pedestrian traffic to specific locations or businesses.
CAMPUS COMPLEX: An agglomeration of industrial, commercial, or professional office parcels that may, because of ownership, proximity of location or
arrangement of buildings, be considered a single premises by the Administrative Officer for the purpose of allowing a multi-tenant sign.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, such as a reader board with changeable letters or changeable
pictorial panels.
CIVIC BANNERS: A temporary sign erected or permitted by a government agency on rights-of-way or other City property.
CLEARANCE (Of A Sign): The vertical distance between the prevailing, natural surface grade and the lowest point of any sign, including framework and
embellishments, extending over that grade.
DETACHED SIGN: A sign permanently affixed to the ground and otherwise not attached to a building or structure. It may be supported by poles, uprights,
braces, or placed on a base mounted directly to the ground. Detached signs include monument signs and pole signs.
DIRECTIONAL/INFORMATION SIGN: An on premises sign giving directions, instructions, or facility information, e.g., parking or exit and entrance signs,
and which may contain the name or logo of an establishment but no other advertising copy.
DOUBLE HEAD SIGN: An off premises sign that contains two (2) sign faces when viewed head on. A double head sign may be a side by side or a stacked
("double decker") sign.
FACADE, OTHER: The exterior walls of a building other than the primary facade or secondary facade.
FACADE, PRIMARY: A single exterior wall of a building that faces the front line of the lot or the exterior wall of a building that contains the primary
entrance to the building. The designation of a primary facade shall be at the discretion of the owner.
FACADE, SECONDARY: A single exterior wall of a building other than the primary facade. The designation of a secondary facade shall be at the
discretion of the owner.
FACE (Of A Sign): The area of a sign on which the copy is placed.
FESTOONS: A string or series of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pinwheels or similar devices.
FLASHING SIGN: A directly or indirectly illuminated sign that contains an intermittent flashing light source. This does not include message center or
time/temperature signs.
FLIER SIGN: A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, utility pole, fence, etc.
HEIGHT (Of A Sign): The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign or sign structure to the prevailing natural surface grade beneath the
sign.
ILLEGAL SIGN: A sign erected without a permit required by this chapter, or in violation of any of the limitations, prohibitions or requirements of this
chapter.
ILLEGAL SIGN STRUCTURE: A sign structure erected without a permit required by this chapter, or in violation of any of the limitations, prohibitions or
requirements of this chapter.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign.
INCIDENTAL SIGN: A small sign, emblem or decal informing the public of information (such as hours of operation, credit cards accepted, etc.), goods,
facilities or services available on the premises.
LOT WIDTH: The average width of a zoning lot measured parallel to the front lot line.
MAINTENANCE: The cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic size, design, or
structure of the sign.
MESSAGE CENTER: All or a portion of an attached or detached sign consisting of an electronically or computer controlled reader board where different
copy changes are shown on a lamp bank or other electronic displays. This definition includes a sign or portion of a sign that displays only current time and
temperature.
MONUMENT SIGN: A detached sign where the base of the sign is on the ground or a maximum of no more than twelve inches (12") above the adjacent
grade or with no more than twelve inches (12") of clearance from the ground.
MULTI-TENANT SIGN: A sign advertising a shopping mall, shopping center, strip mall or campus complex depicting multiple tenants and/or the name of
the shopping center.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign that was erected legally but does not comply with subsequently enacted sign regulations and restrictions.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 344/358
NONCONFORMING SIGN STRUCTURE: A sign structure that was erected legally but does not comply with subsequently enacted sign regulations and
restrictions.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign that directs attention to a business, profession, product, service, activity or entertainment that is not conducted, sold or
offered on the premises upon which the sign is located. An off premises sign shall be considered a principal use in the zoning districts in which it is
allowed.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign that directs attention to a business, profession, product, service, or activity conducted, sold or offered on the same premises
where the sign is located. An on premises sign shall be considered an accessory use in the zoning districts in which it is allowed.
POLE SIGN: A detached sign that is affixed, attached or erected on a pole that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or structure.
PORTABLE SIGN: A sign which, by its construction or nature, may be, or is intended to be, freely moved from one location to another. The removal of the
wheels or undercarriage does not place the sign in another category. Signs mounted on trailers, vehicles or connected to vehicles with hitch mechanisms
are also considered to be portable signs.
POSTER PANEL SIGN: A sign placed outside of a business, usually on the adjacent sidewalk, that is oriented to pedestrians and provides information
about the business (e.g., products and services offered, daily specials, etc.) and is not permanently attached to the ground or structure.
PREMISES: An individual zoning lot, parcel or campus complex, together with the buildings and structures thereon.
PROJECTING SIGN: An attached sign supported by uprights, braces, or other devices or otherwise attached to a building or structure and projecting
perpendicular to the face of the building.
PUBLIC SIGN: A. A temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the City, County, State or Federal government for traffic control or direction.
B. A temporary or permanent sign erected for the designation of or direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or public service, property or facility.
ROOF SIGN: An attached sign erected, constructed or maintained wholly or partially upon or over the roofline of any building with the principal structural
support on the roof or building structure.
ROOFLINE: The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys or minor projections.
SIGN: An object, device, graphic design or part thereof, visible outdoors, that is used to advertise, announce, identify, declare, demonstrate, display,
instruct, direct or attract attention by any means including words, letters, figures, designs, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination, illuminated neon tubing, and
projecting images.
SIGN AREA: A. Area of signs not requiring a permit, detached on premises signs, attached on premises signs with frames, and off premises signs:
1. For a sign composed of one (1) face: The sign area is the area enclosed by one (1) continuous line, connecting the extreme points or edges of the
sign. The area shall be determined using the largest sign area or silhouette, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights.
2. For a sign composed of more than one (1) face: The sign area is the areas enclosed by a continuous line connecting the extreme points or edges
of each face and shall be totaled. The area shall be determined using the total sign area or silhouette, but excluding the necessary supports or
uprights.
3. For a sign composed of two (2) faces constructed back to back, or at less than a forty five degree (45°) angle to each other: The sign area shall be
determined using the sign area or silhouette of the largest face, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights.
4. For a sign composed of two (2) faces constructed at more than a forty five degree (45°) angle to each other: The sign area shall be determined
using the total area of all faces, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights.
B. Area of attached on premises signs without frames, or attached on premises signs that are inscribed, painted or otherwise directly affixed to the wall
surface: The sign area is the area including all lettering, wording, and accompanying design or symbols together with any background.
C. Area of a sign composed of individual letters or figures: The area of the smallest rectangle or other geometric shape that encompasses all the letters
or symbols.
SIGN SEPARATION: The horizontal distance between sign faces when measured along the centerline of a public right-of-way from a point on the
centerline of the public right-of-way at a right angle to the center of one (1) sign face to a point on the centerline of the same public right-of-way at a right
angle to the center of another sign face.
SIGN STRUCTURE: The supports, uprights, bracing, or framework of any structure exhibiting a sign.
SINGLE HEAD SIGN: An off premises sign that contains a single sign face when viewed head on.
STREET FRONTAGE: The length of the property line of any one (1) premises abutting the public right-of-way.
SWINGING SIGN: A sign installed on an arm, mast or spar that is by design intended to allow the sign to swing due to wind action or other force.
TRANSIENT SIGN: A sign, banner, pennant, placard, valance or advertising display or sign constructed of light fabric, plastic, cardboard, wallboard,
plywood, paper or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a limited period of time, e.g., garage sale, rummage sale, real
estate, open house, product sign, vendor sign and similar types of signs, but not including political signs advocating for a candidate, issue, or point of view.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 345/358
WALL SIGN: An attached sign that is mounted, inscribed or painted directly on a wall of any building or structure.
WINDOW SIGN: A nontemporary, on premises attached sign installed in, on, or behind a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. (Ord. 14-14,
12-2-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
12-20-3: SIGN APPROVAL AND PERMITS:
A. Permit Required:
1. Zoning Permit: Except as specifically exempted in this chapter, no sign may be erected, painted or otherwise installed or inscribed on a lot or onto a
building unless a zoning permit has been issued that ensures that the proposed sign is in compliance with this chapter.
2. Sign Permit: Any sign requiring a permit in accordance with title 10, chapter 2, article G of this Code shall not be erected, painted or otherwise
installed or inscribed on a lot or onto a building unless a sign permit has been issued that ensures that the proposed sign is in compliance with the
Building Code adopted under title 10 of this Code.
B. Zoning Review And Approval Required: Except for signs exempt from zoning permits according to this chapter, a zoning permit to erect, alter or relocate
any sign subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be issued only after zoning review and approval. Review and approval shall be required for each
sign or signs regulated by this chapter, whether erected concurrently or not.
1. Off premises signs shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee, according to the process outlined in chapter 7 of this title.
2. All other signs subject to zoning permits under this chapter shall be reviewed and approved by the Administrative Officer before issuance of a zoning
permit.
C. Normal Maintenance Or Repair: These regulations shall not be construed to require zoning review and approval or a zoning permit for a change of copy
on a sign, nor for the repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or sign structure for which zoning approval has previously
been granted; provided, that the sign or sign structure is not modified in any way. (Ord. 14-2, 2-4-2014)
12-20-4: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The signs listed in table 1 of this section are expressly prohibited in all zoning districts:
TABLE 1
PROHIBITED SIGNS
Signs prohibited in all zone districts:
Abandoned and/or obsolete sign structures.
Abandoned and/or obsolete signs.
Any sign not expressly permitted by this chapter.
Any sign that is not a public sign that is located in, on, under or over a public right-of-way, except as allowed in subsection 12-20-6D of this chapter
and title 5, chapter 1, article C of this Code.
Any sign that violates or advertises activities that violate City, State or Federal law.
Flashing signs, other than allowed message centers.
Flier signs.
Off premises advertising signs mounted to the wall or roof of a building.
Signs bearing or containing statements, words or pictures that describe or depict specified anatomical areas or specific sexual activities, as defined
in title 13 of this Code.
Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or governmental signs or signals.
Swinging signs. (Ord. 14-2, 2-4-2014)
12-20-5: SIGNS ALLOWED BUT NOT REQUIRING A ZONING PERMIT:
A. General regulations for signs not requiring a zoning permit:
1. Signs shall not be illuminated unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
2. Signs shall not be located in, on, under or over any public right-of-way except as allowed in title 5, chapter 1, article C of this Code.
3. The sign area shall not be applied to the total sign area allowed by the zoning district, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
4. Signs are not subject to the setback requirement unless specifically stated in this chapter.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 346/358
5. Signs shall not be placed in the traffic visibility zone, per section 12-16-6 of this title.
6. Signs must be constructed of a rigid material, or erected tightly so as to appear of a rigid material, and securely mounted without the use of
guywires, ropes, strings, or cords.
B. The signs listed in table 2 of this section are allowed and are exempted from the zoning permit requirements: (Ord. 14-2, 2-4-2014)
TABLE 2
SIGNS ALLOWED BUT NOT REQUIRING A ZONING PERMIT
Z1, Z2, Z3, Z7-3, Z7-5
Z4, Z5, Z6,
Z7-1, Z7-2, Z7-4
Transient signs:
Area (maximum sq. ft.)
Per individual sign: 6 sq. ft. Lots with <200' of street frontage: Cumulative area of all
signs: 16 sq. ft.
Cumulative area of all signs: 12 sq. ft. Lots with =200' of street frontage: Cumulative area of all
signs: 32 sq. ft.
Height (maximum ft.) 6' 8'
Location May be placed within the required setbacks, but not within
the traffic visibility zone (see section 12-16-6 of this title)
May be placed within the required setbacks, but not within
the traffic visibility zone (see section 12-16-6 of this title)
Time limits Shall be removed within 10 days after the precipitating
project, event sale, or promotion is concluded
No limitation
Balloons, festoons and
other promotional
devices:
Time limits No more than 10 days per calendar year No more than 30 days per calendar year
Restrictions On single-family and two-family properties, may be used for noncommercial purposes only
Others (allowed in all zone districts):
Civic banners
Directional/informational signs. 1 per street access, not to exceed 4 sq. ft. in area per sign. May be illuminated but may not flash
Holiday decorations
Home occupations sign. 1 attached sign per lot, advertising an allowed home occupation. Maximum area = 2 sq. ft. May not be illuminated
Incidental signs
Public signs. Signs may be illuminated but may not flash; however, time/temperature and message centers are allowed
Signs mounted inside a building, that are not visible from the exterior of the building
Temporary window signs. May not be displayed for more than 30 consecutive days
(Ord. 14-14, 12-2-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
12-20-6: PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SIGNS REQUIRING A ZONING PERMIT:
A. General Regulations:
1. Signs shall not be placed in a drainageway, ingress/egress easement, utility easement or other easement of record.
2. Signs shall not be located in, on, under or over any public right-of-way except as allowed in subsection D of this section and in title 5, chapter 1,
article C of this Code.
3. Signs shall not be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exitway, window or door opening used as a means
of egress or to prevent free passage from one part of a roof to another part thereof or access thereto.
4. Signs shall not be attached in any form, shape or manner which will interfere with any opening required for ventilation, except that a sign may be
erected in front of and may cover transom windows when not in violation of the provisions of the Building or Fire Prevention Codes.
5. Signs shall not be suspended by chains, hooks or cables or other devices that will allow the sign to swing due to wind action or other force. Signs
shall be anchored to prevent any lateral movement that could cause wear on supporting members or connections.
6. Signs shall not have moving, rotating or animated parts.
7. Supports and braces shall be an integral part of the sign design. Angle irons, chains, or wires used for supports or braces shall be hidden from public
view to the extent technically feasible.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 347/358
8. Detached signs shall be self-supporting structures and be permanently attached to sufficient foundations as required by the City Building Code.
Supporting posts shall be painted in a neutral color.
9. An attached sign must derive all of its structural support from the building to which it is attached.
10. A mural painted directly upon a building wall shall not be considered a sign and therefore not subject to regulation, unless the artwork or graphics
contain letters, logos or other representations that constitute advertising. Any portion of a mural that constitutes advertising shall be subject to the
requirements for wall signs as outlined in section 12-20-8, table 3 of this chapter.
11. After any sign that requires a zoning permit is constructed, affixed or erected, the sign owner or sign contractor performing the work or service shall
notify the Administrative Officer for final inspection of the sign.
12. Signs shall not be placed in the traffic visibility zone, per section 12-16-6 of this title.
B. Electrical And Illumination Requirements:
1. Electrical service to on premises and off premises signs shall be concealed to the greatest extent feasible.
2. External lighting used in conjunction with or the lighting of any sign, shall be directed only upon the sign to be illuminated. Any illumination of a sign,
whether internal or external, shall not be directed onto adjoining property or constitute a hazard to vehicles upon a street or highway.
3. Any sign that is allowed to be illuminated shall not have any flashing elements, unless a message center is allowed.
4. In the Z2 and Z3 Zone Districts, only signs for multiple-family developments and allowed nonresidential uses may be illuminated.
C. Maintenance Standards:
1. Every sign, including signs for which zoning permits are not required, shall be maintained in a safe, representable and good structural and aesthetic
condition at all times, including replacing of defective parts and lettering, repainting, cleaning and other acts required for the maintenance of the sign.
2. The ground area around any detached sign shall be kept free and clean of weeds, trash and other debris. Landscaping at the base of the sign, if
required, shall be maintained in a healthy and hardy condition. (Ord. 14-14, 12-2-2014)
D. Encroachment Standards:
1. Wall signs attached parallel to the face of a building and blade signs may encroach into an adjacent right-of-way up to fifteen inches (15"). (Ord. 14-
14, 12-2-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
2. Projecting signs, canopy and awning signs that encroach into the public right-of-way are allowed after review and approval by the City Council per
title 5, chapter 1, article C of this Code and after confirmation that the signs meet the requirements of this section.
3. A poster panel sign on a public sidewalk or plaza shall not require an encroachment permit from the City Council; provided, that the requirements of
subsection E3 of this section are met.
4. Detached signs shall not be allowed to encroach into any right-of-way.
E. Specific Sign Requirements:
1. Projecting Signs:
a. A projecting sign must be constructed to provide a minimum height above grade at least ten feet (10') above any pedestrianway and fourteen feet
(14') above any vehicularway.
b. A projecting sign may not project more than four feet (4') from the face of the building.
2. Blade Signs:
a. Extension: A blade sign shall not extend more than fifteen inches (15") from the face of the wall.
b. Maximum Area: Three (3) square feet. The area of the blade sign shall be counted toward the cumulative maximum area of allowed attached
signs.
c. Minimum Clearance From Sidewalk: Seven feet (7'). (Ord. 14-14, 12-2-2014)
d. Number Of Signs Permitted: One (1) blade sign shall be permitted for each business accessed from a building frontage. A blade sign shall be
located near the business entrance. A business fronting on two (2) or more streets, or streets and a parking lot in combination, may have one (1)
blade sign per frontage, but in no case may a business have more than two (2) blade signs.
e. Faces; Thickness: Blade signs shall have no more than two (2) faces, placed back to back to each other in the same plane, and shall be no more
than three inches (3") thick.
f. Materials: Blade signs shall be constructed of rigid and permanent materials, such as wood, metal, or rigid polymer.
g. Illumination: A blade sign may be illuminated only by an internal light source or by a low intensity light source that is not directly visible from the
ground and is directed only upon the sign, or indirectly illuminated by a shielded, wall mounted building light or other ambient light source. (Ord.
14-14, 12-2-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
3. Poster Panel Signs:
a. The sign shall be located at least two feet (2') from an adjacent curb and shall not impede passage of pedestrians along the sidewalk.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 348/358
b. The sign shall be anchored or weighted to prevent it from being affected by wind or other force.
c. A poster panel sign shall be removed from the sidewalk and stored indoors whenever the business is not in operation or open to the public.
d. The holder of the sign permit for the poster panel sign shall provide proof of insurance sufficient to hold the City harmless from and indemnified
against all damages arising from or growing out of the placement of the sign. (Ord. 14-14, 12-2-2014)
12-20-7: ON PREMISES CAMPUS COMPLEX SIGNS:
A. A campus complex may be designated by the Administrative Officer in the Z4, Z6 and Z7 Districts where several parcels are located and arranged so
that they give an appearance to the general public of an institutional or commercial center. A designation of a campus complex allows the various
parcels to be considered a single premises for the purpose of meeting the requirements for a multi-tenant sign.
B. The designation of several parcels as a campus complex allows a single sign structure to support the detached signs of the various parcels. The
formula for determining detached sign allowances in the zoning district shall be applied to each individual parcel. A single sign structure, located on any
one of the parcels, may be used to support the various detached signs of each individual parcel. In no case shall more total or individual sign area be
allowed under the campus complex designation than would be allowed using the sign area requirements of each individual premises.
C. A sign designating the name of the campus complex may be attached to the campus complex sign structure. The total sign area allowed on the campus
complex sign structure, including the sign designating the name of the campus complex, shall not exceed the sign area allowed above. (Ord. 14-2, 2-4-
2014)
12-20-8: ON PREMISES SIGN REQUIREMENTS:
A. Allowed Signs:
1. Poster panel signs are permitted in the Z5 District, subject to the requirements of subsection 12-20-6E3 of this chapter.
2. Attached, detached and portable on premises signs are permitted in each zone district according to tables 3, 4 and 5 of this section.
TABLE 3
ATTACHED SIGNS
Z1
Z2, Z3, Z7-3,
Z7-5 Z4 Z5
Z66, Z7-1,
Z7-2, Z7-4
Type allowed
Wall, window Wall, window Wall, window, projecting,
blade, message center
Wall, window, projecting, blade,
message center
See note 5
Wall, window, projecting,
message center
Cumulative
area
(maximum
sq. ft.)
Residential
uses: 2 sq. ft.
All others: 32
sq. ft.
See note 1
Residential
uses: 2 sq. ft.
All others: 32
sq. ft.
See note 1
20% of the area of the
primary facade
10% of secondary facade
See notes 2 and 3
10% of any facade
See note 3
10% of the area of the
primary facade
10% of secondary facade
See note 3
Location Shall not be
placed above
the first floor
Shall not be
placed above
the first floor
Shall not exceed a height
greater than 125% of the
height of the roofline
Area of wall signs placed above
the first floor may not exceed 15%
of allowed sign area
Shall not exceed a height
greater than 125% of the
height of the roofline
Additional
requirements
See note 4 See note 4 See note 4
Notes:
1. The required maximum area stated is cumulative for all signs, including both attached and detached signs.
2. A portion of the allowed attached sign area may be placed on other facades; provided, that the cumulative area of attached signs on any other
facade does not exceed 10 percent of the area of that facade.
3. There is no limit to the number of attached signs per facade; provided, that the cumulative area for all attached signs does not exceed the
required maximum.
4. See subsection 12-20-6E of this chapter for specific requirements for projecting signs and blade signs.
5. In the Z5 District, a message center sign is only permitted on lots with frontage on those segments of Delaware Avenue and Washington
Avenue under the jurisdiction of the Iowa Department of Transportation as U.S. Highway 65. Such message center signs must be placed so as to
be visible from Highway 65.
6. Commercial uses in the Z6 District for which a conditional use permit has been granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment are subject to the
sign requirements of the Z4 District, for such time as the conditional use permit is valid.
(Ord. 14-14, 12-2-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 349/358
TABLE 4
DETACHED SIGNS
Z1
Z2, Z3, Z7-
3, Z7-5 Z4 Z5
Z66, Z7-1,
Z7-2, Z7-4
Number n/a n/a 1 per street frontage 1 per lot 1 per street frontage
Type allowed
Monument
signs only
Monument
signs only
Monument, pole, message center Monument, message center Monument, pole, message center
Area
(maximum)
Residential
uses: 2 sq.
ft.
All others:
32 sq. ft.
See note 1
Residential
uses: 2 sq.
ft.
All others:
32 sq. ft.
See note 1
1 sq. ft. per each 1' of lot width;
minimum 30 sq. ft. allowed;
cumulative maximum area = 250
sq. ft. per lot
See note 4
1 sq. ft. per each 1' of lot
width; minimum 20 sq. ft.
allowed; maximum area =
100 sq. ft.
1 sq. ft. per each 1' of lot width;
minimum 30 sq. ft. allowed;
cumulative maximum area = 200
sq. ft. per lot
See note 4
Location May be
within
required
setbacks
5' from
right-ofway
Monument signs may be within
required setbacks
Pole sign structure setback = 5'
from right-of-way
See note 5
May be within required
setbacks
Monument signs may be within
required setbacks
Pole sign structure setback = 5'
from right-of-way
See note 5
Height (ft.
maximum)
6' 4' On an arterial street: 35'
All other streets: 25'
Within 100' of Z1, Z2 or Z3
Districts: 25'
15' On an arterial street: 35'
All other streets: 25'
Additional
requirements
See notes
2 and 3
Notes:
1. The required maximum area shown is cumulative for all signs, including both attached and detached signs.
2. Not permitted for single-family and two-family uses.
3. The area around the sign shall be landscaped to accent and enhance the sign. Detailed site and landscape plans shall accompany the zoning
review application.
4. The area of a monument sign may be increased by 10 percent of the formula amount.
5. Setback measured from lot line to base of pole structure. The leading edge of an allowed pole sign may extend to the right-of-way line, but may
not encroach into the right-of-way.
6. Commercial uses in the Z6 District for which a conditional use permit has been granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment are subject to the
sign requirements of the Z4 District, for such time as the conditional use permit is valid.
TABLE 5
PORTABLE SIGNS
Z1 Z2, Z3, Z7-3, Z7-5 Z4 Z5
Z64, Z7-1,
Z7-2, Z7-4
Number per lot
Not permitted
1 1
Not permitted
1
Area (maximum sq. ft.) 32 sq . ft. 32 sq . ft. 32 sq . ft.
Setback (ft.) 10' from any lot line 10' from any lot line 10' from any lot line
Height (ft. maximum) 6' 6' 6'
Time limits (days) Up to 7
See note 1
Up to 30
See note 1
Up to 30
See note 1
Additional requirements See notes 2 and 3 See note 3 See note 3
Notes:
1. There shall be a minimum of 60 days between the date of removal of a portable sign and the first day allowed by a new permit for a portable
sign.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 350/358
2. Permitted only on a nonresidentially used parcel that has at least 400 feet of frontage on a principal arterial.
3. Portable signs may not displace any parking spaces required by this title.
4. Commercial uses in the Z6 District for which a conditional use permit has been granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment are subject to the
sign requirements of the Z4 District, for such time as the conditional use permit is valid.
(Ord. 14-2, 2-4-2014)
12-20-9: OFF PREMISES SIGNS:
A. Principal Use: An off premises sign shall be considered a principal use in the zoning districts in which it is allowed.
B. Where Permitted: Off premises signs are permitted according to the requirements of table 6 of this section:
TABLE 6
OFF PREMISES SIGNS
Districts allowed Z4, Z6, Z7-4
Types allowed Single head
Double head
Electronic digital display message centers1
Area (maximum) 300 sq. ft.
Height (maximum) Z4 and Z7-4 Districts: 25 feet
Z6 District: 35 feet
Setbacks (minimum) Leading edge(s) of the sign must meet minimum setbacks of zoning district2
From property in a Z2 or Z3 District: 1,000 feet
From an at grade intersection of any street and railroad: 300 feet
Separation requirements From an off premises sign on the same side of the street: 1,000 feet
From an off premises sign on the opposite side of the street or on any other street: 500 feet
Notes:
1. Electronic digital display message centers shall be subject to the requirements of subsection E of this section.
2. If a minimum and maximum setback range is indicated for the district, the off premises sign shall meet the maximum setback required for the
district.
C. Identification Plate: All off premises signs hereafter erected or remodeled shall bear a permanent, legible identification plate stating the name of the
owner of the sign or corporation responsible for the construction or erection of the sign.
D. Construction: All off premises signs shall be constructed on steel supports and such supports shall have a neutral color.
E. Electronic Digital Display Message Center Off Premises Signs: An off premises sign meeting all other requirements of this section may consist of an
electronic digital display message center, subject to the following:
1. Each message shall be static and not animated in any way.
2. Minimum duration of a message shall be seven (7) seconds.
3. Transition from one (1) message to the next shall be instantaneous and shall not fade, scroll or otherwise be animated.
4. Maximum brightness of the electronic graphic display message center shall not exceed illumination of five thousand (5,000) nits (candelas per
square meter) during daylight hours, nor five hundred forty (540) nits between dusk and dawn, as measured from the sign's face at maximum
brightness.
5. An electronic graphic display message center shall be equipped with automatic dimmer features to adjust brightness levels for ambient light during
daylight hours. The illumination system shall be set to "automatic" in order to comply with levels of brightness as set forth in this section.
6. The electronic graphic display message center shall have an automatic dimmer switch control to produce a distinct illumination change from a higher
illumination level to a lower illumination level for the period of time between one-half (1/2) hour before sunset and one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise.
7. An off premises sign with an electronic graphic display message center may only be constructed to replace an existing off premises sign. (Ord. 14-2,
2-4-2014)
12-20-10: NONCONFORMING AND ABANDONED SIGNS AND SIGN STRUCTURES:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 351/358
A. On Premises Signs: All signs legally erected and in existence on the adoption date of this chapter and which do not conform to the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming sign and may continue in existence until:
1. The sign is deemed abandoned.
2. The sign is damaged or destroyed in excess of fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time of damage or destruction.
B. On Premises Sign Structures: All sign structures legally erected and in existence on the adoption date of this chapter and which do not conform to the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming sign structure and may continue in existence until:
1. The sign structure is deemed abandoned.
2. The sign structure is damaged or destroyed in excess of fifty percent (50%) of replacement cost at time of damage or destruction.
C. Off Premises Signs And Sign Structures: All off premises signs and sign structures legally erected and in existence on the adoption date of this chapter
and which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming off premises sign or sign structure and may continue in
existence until:
1. The sign or sign structure is deemed abandoned.
2. The sign or sign structure is destroyed in excess of fifty percent (50%) of replacement cost at time of destruction.
D. Abandoned Signs And Sign Structures: An abandoned sign and/or sign structure, regardless of nonconforming status, shall be removed within ninety
(90) days after abandonment. (Ord. 14-2, 2-4-2014)
12-20-11: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
A. Unmaintained Signs:
1. The owner of any unmaintained sign is prima facie responsible for the maintenance of that sign upon public or private property in violation of this
chapter. Any owner, occupant or person in possession of real property within the City upon which one (1) or more unmaintained signs are found is
prima facie responsible for permitting the unmaintained sign upon the property in violation of this chapter. No person shall be charged with more than
one (1) violation of this chapter for any one (1) sign. The owner of an unmaintained sign and the owner of real estate upon which the unmaintained
sign are found may both be charged.
2. Each day the owner of an unmaintained sign and the owner, occupant or person in possession of real property within the City is found in violation of
this chapter and permits the violation to continue after the notice period provided in subsection A4 of this section shall be a new violation of this
chapter.
3. Upon discovery of any unmaintained sign upon private property within the corporate limits of this City, any police officer, or other City officer, official
or employee having authority or responsibility for enforcement of any provisions of this title, may notify in writing the owner of the unmaintained sign,
and the owner of the property upon which it is located that:
a. The unmaintained sign constitutes a violation under the provisions of this chapter.
b. The owner must abate the violation by removing or repairing the sign in accordance with the terms of subsection A4 of this section.
c. Failure to remove or repair the unmaintained sign shall be sufficient cause for removal and disposal by the City and assessment of costs.
d. In the alternative, the City may cause to be issued to the owner of the unmaintained sign, or to the owner of the property on which the
unmaintained sign is found, a citation for a Municipal infraction setting forth the violation of this chapter and seeking an order of removal on
conviction.
e. The notice provided by this section relates only to the abatement of a violation of this chapter and is not an element of a violation; provided,
however, that a second or any subsequent citation shall not be issued until after the notice provided herein.
4. The owner of the unmaintained sign that violates the provisions of this chapter, or the owner of the property upon which it is located, shall within ten
(10) days after service of a written notice from any police officer, or other City officer, official or employee having authority or responsibility for
enforcement of any provisions of this title, remove or repair the sign.
5. If the owner of an unmaintained sign or the owner of the property upon which it is located shall fail to remove or repair same in accordance with the
requirements of subsection A4 of this section, any police officer, or other City officer, official or employee having authority or responsibility for
enforcement of any provisions of this Code, may abate the violation by causing the sign to be removed to a place of safekeeping and the cost of the
removal and storage shall be charged to the owner of the unmaintained sign, or to the owner of the property upon which it was located.
B. Violation: A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may be charged as a Municipal infraction or a misdemeanor. (Ord. 14-2, 2-4-2014)
Chapter 21
ACCESS TO SOLAR ENERGY
12-21-1: REQUIREMENTS AND PROCESS FOR EASEMENTS:
The commission is established as the Solar Access Regulatory Board for Mason City, pursuant to chapter 564A, Code of Iowa. The Solar Access
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 352/358
Regulatory Board may grant solar access easements upon application, following a public hearing, and subject to the following requirements: (Ord. 10-003,
1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
A. An owner of property may apply for a solar access easement by filing an application with the Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission which
shall contain the following:
1. A statement of the need for the solar access easement by the owner of the dominant estate.
2. A legal description of the dominant and servient estates.
3. The name and address of the dominant and servient estate owners of record.
4. A description of the solar collector to be used.
5. The size and location of the collector including heights, its orientation with respect to south and its slope from the horizontal shown either by
drawings or in words.
6. An explanation of how the applicant has done everything reasonable, taking cost and efficiency into account, to design and locate the collector in a
manner to minimize the impact on development of servient estates.
7. A legal description of the solar access easement that is sought and a drawing that is a spatial representation of the area of the servient estate
burdened by the easement illustrating the degrees of the vertical and horizontal angles through which the easement extends over the burdened
property and the points from which those angles are measured. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
8. A statement that the applicant has attempted to voluntarily negotiate a solar access easement with the owner of the servient estate and has been
unsuccessful in obtaining the easement voluntarily.
9. A statement that the space to be burdened by the solar access easement is not obstructed at the time of filing of the application by anything other
than vegetation that would shade the solar collector.
10. Appraisal prepared by a qualified appraiser, establishing the difference between the full market value of the servient estate prior to and after the
existence of the solar access easement sought.
11. A filing fee to defray the cost of copying and mailing the application and notice.
B. Upon receipt of the application, the Solar Access Regulatory Board shall determine whether the application is complete and contains the information
required under subsection A of this section. The Solar Access Regulatory Board may return an application for correction of any deficiencies. Upon
acceptance of an application, the Solar Access Regulatory Board shall schedule a hearing. The Solar Access Regulatory Board shall cause a copy of
the application and a notice of the hearing to be served upon the owners of the servient estates in the manner provided for service of original notice
and at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state that the Solar Access Regulatory Board will determine whether and
to what extent a solar access easement will be granted, that the Solar Access Regulatory Board will determine the compensation that may be awarded
to the servient estate owner if the solar access easement is granted and that the servient estate owner has the right to contest the application before
the Solar Access Regulatory Board.
C. After the hearing on the application, the Solar Access Regulatory Board shall determine whether to issue an order granting a solar access easement.
The Solar Access Regulatory Board shall grant a solar access easement if the Solar Access Regulatory Board finds that there is a need for the solar
collector, that the space burdened by the easement was not obstructed by anything except vegetation that would shade the solar collector at the time of
filing of the application, that the proposed location of the collector minimizes the impact of the easement on the development of the servient estate and
that the applicant tried and failed to negotiate a voluntary easement. However, the Solar Access Regulatory Board may refuse to grant a solar access
easement upon a finding that the easement would require the removal of trees that provide shade or a windbreak to a residence on the servient estate.
The Solar Access Regulatory Board shall not grant a solar access easement upon a servient estate if the Solar Access Regulatory Board finds that the
owner, at least six (6) months prior to the filing of the application, has made a substantial financial commitment to build a structure that will shade the
solar collector. In issuing its order granting the solar access easement, the Solar Access Regulatory Board may modify the solar access easement
applied for and impose conditions on the location of the solar collector that will minimize the impact upon the servient estate.
D. The Solar Access Regulatory Board shall grant a solar access easement only within the area that is within three hundred feet (300') of the center of the
northernmost boundary of the collector and is south of a line drawn east and west tangent to the northernmost boundary of the collector. (Ord. 10-003,
1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
E. The Solar Access Regulatory Board shall determine the amount of compensation that is to be paid to the owners of the servient estate for the
impairment of the right to develop the property. Compensation shall be based on the difference between the fair market value of the property prior to
and after granting the solar access easement. The Solar Access Regulatory Board may request the assistance of a professional appraiser to determine
the fair market values; any costs thereof shall be paid by the applicant. The parties shall be notified of the Solar Access Regulatory Board's decision
within thirty (30) days of the date of the hearing. The owner of the dominant estate shall have thirty (30) days from the date of notification of the Solar
Access Regulatory Board's decision to deposit the compensation and any other relevant costs with the Solar Access Regulatory Board. Upon receipt of
the compensation, the Solar Access Regulatory Board shall issue an order granting the solar access easement to the owner of the dominant estate
and remit the compensation awarded to the owners of the servient estate. The owner of the dominant estate may decline to deposit the compensation
with the Solar Access Regulatory Board and no order granting the solar access easement shall then be issued. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010;
amd. 2017 Code)
F. When the order granting the solar access easement is issued, the owner of the dominant estate shall have it recorded in the Office of the County
Recorder who shall record the solar access easement and list the owner of the dominant estate as grantee and the owner of the servient estate as
grantor in the deed index. After being recorded, the solar access easement shall be considered an easement appurtenant in or on the servient estate.
G. The owner of a servient estate may apply to the Solar Access Regulatory Board for an order removing a solar access easement granted by the Solar
Access Regulatory Board under this section under any of the following conditions:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 353/358
1. If the solar collector is not installed and made operational within two (2) years of recording the easement.
2. If the dominant estate owner ceases to use the solar collector for more than one (1) year.
3. If the solar collector is destroyed or removed and not replaced within one (1) year.
The procedure for filing an application with the Solar Access Regulatory Board under this section and for notice and hearings on the application shall
be the same as that prescribed for an application for granting a solar access easement. An order issued by the Solar Access Regulatory Board
removing a solar access easement may provide for the return by the servient estate owner of compensation paid by the dominant estate owner for
the solar access easement after the deduction of reasonable expenses incurred by the servient estate owner in proceeding for the granting and
removal of the easement. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
Chapter 22
ADULT USES
12-22-1: REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the zoning regulations herein, adult uses shall meet the requirements of title 13 of this Code. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
Title 13
ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Chapter 1
OVERVIEW
13-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the MASON CITY ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS ORDINANCE. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
13-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to protect the established rights of adult businesses while at the same time providing for physical separation from sensitive land
uses to minimize negative secondary impacts to the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the citizens of Mason City. (Ord. 10-
22, 12-21-2010)
13-1-3: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this title is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not
affect the remainder of this title. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
13-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the singular number
shall include the plural and the plural number includes the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive; the word "person" includes
a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual; the words "used" or "occupied" include the words
"intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied". (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
13-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: Any employee or official authorized to enforce this title of the City of Mason City.
ADULT: As used in this title refers to persons who have attained the age of eighteen (18) years.
ADULT CABARET: A building or portion of a building regularly featuring dancing or other live entertainment if the dancing or entertainment that constitutes
the primary live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibiting of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MEDIA: Magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, CD-ROMs or other devices used to record computer images, or other media that are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to hardcore material.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 354/358
ADULT MEDIA SHOP: An establishment that rents and/or sells media, and that meets any of the following three (3) tests:
A. Forty percent (40%) or more of the gross public floor area is devoted to adult media.
B. Forty percent (40%) or more of the stock in trade consists of adult media.
C. It advertises or holds itself out in any forum as "XXX", "adult", "sex", or otherwise as a sexually oriented business other than an adult media store,
adult motion picture theater, or adult cabaret.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting motion pictures,
slides or photographic reproductions which: a) are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observance by patrons therein, or b) excludes minors by reason of age.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used predominantly for presenting motion
pictures, slides or photographic reproductions which: a) are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein, or b) excludes minors by reason of age.
COMMUNITY GATEWAY: Highly visible entrances to the community generally located along arterial streets at or near the edge of the community.
DISPLAY PUBLICLY: The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in
such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street, highway, or public
sidewalk, or from the property of others, or from any portion of the premises where items and material other than adult media are on display to the public.
HARDCORE MATERIAL: Media characterized by sexual activity that includes one (1) or more of the following: erect male organ; contact of the mouth of
one (1) person with the genitals of another; penetration with a finger or male organ into any orifice in another person; open female labia; penetration of a
sex toy into an orifice; male ejaculation; or the aftermath of male ejaculation.
HARDCORE PERFORMANCE: Live human performance characterized by sexual activity that includes one (1) or more of the following: erect male organ;
contact of the mouth of one (1) person with the genitals of another; penetration with a finger or male organ into any orifice in another person; open female
labia; penetration of a sex toy into an orifice; male ejaculation; or the aftermath of male ejaculation.
LINGERIE MODELING STUDIO: An establishment or business that provides the service of live models modeling lingerie to individuals, couples, or small
groups in a room smaller than six hundred (600) square feet.
MASSAGE: Any method of treating the external parts of the human body by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or vibrating with the hand or any
instrument for any form of consideration or gratuity.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment having a fixed place of business, which excludes minors by reason of age, where massages are
administered for any form of consideration or gratuity, including, but not limited to, massage parlors, health clubs, sauna baths and steam baths. This
definition shall not be construed to include: a) persons licensed by the State of Iowa under the provisions of chapter 148, 148A, 148B, 150, 152, 153, 157
or 158, Iowa Code, when performing massage therapy or massage services as a part of the profession or trade for which licensed; b) persons performing
massage therapy or massage services under the direction of a person licensed as described in item a of this definition; c) persons performing massage
therapy or massage services upon a person pursuant to the written instruction or order of a licensed physician; d) nurses' aides, technicians and
attendants at any hospital or healthcare facility licensed pursuant to chapter 135B, 135C or 145A, Iowa Code, in the course of their employment and under
the supervision of the Administrator thereof or of a person licensed as described in item a of this definition; e) an athletic coach or trainer in any accredited
public or private secondary school, junior college or university or employed by a professional or semiprofessional athletic team or organization, in the
course of his employment as such coach or trainer. This definition shall not be construed to include a nonprofit organization operating a community center,
swimming pool, tennis court or other educational, cultural, recreational and athletic facilities for the welfare of the residents of the area.
MEDIA: Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation
or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes, but shall not necessarily be
limited to, books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-ROMs, other magnetic media, and undeveloped pictures.
MEDIA SHOP: A general term, identifying a category of business that may include sexually oriented material but that is not subject to the special
provisions applicable to adult media shops. In that context, media shop means a retail outlet offering media for sale or rent, for consumption off the
premises, provided that any outlet meeting the definition of "adult media shop" shall be treated as an adult media outlet.
PROTECTED LAND USE: Religious institutions, community gateway corridors, public or private K through 12 educational institutions, public park, or a
childcare facility licensed by or registered with the State of Iowa.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious
body organized to sustain public worship, together with all accessory buildings and uses customarily associated with such primary purpose. Includes
synagogue, temple, mosque, church or other such place for worship and religious activities.
SADOMASOCHISTIC PRACTICES: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of one clothed or naked.
SEX SHOP: An establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that meets any of the following tests:
A. The establishment offers for sale or rent items from any two (2) of the following categories: 1) adult media, 2) lingerie, or 3) leather goods marketed
or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; and the combination of such items constitutes more than ten percent
(10%) of its stock in trade or occupies more than ten percent (10%) of its floor area.
B. More than five percent (5%) of its stock in trade consists of sexually oriented toys or novelties.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 355/358
C. More than five percent (5%) of its gross public floor area is devoted to the display of sexually oriented toys or novelties.
SEXUAL ACTIVITY ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, used for the display of live presentations distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing or involving specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Provided, that the
provisions of this definition shall not apply to a theater, concert hall, art center, museum or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to presentations
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An inclusive term used to describe the following collectively: adult cabaret; adult media shop; adult mini-motion
picture theater; lingerie modeling studio; adult motion picture theater; video arcade; bathhouse; massage establishment; sex shop; and/or sexual activity
establishment.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED TOYS OR NOVELTIES: Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or
female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: As used in this title is defined as: a) less than completely and opaquely covered: 1) human genitals, pubic region; 2)
buttocks; and 3) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and b) human male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if
completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: As used in this title is defined as: a) human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; b) acts of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; c) fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts.
VIDEO VIEWING BOOTH OR ARCADE BOOTH: Any booth, cubicle, stall, or compartment that is designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat patrons
and is used for presenting live human performances or motion pictures or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other
means or media (including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disk, CD-ROM, books, magazines, or periodicals) for observation by
patrons therein. A video viewing booth shall not mean a theater, movie house, playhouse, or a room or enclosure or portion thereof that contains more
than six hundred (600) square feet. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
Chapter 3
COMMUNITY GATEWAYS
13-3-1: COMMUNITY GATEWAYS ESTABLISHED:
For the purposes of this title, the following community gateways are established:
A. All property having frontage on South Federal Avenue extending from Twenty Seventh Street south, southward to the southern corporate limits.
B. All property having frontage on Fourth Street Southwest extending west from South Taft Avenue westward to the western corporate limits.
C. All property having frontage on North Federal Avenue extending from Seventeenth Street north northward to the northern corporate limits.
D. All property having frontage on Fourth Street Southeast extending east from Birch Drive eastward to the eastern corporate limits. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-
2010)
Chapter 4
ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED
13-4-1: VIDEO VIEWING BOOTH OR ARCADE BOOTH PROHIBITED:
Video viewing booths or arcade booths are prohibited within the corporate limits of Mason City. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
Chapter 5
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
13-5-1: Z1 AGRICULTURAL ZONING DISTRICT:
A media shop shall be allowed in a corner store form within the Z1 Agricultural Zoning District. A media shop is prohibited in all other forms in this district.
Adult media shall constitute no more than ten percent (10%) of the stock in trade or occupy no more than ten percent (10%) of the gross public floor area.
(Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
Chapter 6
SUB-URBAN DISTRICT
13-6-1: Z2 SUB-URBAN ZONING DISTRICT:
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 356/358
A media shop shall be allowed in a corner store form within the Z2 Sub-Urban Zoning District. A media shop is prohibited in all other forms in this district.
Adult media shall constitute no more than ten percent (10%) of the stock in trade or occupy no more than ten percent (10%) of the gross public floor area.
(Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
Chapter 7
URBAN DISTRICT
13-7-1: Z3 GENERAL URBAN DISTRICT:
A media shop shall be allowed in the Z3 General Urban Zoning District so long as it is located in an allowed form in that district. Adult media shall
constitute no more than ten percent (10%) of the stock in trade or occupy no more than ten percent (10%) of the gross public floor area. (Ord. 10-22, 12-
21-2010)
Chapter 8
MULTI-USE DISTRICT
13-8-1: Z4 MULTI-USE ZONING DISTRICT:
A. A media shop shall be allowed in the Z4 Multi-Use Zoning District, so long as it is located in an allowed form in that district and meets the following
conditions:
1. Adult media shall constitute no more than forty percent (40%) of the stock in trade or occupy no more than forty percent (40%) of the gross public
floor area.
2. If adult media constitutes more than ten percent (10%) of the stock in trade or occupies more than ten percent (10%) of the gross public floor area,
the adult media shall be kept in a separate room or section of the shop, which room or section shall:
a. Not be open to any person under the age of eighteen (18);
b. Be physically and visually separated from the rest of the store by an opaque wall of durable material, reaching at least eight feet (8') high or to the
ceiling, whichever is less;
c. Be located so that the entrance to it is as far as reasonably practicable from media or other inventory in the store likely to be of particular interest
to children;
d. Have access controlled by electronic or other means to provide assurance that persons under age eighteen (18) will not easily gain admission and
that the general public will not accidentally enter such room or section, or provide continuous video or window surveillance of the room by store
personnel;
e. Provide signage at the entrance stipulating that persons under age eighteen (18) are not permitted inside.
B. The Mason City Zoning Board of Adjustment may approve a conditional use permit, pursuant to section 12-5-5 of this Code, for the following uses in the
Z4 Multi-Use Zoning District, so long as it is located in an allowed form in that district:
1. Adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture theater, lingerie modeling studio or sexual activity establishment, subject to
these restrictions:
a. These uses shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of each other, nor shall they be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a
protected land use or residential zoning district. The distance between establishments shall be the shortest distance measured in a straight line
from the boundary of the zoning lots containing such uses. The distance between the adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion
picture theater or lingerie modeling studio and the protected use or residential zoning district shall be measured from the nearest property line of
such protected use or district boundary of such zoning district, to the nearest public entrance door of the premises of the adult cabaret, adult minimotion
picture theater, adult motion picture theater or lingerie modeling studio along the street right-of-way line providing the nearest direct route
usually traveled by pedestrians between such points.
b. All building openings, entries, windows, etc., shall be covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any public
or semipublic area.
c. In new construction, and whenever else it is considered feasible by the Zoning Administrator, the building shall be oriented so as to minimize any
possibility of viewing the interior from public or semipublic areas.
d. Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks,
walkways or from other public or semipublic areas.
2. Adult media shop or sex shop, subject to these restrictions:
a. These uses shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of each other, nor shall they be located within five hundred feet (500') of a protected
land use or residential zoning district. The distance between establishments shall be the shortest distance, measured in a straight line from the
boundary of the zoning lots containing such uses. The distance between the protected use or residential zoning district and the adult media shop
or sex shop shall be measured from the nearest property line of such protected use or district boundary of such zoning district, to the nearest
public entrance door of the premises of the adult media shop or sex shop along the street right-of-way line providing the nearest direct route
usually traveled by pedestrians between such points.
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 357/358
b. All building openings, entries, windows, etc., shall be covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any public
or semipublic area.
c. In new construction, and whenever else it is considered feasible by the Administrative Officer, the building shall be oriented so as to minimize any
possibility of viewing the interior from public or semipublic areas.
d. Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks,
walkways or from other public or semipublic areas. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
Chapter 9
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
13-9-1: Z5 CENTRAL BUSINESS ZONING DISTRICT:
A media shop shall be allowed in the Z5 Central Business Zoning District, so long as it is located in an allowed form in that district. Adult media shall
constitute no more than ten percent (10%) of the stock in trade or occupy no more than ten percent (10%) of the gross public floor area. (Ord. 10-22, 12-
21-2010)
Chapter 10
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
13-10-1: Z6 INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT:
The following uses shall be allowed in the Z6 Industrial Zoning District, so long as it is located in an allowed form in that district:
A. Adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture theater, lingerie modeling studio or sexual activity establishment, subject to these
restrictions:
1. These uses shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of each other, nor shall they be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a
protected land use or residential zoning district. The distance between establishments shall be the shortest distance measured in a straight line from
the boundary of the zoning lots containing such uses. The distance between the adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture
theater or lingerie modeling studio and the protected use or residential zoning district shall be measured from the nearest property line of such
protected use or district boundary of such zoning district, to the nearest public entrance door of the premises of the adult cabaret, adult mini-motion
picture theater, adult motion picture theater or lingerie modeling studio along the street right-of-way line providing the nearest direct route usually
traveled by pedestrians between such points.
2. All building openings, entries, windows, etc., shall be covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any public or
semipublic area.
3. In new construction, and whenever else it is considered feasible by the Zoning Administrator, the building shall be oriented so as to minimize any
possibility of viewing the interior from public or semipublic areas.
4. Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks,
walkways or from other public or semipublic areas.
B. Adult media shop or sex shop, subject to these restrictions:
1. These uses shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of each other, nor shall they be located within five hundred feet (500') of a protected
land use or residential zoning district. The distance between establishments shall be the shortest distance, measured in a straight line from the
boundary of the zoning lots containing such uses. The distance between the protected use or residential zoning district and the adult media shop or
sex shop shall be measured from the nearest property line of such protected use or district boundary of such zoning district, to the nearest public
entrance door of the premises of the adult media shop or sex shop along the street right-of-way line providing the nearest direct route usually
traveled by pedestrians between such points.
2. All building openings, entries, windows, etc., shall be covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any public or
semipublic area.
3. In new construction, and whenever else it is considered feasible by the Administrative Officer, the building shall be oriented so as to minimize any
possibility of viewing the interior from public or semipublic areas.
4. Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks,
walkways or from other public or semipublic areas.
C. Media shop; provided, that adult media constitutes no more than forty percent (40%) of the stock in trade or occupies no more than forty percent (40%)
of the gross public floor area. If adult media constitutes more than ten percent (10%) of the stock in trade or occupies more than ten percent (10%) of
the gross public floor area, the following conditions shall be met:
1. Adult media shall be kept in a separate room or section of the shop, which room or section shall:
a. Not be open to any person under the age of eighteen (18);
b. Be physically and visually separated from the rest of the store by an opaque wall of durable material, reaching at least eight feet (8') high or to the
ceiling, whichever is less;
12/7/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=382 358/358
c. Be located so that the entrance to it is as far as reasonably practicable from media or other inventory in the store likely to be of particular interest
to children;
d. Have access controlled by electronic or other means to provide assurance that persons under age eighteen (18) will not easily gain admission and
that the general public will not accidentally enter such room or section or provide continuous video or window surveillance of the room by store
personnel; and
e. Provide signage at the entrance stipulating that persons under age eighteen (18) are not permitted inside. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)