CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
1.01 Title 1.09 Altering Code
1.02 Definitions 1.10 Rules of Construction
1.03 City Powers 1.11 Severability
1.04 Indemnity 1.12 Codification Service
1.05 Personal Injuries 1.13 Warrants and Subpoenas
1.06 Standard Penalty 1.14 General Standards for Action
1.07 Amendments 1.15 Extension of Authority
1.08 Catchlines and Notes 1.16 Moratoriums
1.01 TITLE. This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Marion, Iowa, 2000.
1.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are
defined in the Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of
Ordinances, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the Council, or repugnant to the context of the provision. Other words and phrases used
herein have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in another
portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless such construction would be inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the context of the provision:
1. “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
2. “City” means the City of Marion, Iowa.
3. “Clerk” means the city clerk of Marion, Iowa.
4. “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the Building
Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
5. “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Marion, Iowa, 2000.
6. “Council” means the city council of Marion, Iowa.
7. “County” means Linn County, Iowa.
8. “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
9. “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person
who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
10. “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Marion, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
11. “Public place” includes in its meaning, but is not restricted to, any Cityowned
open place, such as parks and squares.
12. “Public property” means any and all property owned by the City or held in
the name of the City by any of the departments, commissions or agencies within
the City government.
13. “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
14. “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge of
the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line, intended
for the use of pedestrians.
15. “State” means the State of Iowa.
16. “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
17. “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa have their
ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent
of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the provision.
1.03 CITY POWERS. The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa
Constitution, and if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly,
exercise any power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve
the rights, privileges and property of the City and of its residents, and preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents and
each and every provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise
of the foregoing powers and the performance of the foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04 INDEMNITY. The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of
Ordinances, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or
death of any person or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or
damage to property whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto,
however arising from or related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the issuance of the
permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or
the agents, employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply with any of
the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms and conditions of such permit or
license, and such applicant, by making such application, forever agrees to indemnify the
City and its officers, agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any
and all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or
death, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing. The
provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or license issued
under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City whether expressly
recited therein or not.
1.05 PERSONAL INJURIES. When action is brought against the City for personal
injuries alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any
person by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the court where
the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that
the City believes that the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against
the City, and asking the person to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is
conclusive in any action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of
the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City to the
plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury. The City
may maintain an action against the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment
together with all the expenses incurred by the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06 STANDARD PENALTY. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the
Code of Ordinances for any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing to
perform a duty, or obtain a license required by, or violating any provision of the Code of
Ordinances, or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine and a term of imprisonment provided for a misdemeanor violation
under Iowa Code Section 903.1, subsection 1, paragraph “a”.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2])
(Ord. 09-17 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
1.07 AMENDMENTS. All ordinances which amend, repeal or in any manner affect
this Code of Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter,
section, subsection or paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the
City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.08 CATCHLINES AND NOTES. The catchlines of the several sections of the Code
of Ordinances, titles, headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross
references and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself,
contained in the Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law, and are
intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or clarify the contents of a section.
1.09 ALTERING CODE. It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or
amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of Ordinances, or to
insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code of
Ordinances in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.5)
1.10 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. In the construction of this Code of Ordinances,
the rules of statutory construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be
utilized to ascertain the intent of the Council with the understanding that the term
“statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term “ordinance”
when applied to this Code of Ordinances.
1.11 SEVERABILITY. If any section, provision or part of the Code of Ordinances is
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of the
Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional.
1.12 CODIFICATION SERVICE. The municipal codification service shall, when
preparing this Code of Ordinances or any supplement thereto, have the same powers and
duties as are provided to the Code of Iowa editor in Section 2B.13(1), (2) and (3) of the
Code of Iowa, and in addition shall change chapter or section numbers when an
ordinance adds a new section or chapter to the Code of Ordinances using a section or
chapter number that has previously been used and which was not specifically repealed.
1.13 WARRANTS AND SUBPOENAS. The Chief of the Fire Department, Chief of
the Police Department, Building Inspection Director and the City Manager shall have full
authority to issue a municipal administrative warrant and/or subpoena duces tecum
incident to any investigation of a suspected violation of the Code of Ordinances. If
consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure or property pursuant to a
municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful right to exclude, or if
the production of documents and papers is refused, the City officer or employee having
the duty to enter upon or conduct the inspection or needing the production of said
documents and papers, may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for Linn County,
pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative search warrant or
subpoena duces tecum. No owner, operator or occupant or any other person having
charge, care or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure, building or premises
shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search warrant, to permit entry therein by the
municipal officer or employee or refuse to respond to a subpoena duces tecum.
(Ord. 11-13 – Aug. 11 Supp.)
1.14 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION. Whenever this Code of Ordinances
grants any discretionary power to the Council or any commission, board or officer or
employee of the City and does not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power,
the power shall be exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power
to grant, deny or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and
circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due consideration
shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and welfare, and the decision
shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under similar circumstances in the exercise of
the police power.
1.15 EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever an officer or employee is required
or authorized to do an act by a provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall
be construed as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.16 MORATORIUMS. The City Council by resolution may establish a temporary
moratorium on the enforcement of any provision of this Code of Ordinances where it
finds that enforcement of said provision will hinder reaction to or recovery from any
natural or man made disaster or emergency situation located in the City or the
metropolitan area and that a moratorium is in the best interests of the public health, safety
and welfare. The resolution establishing a temporary moratorium may establish such
conditions and restrictions as the City Council deems appropriate in the circumstances
then existing. The City Council may also enact temporary ordinances that are not a part
of the permanent Code of Ordinances and enforce the temporary ordinances as provided
in either Section 1.06 or Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances. The establishment of a
temporary moratorium shall not create any property interest or right in any person or
entity benefiting from the moratorium and a moratorium may be terminated by the City
Council at such time as it deems expedient without prior notice.
(Ord. 10-06 – May 10 Supp.)
[The next page is 9]
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
2.01 Form of Government 2.04 Article III – City Manager
2.02 Article I – Powers 2.05 Article IV – Repeal of Previous Charter
2.03 Article II – City Council
2.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT. The form of government of the City is by a Home
Rule Charter which was approved at a special Home Rule Charter election held on August
26, 1975, and which Charter is as follows:
2.02 ARTICLE I – POWERS.
1. Powers of the City. The City shall have all powers possible under the
Constitution and laws of the State of Iowa, including particularly the City Code of
Iowa, as amended.
2. Construction. The grant of power to the City under this Charter is intended
to be as broad as possible; the mention of a specific power in this Charter is not
intended to be a limitation of the general powers conferred in this article.
3. Savings Clause. If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the invalidity
shall not affect other provisions of the Charter.
4. Existing Legislation. The enactment of this Charter shall not repeal existing
motions, resolutions or ordinances of the City of Marion or change its City Code of
Ordinances, except where the provisions of this enactment specifically change or
are irreconcilable with the provisions of such motions, resolutions, ordinances or
provisions of the City Code.
2.03 ARTICLE II – CITY COUNCIL.
1. Composition. The City Council shall consist of seven (7) members. Three
(3) of the members, including the Mayor, shall be known as Council members at
large; and are to be nominated and elected by the qualified electors of the City at
large. One member shall be elected both as Mayor and Council member at large.
The other four Council members shall be known as ward Council members; they
are to be nominated and elected by the qualified voters in their respective wards, in
the regular City election. The Mayor shall be elected to the position of Mayor by
the voters of the City.
(Ord. 16-19 – Feb. 17 Supp.)
2. Wards. The Council by ordinance shall divide the City into four (4) Council
wards of substantially equal population. These wards are to be designated as
Council wards 1, 2, 3 and 4.
3. Eligibility. To be eligible to be elected to and to retain a Council position, a
person must be a voter of Marion; and if seeking or elected to represent a Council
ward, then that person must be a legal resident of that ward at the time petition is
filed and at the time of election.
4. Staggered Four-year Terms. At the first election under this Charter, all seven
Council members, including the Mayor, are to be elected. The Council members
from Ward I and Ward 3 and the two of the three Council members at large,
including the Mayor, who receive the greatest number of votes cast for Council
members at large and Mayor, are to serve for terms of four years, and the other
Council members, and possibly Mayor if he receives fewer votes than the other two
Council members at large, are to serve for terms of two years. Commencing at the
next regular City election, and at all subsequent regular City elections, all Council
members elected to fill the positions for those whose terms expire shall be elected
for terms of four years.
5. Compensation. The Council by ordinance shall prescribe the compensation
of the Mayor and the other Council members, but an increase in the compensation
of the Mayor or other Council members does not become effective during the term
in which the increase is adopted; and the Council may not adopt such an ordinance
during the month of November or December immediately following a regular City
election. The current City compensation provisions of the Code of Ordinances shall
continue in full force and effect until changed by the City Council in the manner
provided by law.
6. Powers – Council. The Council shall exercise all duties and responsibilities
and enjoy the powers provided for in Sec. 372.13 of the Code of Iowa, as amended..
7. Mayor. The Mayor shall be elected at large by the voters of the City as
provided for herein, and is a Council member at large. The Mayor is a voting
member of the Council and the official representative of the City. The Mayor shall
exercise all other duties and responsibilities as provided for in Section 372.14 of the
Code of Iowa.
2.04 ARTICLE III – CITY MANAGER. The Council may by ordinance provide for
a City Manager, and prescribe the Manager’s powers, duties and compensation. The City
has such an ordinance at the present time which shall continue in full force and effect
subject to repeal or amendment by the Council in the manner provided by law.
2.05 ARTICLE IV – REPEAL OF PREVIOUS CHARTER. The enactment of the
Home Rule Charter set out herein shall replace the existing form of government of the City,
which is Mayor-Council with appointed Manager, and which Charter was adopted by the
Council as Ordinance No. 72-21 on November 16, 1972, pursuant to Section 47 of the
Home Rule Act, Chapter 1088 of the Acts of the 64th General Assembly (1972).
EDITOR'S NOTE
Ordinance No. 76-1 adopting a charter for the City was passed and approved
by the Council on January 2, 1976.
CHAPTER 3
PRECINCTS AND WARDS
3.01 Definitions 3.04 Correction of Errors
3.02 Precincts Established 3.05 Publication of Changes
3.03 Wards Established 3.06 Annexed Territory
3.01 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context
otherwise requires:
1. “Annexed territory” means annexed to the City after Census Day.
2. “Census Day” means the official date of the 2010 United States
Decennial Census.
3. “City” means all territory within the corporate limits of the City
and all annexed territories.
4. “Commissioner of Elections” means the county auditor of Linn
County.
5. “Corporate limits” means the corporate limits of the City on Census
Day. The corporate limits do not embrace the annexed territories.
6. “Legislative district” means a district represented by a member of
the House of Representatives of the General Assembly of the State of Iowa
as passed by the General Assembly and signed by the Governor on April
19, 2011.
7. “Points of the compass” are approximate unless otherwise stated.
8. “Street” or similar language means the centerline of the right-ofway,
and a straight extension of that centerline.
9. All names, boundaries, lines, features, and fixtures are to be
construed as they existed on Census Day.
3.02 PRECINCTS ESTABLISHED. The City is divided into fourteen
precincts as set forth in this section.
1. First Precinct.
Beginning at a point at the intersection of 7th Avenue and 16th Street then
south along 16th Street to the intersection of 3rd Avenue then west along
3rd Avenue to the intersection of 15th Street then south along 15th Street to
the intersection of 1st Avenue then west along 1st Avenue to the
intersection of 7th Street then north along 7th Street to the intersection of
3rd Avenue then west along 3rd Avenue to the center of Indian Creek then
northerly along the centerline of Indian Creek to the intersection of
CHAPTER 3 PRECINCTS AND WARDS
Alburnett Road then south easterly along Alburnett Road to the
intersection of Central Avenue then south easterly along Central Avenue
to the intersection of 7th Street then north along 7th Street to the intersection
of 13th Avenue then east along 13th Avenue to the intersection of Lincoln
Drive then north along Lincoln Drive to the intersection of Park Avenue
then east along Park Avenue to the intersection with Washington Drive
then south along Washington Drive to the intersection of 11th Avenue, then
west along 11th Avenue to the intersection of 18th Street then south along
18th Street to the intersection with 7th Avenue then west along 7th Avenue
to the point of beginning.
2. Second Precinct.
Beginning at a point at the intersection of Boyson Road and 10th Street
then west along Boyson Road to the Corporate Boundary then southerly
along the Corporate Boundary to the former railroad right-of-way then
easterly along former railroad right-of-way to the intersection of Lindale
Drive then north along Lindale Drive to the intersection with West 8th
Avenue then east along West 8th Avenue to the center of Indian Creek then
northerly along the centerline of Indian Creek to the intersection with
Alburnett Road then south easterly along Alburnett Road to the
intersection of Central Avenue then south easterly along Central Avenue
to the intersection with 7th Street then north along 7th Street to the
intersection with 13th Avenue then east along 13th Avenue to the
intersection with 10th Street then north along 10th Street to the point of
beginning.
3. Third Precinct.
Beginning at a point at the intersection of 1st Avenue and 11th Street then
west along 1st Avenue to the intersection of 7th Street then north along 7th
Street to the intersection with 3rd Avenue then west along 3rd Avenue to
the intersection with Indian Creek then northerly along the centerline of
Indian Creek to the intersection with West 8th Avenue then west along
West 8th Avenue to the intersection of Lindale Drive then south along
Lindale Drive to the intersection with the former railroad right-of-way
then west along the former railroad right-of-way to the westerly corporate
limits then counter clockwise along the corporate boundaries to the
intersection with East Post Road then north along East Post Road to South
11th Street then north along 11th Street to the point of beginning.
4. Fourth Precinct.
Beginning at a point at the intersection of 1st Avenue and 11th Street then
east along 1st Avenue to the intersection of 22nd Street then south along
22nd Street to the southerly corporate boundary, then west along the
southern corporate boundary to the intersection of East Post Road then
north along East Post Road to South 11th Street then north along South 11th
Street to the point of beginning.
CHAPTER 3 PRECINCTS AND WARDS
5. Fifth Precinct.
Beginning at a point at the intersection of 29th Avenue and Indian Creek
Road, thence north along the centerline of Indian Creek Road right-of-way
to the intersection of Winslow Road, thence north along the centerline of
Winslow Road to the southwest corner of Blackford's First Addition,
thence east to the southeast corner of Blackford's First Addition which is
also the centerline of Indian Creek Road, thence north along the centerline
of Indian Creek Road to the northern corporate limit, thence clockwise
along the corporate boundary to the intersection with 29th Avenue, thence
west along the centerline of 29th Avenue to the intersection of 31st Street,
thence south along the centerline of 31st Street to the intersection of 26th
Avenue, thence west along the centerline of 26th Avenue to the intersection
with 24th Street, thence north along the centerline of 24th Street to the
intersection of 29th Avenue, thence west along the centerline of 29th
Avenue to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 15-15 – Aug. 15 Supp.)
6. Sixth Precinct.
Beginning at a point at the intersection of 26th Avenue and 31st Street then
west along 26th Avenue to the intersection of 24th Street then south along
24th Street to the intersection of 17th Avenue then west along 17th Avenue
to the intersection with Northview Drive then south along Northview
Drive to the intersection of 15th Avenue then west along 15th Avenue to
the intersection of Douglas Court then north along Douglas Court to the
intersection of Henderson Drive then west along Henderson Drive to the
intersection of English Boulevard then south along English Boulevard to
the intersection of Park Avenue then east along Park Avenue to the
intersection of Washington Drive then south along Washington Drive to
the intersection of 11th Avenue then west along 11th Avenue to the
intersection of 18th Street then south along 18th Street to the intersection of
7th Avenue then east along 7th Avenue to the intersection of 35th Street then
north along 35th Street to the intersection of 24th Avenue then west along
24th Avenue to the intersection of 31st Street then north along 31st Street to
the point of beginning.
7. Seventh Precinct.
Beginning at a point at the intersection of 44th Street and 29th Avenue, then
west along 29th Avenue to the intersection of 31st Street then south along
31st Street to the intersection of 24th Avenue then east along 24th Avenue
to the intersection of 35th Street then south along 35th Street to the
intersection of Highway 151 then east along Highway 151 to the
intersection of 44th Street then north along 44th Street to the point of
beginning.
8. Eighth Precinct.
Beginning at a point at the intersection of 29th Avenue and 44th Street, then
south along 44th Street to the intersection of Dunn Avenue then east along
Dunn Avenue to the intersection 48th Street then south along 48th Street to
the intersection of Arlington Avenue then east along Arlington Avenue to
the intersection of 50th Street then north along 50th Street to the intersection
CHAPTER 3 PRECINCTS AND WARDS
of Kacena Avenue then east along Kacena Avenue to Highway 13 then
south along Highway 13 to the intersection of Highway 151 then east
along Highway 151 to the intersection of Cherokee Drive then north along
Cherokee Drive to the intersection with Iowa House District 68 boundary
then in a counter clockwise direction along Iowa House District 68
boundary to the intersection with Fernow Road, then west along Fernow
Road to the intersection of the corporate limit boundary then continuing in
a counter clockwise direction along the corporate limit boundary to the
intersection with Highway 13 then north along Highway 13 to the
intersection of 35th Avenue then west along 35th Avenue to the corporate
boundary then south along corporate boundary to 29th Avenue then west
along 29th Avenue to the point of beginning.
9. Ninth Precinct.
Beginning at a point at the intersection of 1st Avenue and 15th Street then
east along 1st Avenue to the intersection of 22nd Street then south along
South 22nd Street to the southerly corporate boundary then counter
clockwise along the corporate boundary to the intersection of Highway
100 then east along Highway 100 to the intersection of 31st Street then
north along 31st Street to the intersection of 1st Avenue then west along 1st
Avenue to the intersection of 27th Street then north along 27th Street to the
intersection of 3rd Avenue then west along 3rd Avenue to the intersection
of 26th Street then north along 26th Street to the intersection of 5th Avenue
then east along 5th Avenue to the intersection of 31st Street then north along
31st Street to the intersection 7th Avenue then west along 7th Avenue to the
intersection of 16th Street then south along 16th Street to the intersection of
3rd Avenue then west along 3rd Avenue to the intersection of 15th Street
then south along 15th Street to the point of beginning.
10. Tenth Precinct.
Beginning at a point at the intersection of 44th Street and Dunn Avenue
then east along Dunn Avenue to the intersection of 48th Street then south
along 48th Street to the intersection of Arlington Avenue then east along
Arlington Avenue to the intersection of 50th Street then north along 50th
Street to the intersection of Kacena Avenue then east along Kacena
Avenue to the intersection of Highway 13 then south along Highway 13
to the intersection of Highway 151 then east along Highway 151 to the
intersection with House District 68 boundary then in a clockwise direction
along Iowa House District 68 to the intersection with Secrist Road and the
corporate boundaries, then clockwise along the corporate boundary to the
intersection of 31st Street and 1st Avenue then west along 1st Avenue to the
intersection of 27th Street, then north along 27th Street to the intersection
of 3rd Avenue then west along 3rd Avenue to the intersection of 26th Street
then north along 26th Street to the intersection of 5th Avenue then east along
5th Avenue to the intersection of 31st Street then north along 31st Street to
the intersection of 7th Avenue then east along 7th Avenue to the intersection
of Highway 151 then east along Highway 151 to the intersection of 44th
Street then north along 44th Street to the point of beginning.
11. Eleventh Precinct.
CHAPTER 3 PRECINCTS AND WARDS
Beginning at a point at the intersection of 10th Street and 13th Avenue,
thence north along the centerline of 10th Street to the center of Indian
Creek, thence north along center of Indian Creek to the intersection with
Winslow Road, thence north along the centerline of Winslow Road to the
intersection of corporate boundary just south of Hunters Creek Way,
thence clockwise around the corporate boundary to the intersection of the
corporate boundary line with the southeast corner of Lewis Fields Linn
First Addition, thence west along the corporate boundary line which is also
the centerline of Indian Creek Road to the southwest corner of Lewis
Fields Linn First Addition, thence counter clockwise around the corporate
boundary to the intersection of the corporate boundary line with the
centerline of Indian Creek Road, thence south along the centerline of
Indian Creek Road to the southeast corner of Blackford's First Addition,
thence west to the southwest corner of Blackford's first addition which is
also the centerline of Winslow Road, thence south along the centerline of
Winslow Road to the intersection of Indian Creek Road, thence south
along the centerline of Indian Creek Road to the intersection with 29th
Avenue, thence east along the centerline of 29th Avenue to intersection of
24th Street, thence south along the centerline of 24th Street to the
intersection of 17th Avenue, thence west along the centerline of 17th
Avenue to the intersection of Northview Drive, thence south along the
centerline of Northview Drive to the intersection of 15th Avenue, thence
west along the centerline of 15th Avenue to the intersection of Douglas
Court, thence north along the centerline of Douglas Court to the
intersection of Henderson Drive, thence west along the centerline of
Henderson Drive to the intersection of English Boulevard, thence south
along the centerline of English Boulevard to the intersection of Park
Avenue, thence west along the centerline of Park Avenue to the
intersection of 13th Avenue, thence west along the centerline of 13th
Avenue to the point of beginning
(Ord. 15-15 – Aug. 15 Supp.)
12. Twelfth Precinct.
Beginning at the intersect of the corporate limit boundary that is north of
the intersection of Huntington Hill Drive and Winslow Road and south of
the intersection of Winslow Road and Hunters Ridge Road then counter
clockwise along the corporate limit boundary to the intersection of
Connection Avenue, then continuing south on North 10th Street until North
10th Street intersects the northwest corner of the Rolling Glen Acres
Addition, which is north of the intersection of Rolling Glen Drive and
North 10th Street and south of the intersection of North 10th Street and
Connection Avenue, thence moving counter-clockwise along the northern
and west edges of Wil-Bar Acres, Shady Oaks, Shady Oaks Second, and
East View First Additions, thence clockwise along the north and east edges
of Plat of Survey No. 1626 until it intersects with the center line of Tower
Terrace Road, thence following the center line of Tower Terrace Road
until the intersection with North 10th Street, then south along North 10th
Street to the intersection of 29th Avenue and North 10th Street, then west
along 29th Avenue to the intersection of Geode Street, then south along
Geode Street to the intersection of Geode Street and Boyson Road, then
east along Boyson Road to the intersection of Boyson Road and 10th Street,
CHAPTER 3 PRECINCTS AND WARDS
then south along 10th Street to the intersection of 10th Street and Indian
Creek, thence northeasterly along the centerline of Indian Creek until
Indian Creek intersects Winslow Road, thence north along the centerline
of Winslow Road to point of beginning where the corporate limit boundary
intersects Winslow Road, which is north of the intersection of Huntington
Hills Drive and Winslow Road and south of the intersection Winslow
Road and Hunters Ridge Road.
(Ord. 15-03 – May 15 Supp.)
13. Thirteenth Precinct.
Beginning at a point at the intersection of 10th Street and 29th Avenue then
west along 29th Avenue to the intersection of Alburnett Road then north
along Alburnett Road to the corporate boundary then clockwise along the
corporate boundary to North 10th Street then south along North 10th Street
to intersects the northwest corner of the Rolling Glen Acres Addition,
which is north of the intersection of Rolling Glen Drive and North 10th
Street and south of the intersection of North 10th Street and Connection
Avenue, thence moving counter-clockwise along the north and west edges
of Wil-Bar Acres, Shady Oaks, Shady Oaks Second, and East View First
Additions, thence clockwise along the north and east edges of Plat of
Survey No. 1626 until it intersects with the center line of Tower Terrace
Road, thence following the center line of Tower Terrace Road until the
intersection of North 10th Street then south along North 10th Street to the
point of beginning.
(Ord. 15-03 – May 15 Supp.)
14. Fourteenth Precinct.
Beginning at a point at the intersection of Boyson Road and Geode Street
then north along Geode Street to the intersection of 29th Avenue then west
along 29th Avenue to the intersection of Alburnett Road then north along
Alburnett Road to the mid-point of the southwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of Section 25, Township 84, Range 7 then counterclockwise
around the corporate boundary to the intersection of East Robins Road
then west along East Robins Road following the Municipal Boundary then
south along the corporate boundary to the intersection with Boyson Road
then east along Boyson Road to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 17-07 – May 17 Supp.)
CHAPTER 3 PRECINCTS AND WARDS
15. Marion Township Precinct.
The portion of the City of Marion in Iowa House District 95 between
Fernow Road and Secrist Road shall be combined with Marion Township
Precinct as defined by Linn County ordinance.
3.03 WARDS ESTABLISHED. The City is divided into four wards as
follows:
1. The First Ward consists of precincts one (1), two (2), three (3) and
four (4).
2. The Second Ward consists of precincts five (5), six (6) and seven
(7).
3. The Third Ward consists of precincts eight (8), nine (9) and ten
(10).
4. The Fourth Ward consists of precincts eleven (11), twelve (12),
thirteen (13) and fourteen (14).
3.04 CORRECTION OF ERRORS. If this chapter fails to place any part of
the City within a precinct established by this chapter, the Commissioner of
Elections shall assign the omitted area to an adjacent precinct within the same
legislative district. If this chapter places any part of the City in more than one
precinct established by this chapter, the Commissioner of Elections shall assign
that territory to an adjacent precinct within the proper legislative district. The
Commissioner of Elections may also correct obvious clerical errors in this
chapter.
3.05 PUBLICATION OF CHANGES. The City shall publish notice of the
boundaries for the precincts and wards established by this chapter, pursuant to
law. The City shall also certify the population of all precincts and wards, a copy
of this chapter, and a map drawn in conformance thereto, to the Secretary of State
on or before September 1, 2011.
3.06 ANNEXED TERRITORY. Whenever territory is annexed into the City
limits, the resolution approving the same shall also establish which ward and
precinct the territory shall be located in.
(Chapter 3 - Ord. 11-23 – Nov. 11 Supp.)
CHAPTER 3 PRECINCTS AND WARDS
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CHAPTER 3 PRECINCTS AND WARDS
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
4.01 Municipal Infraction 4.04 Civil Citations
4.02 Environmental Violation 4.05 Alternative Relief
4.03 Penalties 4.06 Criminal Penalties
4.01 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any
ordinance or code herein adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any
act or duty required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically
provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious
misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of
Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
4.02 ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION. A municipal infraction which is a violation
of Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa or of a standard established by the City in
consultation with the Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an
environmental violation. However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable
until the City has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or
to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1])
1. A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
2. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial production or
manufacturing of grain products.
3. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production or
manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
4.03 PENALTIES. A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil
penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1])
1. Standard Civil Penalties.
A. First Offense ....................................... $ 750.00
B. Second Offense .................................. $ 1,000.00
C. Third and Subsequent Offenses ......... $ 1,000.00
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat
offense. (Ord. 06-20 – Nov. 06 Supp.)
2. Special Civil Penalties.
A. A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an
industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each day a violation exists or continues.
B. A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is
punishable by a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each occurrence. However, an environmental violation is not subject to
such penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or
conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or
the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.
(2) The City is notified of the violation within twenty-four (24)
hours from the time that the violation begins.
(3) The violation does not continue in existence for more than
eight (8) hours.
4.04 CIVIL CITATIONS. Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of
Ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction.
The citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure
56.1, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s last known mailing
address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as provided in Rule of
Civil Procedure 60 and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 60.1. A copy
of the citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and one copy shall be sent to the
Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has
been committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [4])
1. The name and address of the defendant.
2. The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing
the citation.
3. The location and time of the infraction.
4. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought,
or both.
5. The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
6. The time and place of court appearance.
7. The penalty for failure to appear in court.
4.05 ALTERNATIVE RELIEF. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter
does not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same
action. Such alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement
or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [8])
4.06 CRIMINAL PENALTIES. This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from
issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if
criminal penalties are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the
authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances by criminal
sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
5.01 Oaths 5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.02 Bonds 5.10 Vacancies
5.03 Duties: General 5.11 Gifts
5.04 Books and Records 5.12 Mileage
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.13 Place of Residence
5.06 Meetings 5.14 City Elections
5.07 Conflict of Interest 5.15 Employment Agreements
5.08 Resignations 5.16 SUDAS
5.01 OATHS. The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with
the following:
1. Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for office
by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The oath shall
be taken, and bond provided, after being certified as elected but not later than noon
of the first day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year
of the term for which the officer was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
2. Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear that
I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State
of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge
all duties of the office of (name of office) in Marion as now or hereafter required by
law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
3. Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the business of
their respective office:
A. Mayor
B. City Clerk
C. Members of all boards, commissions or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02 BONDS. Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
1. Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or
blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer
and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and advisable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
2. Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
3. Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed with
the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])
4. Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of Official
Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City officers, elective or
appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])
5.03 DUTIES: GENERAL. Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and
perform the duties prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed
by the Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04 BOOKS AND RECORDS. All books and records required to be kept by law or
ordinance shall be open to examination by the public upon request, unless some other
provisions of law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records which are combined with data processing software shall be in
accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A)
5.05 TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR. Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor
in office all books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06 MEETINGS. All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multimembered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held
in accordance with the following:
1. Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the time,
date and place of each meeting, and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
2. Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
3. Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and
place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The minutes shall
show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to indicate the vote
of each member present. The vote of each member present shall be made public at
the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
4. Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of
either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting and in
accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
5. Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices
at any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
6. Electronic Meetings. A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only
in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or impractical and
then only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
5.07 CONFLICT OF INTEREST. A City officer or employee shall not have an
interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof
or services to be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A
contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of this section do
not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
1. Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding of
which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[1])
2. Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[2])
3. City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as
Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3])
4. Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an interest
solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind described in
subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contract is for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid, if the remuneration of employment will
not be directly affected as a result of the contract, and if the duties of employment
do not directly involve the procurement or preparation of any part of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[5])
5. Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[6])
6. Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has an
interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee was elected
or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[7])
7. Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer fire fighters or civil defense volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[8])
8. Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five percent
(5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate family of such
officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[9])
9. Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[4])
10. Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this section, for
the purchase of goods or services which benefit a City officer or employee, if the
purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a cumulative total
purchase price of fifteen hundred dollars ($1500.00) in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[10])
11. Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a utility
and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential City utility
services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[12])
5.08 RESIGNATIONS. An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by
submitting a resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and
considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment
to the same office during the time for which the person was elected, if during that time the
compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09 REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. Except as
otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to City office or employment
may be removed by the officer or body making the appointment, but every such removal
shall be by written order. The order shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the
Clerk, and a copy shall be sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request
filed with the Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be
granted a public hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The
hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date the request is filed, unless the
person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10 VACANCIES. A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall
be filled, at the Council’s option, by one of the two following procedures:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2])
1. Appointment. By appointment following public notice by the remaining
members of the Council within forty (40) days after the vacancy occurs, except that
if the remaining members do not constitute a quorum of the full membership, or if
a petition is filed requesting an election, the Council shall call a special election as
provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2a])
2. Election. By a special election held to fill the office for the remaining
balance of the unexpired term as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [2b])
5.11 GIFTS. Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family member, shall
not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series of gifts from a “restricted
donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly,
individually or jointly with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a
series of gifts to a public official, public employee or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
5.12 MILEAGE. Employees of the City who are required to use their personal
automobiles in their work with the City, excluding coming to or going from work, shall
receive a mileage allowance equal to that allowed by the Internal Revenue Service without
such allowance being treated as income. Claims shall be submitted on forms provided by
the City Treasurer. Employees who are required to regularly use a personal automobile in
their work for the City may also be allowed, in lieu of the above mileage allowance, a car
allowance as approved by the Council. (Ord. 18-33 – Feb. 19 Supp.)
5.13 PLACE OF RESIDENCE. The City Manager, department heads, police officers,
firefighters and other critical employees, shall not reside outside the City limits unless the place
of residence is within a radius of 10 miles measured from the residence to the employee's
department headquarters or is within 30 minutes driving time as per an approved on-line
mapping service such as but not limited to Google Maps or Mapquest, as determined by the
department head. All Paid-On-Call (volunteer) firefighters must reside in the city limits or
within the Marion Township. This section does not require an employee to move and does not
constitute grounds for termination if the employee does not reside within the limits established
by this section at the time this section becomes effective, except that, should any such
employee change his or her residence after the effective date of this section, the employee's
new residence must comply with this provision within one year of hiring or within six months
of the completion of his or her period of probationary employment, if any, whichever event
occurs last. Employees may seek prior approval to obtain a residence beyond the limits set
forth in this section. Approvals may be granted with the unanimous agreement of the Mayor,
City Manager and affected department head, provided the proposed residence will
nevertheless, be within a reasonable response time to the employee's department due to the
peculiarities of the particular circumstances. The word "reside" and words "place of residence"
as used in this section mean that dwelling or a place where an employee actually lives and
from which the employee will normally depart to travel to his or her place of employment
within the City. A home, dwelling or apartment owned or rented by an employee but not
actually occupied by an employee during his or her customary hours of sleep shall not be
considered to be the employee' s place of residence. Individual city departments that have
departmental rules and regulations may adopt a rule or regulation governing residence
requirements for its critical employees that is more stringent than this section.
(Ord. 16-06 – Aug. 16 Supp.)
5.14 CITY ELECTIONS. All candidates for elective municipal office shall be
nominated under the provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa. The candidate with
the most votes shall be the winner of the election and there shall not be a primary election
nor shall there be a runoff election.
(Ord. 05-10 – Nov. 05 Supp.)
5.15 EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENTS. The City Council may approve, by
resolution, employment agreements with the City Manager, department heads and
professional employees that contain such provisions as the Council deems appropriate
including provisions that deviate from employment at will even though the ordinance
creating the position in question creates the same as an employment at will position.
(Ord. 07-03 – Aug. 07 Supp.)
5.16 SUDAS. The City of Marion hereby adopts the 2015 edition of the Statewide Urban
Design and Specifications Program, as Marion's design specifications and manual. These
specifications and manual may be known as and cited as "SUDAS". SUDAS as adopted
herein replaces the Metropolitan Area Engineering Design Standards and the Cedar Rapids
Metropolitan Standards and Specifications previously in effect in Marion. Subsequent
updated editions of SUDAS will be adopted by the Marion City Council by resolution.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
CHAPTER 6
COMPETITION WITH PRIVATE ENTERPRISES
6.01 Authorization to Specific City Departments 6.02 Authorization to City Departments Generally
6.01 AUTHORIZATION TO SPECIFIC CITY DEPARTMENTS. Pursuant to the
provisions of Section 23A.2 of the Code of Iowa, the following departments of the City
are hereby authorized but not limited to do the following:
1. Water Department:
A. Drill wells, install lines and towers, pump and sell water.
B. Test water and perform inspections.
2. Fire Department:
A. Fire suppression.
B. Fire Code inspections, plan review and enforcement.
C. Rescue and extrication.
D. Advanced and basic emergency medical care and first aid.
E. Public C.P.R. training.
F. Public fire prevention training.
G. Rental Housing Code inspection and enforcement.
H. City nuisance inspection and abatement.
I. Purchase or lease fire apparatus and equipment and repair and
maintain the same.
J. Fire station building repair and maintenance.
K. Fire station grounds maintenance.
L. Train Fire Department employees.
M. Respond to any emergency which may arise within the City of
Marion or Marion Township.
N. Organize and administer community festivities.
O. Provide mutual aid as provided by Chapter 28E agreements.
3. Parks Department:
A. Rent pavilions.
B. Rent community center rooms.
C. Sell cemetery lots.
D. Perform interment in cemetery.
E. Mow park and City lawns.
F. Purchase and resell pool concession items.
G. Operate ball programs.
H. Provide programs and lessons.
I. Pick up garbage and trash.
J. Fertilize lawns.
K. Mow and spray for weeds.
L. Perform snow removal.
M. Operate and maintain ice skating rinks.
N. Issue park user permits and permits to remove dead or damaged trees
or limbs and assist City Forester.
O. Provide a farmers market.
P. Operate playground programs and recreation facilities.
Q. Rent recreational facilities/fields.
4. Engineering and Public Services Departments:
A. Provide engineering services relative to City-wide infrastructure
needs, including but not limited to: gathering of engineering data; analysis
and evaluation of engineering data; developing and administering capital
improvements; recording and maintaining records of City infrastructure;
design and preparations of plans, specifications, and contract documents;
contract administration; construction inspections; staking and surveying;
administration of State, local and Federal regulations governing the
development, repair, or improvement of City infrastructure.
B. Maintain City property and easements in accordance with City Code
and policy including: planting, pruning and removal of trees and shrubs;
mowing grass and weeds; construction, repair and maintenance of City
buildings, removal and disposal of dead animals, repair, fabrication,
maintenance of City vehicles and equipment.
C. Abatement of public nuisances on private property in accordance
with City, State and Federal regulations.
D. Construct, repair, maintain and inspect the City’s transportation
system including: grading; excavating; sawing; breaking and removing
concrete and asphalt; applying salt, sand, rock, chlorides, road oil, and other
roadway chemicals or materials; removal of snow, ice, leaves, dirt, and
other debris; bridge and culvert cleaning, painting, and repair; installation,
repair, replacement or removal of traffic signs, signals, street lights, street
markers, information signs, pavement markings, barricades and other traffic
control devices.
E. Construct, repair, maintain and inspect the City’s storm water
conveyance and sanitary sewer conveyance system, including: excavating;
grading; pipe laying; manhole and inlet construction and repair; cleaning
sewers and ditches; relieving backups; applying chemical treatments;
locating and televising; grouting.
F. Routinely collect and dispose of, by sale or otherwise, residential
and commercial solid waste, garbage, refuse, recyclables, tree and yard
waste and to grow and sell organic materials used in the making of fuel.
(Ord. 13-01 – Feb. 13 Supp.)
5. Library Department:
A. Loan books, compact disks, cassette tapes, audio and video tapes and
magazines.
B. Make available newspapers, magazines, books and computers for
patron use in library.
C. Make available a photocopier for patron use.
D. Make available a microfilm/microfiche copier for public use.
E. Provide meeting room for meetings.
F. Reference/information services.
G. Directory assistance.
H. Processing and cataloging library books.
I. Borrowing films and video from the State library.
J. Borrowing books from other libraries.
K. Selling used books.
6. Police Department:
A. Enforce the laws of the State and the City.
B. Provide security services.
C. Provide traffic control services.
D. Provide service of process and notices.
E. Provide transportation.
F. Provide emergency medical aid.
G. Provide photo processing and printing.
7. Finance Department:
A. Maintain records and accounts.
B. Receive and invest funds.
C. Issue licenses and permits.
6.02 AUTHORIZATION TO CITY DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY. All City
departments are hereby authorized but not limited to do the following:
1. Maintain records, supplies and equipment.
2. Use and maintain all property under the department’s control whether real
or personal and whether owned or leased.
3. Purchase or rent property, real or personal.
4. Answer and initiate phone calls.
5. Bill for services and materials.
6. Employ personnel to carry out its mission and train personnel.
7. Perform all tasks assigned to it by the City, Federal or State law and by the
Council or City Manager and anything deemed necessary or desirable to comply
with a Federal, State or City law.
8. Do such things as are authorized through the City budget or appropriation
process.
9. Do such things as have traditionally been performed by the department.
10. Engage in manufacturing, processing, sale, offering for sale, rental, leasing,
delivery, dispensing, distributing or advertising of goods or services to the public
at such times and in such manner as the department head deems appropriate.
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
7.01 Purpose 7.06 Budget Amendments
7.02 City Treasurer 7.07 Accounting
7.03 Cash Control 7.08 Financial Reports
7.04 Fund Control 7.09 Construction Maintenance Fund
7.05 Operating Budget Preparation
7.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and
regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02 CITY TREASURER. The City Treasurer is the accounting officer of the City.
7.03 CASH CONTROL. To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the
following shall apply:
1. Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any City officer
shall be deposited through the office of the City Treasurer. If any said fees are due to an
officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check drawn by the City Treasurer and approved
by the Council only upon such officer's making adequate reports relating thereto as required
by law, ordinance or Council directive.
2. Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be promptly
deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not exceeding the authorized
depository limitation established by the Council or invested in accordance with the City's
written investment policy and State law, including joint investments as authorized by
Section 384.21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
3. Petty Cash Fund. The City Treasurer shall be the custodian of a petty cash fund for
use of small purchases and payments. The City Treasurer shall obtain some form of receipt
or bill for petty cash disbursements. At such time as the petty cash fund is approaching
depletion, the City Treasurer shall draw a check for replenishment in the amount of the
accumulated expenditures and such check shall be submitted to Council as a claim in the
usual manner for claims and charged to the proper funds and accounts. It shall not be used
for salary payments or other personal services or personal expenses.
7.04 FUND CONTROL. There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds
in accordance with the following:
1. Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the proper fund as
required by law, ordinance or resolution.
2. Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was properly budgeted, and
supported by a claim approved by the Council.
3. Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency Fund.
(IAC, 545-2.5 [384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])
4. Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law, moneys may
be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to meet payments of
principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget
amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])
5. Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. There is established as a part of the system of
municipal budgeting an account known as the Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. The
City Treasurer shall deposit in this fund such sums as directed by the City Manager;
provided, however, no taxes shall be certified or levied to fund this account unless
approved by election as established in Section 384.7 of the Code of Iowa.
6. Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund may be
transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund and Road Use Tax Funds,
by resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required transfers have been
made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the terms and provisions of any revenue
bonds or loan agreements relating to the Utility or Enterprise Fund. A surplus is defined as
the cash balance in the operating account or the unrestricted retained earnings calculated
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in excess of:
A. The amount of the expense of disbursements for operating and maintaining
the utility or enterprise for the preceding three (3) months, and
B. The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted accounts
for the succeeding three (3) months.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5])
7. Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of each month
and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05 OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION. The annual operating budget of the City
shall be prepared in accordance with the following:
1. Proposal Prepared. The City Manager is responsible for preparation of the annual
budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption by the Council in
accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
2. Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions and other administrative
agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and administer budgets must submit their
budget proposals to the City Manager for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such
time and in such-form as required by the Council.
3. Submission to Council. The City Manager shall submit the completed budget
proposal to the Council no later than February 15 of each year.
4. Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may make any
adjustments in the budget which it deems appropriate before accepting such proposal for
publication, hearing and final adoption.
5. Notice of Hearing. Upon adopting a proposed budget the Council shall set a date
for public hearing thereon to be held before March 15 and cause notice of such hearing and
a summary of the proposed budget to be published not less than ten (10) nor more than
twenty (20) days before the date established for the hearing. Proof of such publication must
be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
6. Copies of Budget on File. Not less than twenty (20) days before the date that the
budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than ten (10) days before the
public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number of copies of the detailed
budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and organizations, and have them available for
distribution at the offices of the Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
7. Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt, by
resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the City Treasurer shall certify the
necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor and the County Board of
Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than, but not more than, the amount
estimated in the proposed budget. Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and
of the tax certificate must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
7.06 BUDGET AMENDMENTS. A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year
becomes effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and purpose
specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
1. Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program must be
prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.2 [384, 388])
2. Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to another must
be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.3 [384, 388])
3. Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to another
activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the Council.
(IAC, 545-2.4 [384, 388])
4. Administrative Transfers. The City Treasurer shall have the authority to adjust, by
transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a specific activity without prior
Council approval.
(IAC, 545-2.4 [384, 388])
7.07 ACCOUNTING. The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:
1. Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained books of
original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and disbursed.
2. General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general ledger
controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording unappropriated
surpluses.
3. Checks. Checks shall be signed by the City Treasurer. Checks will be disbursed by
the City Treasurer following Council approval, except as provided by subsection 5 hereof.
4. Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to record
receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will provide adequate
information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and approved by the Council.
Each individual account shall be maintained within its proper fund and so kept that receipts
can be immediately and directly compared with revenue estimates and expenditures can be
related to the authorizing appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the
appropriation for the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred.
5. Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution authorize the
Treasurer to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not paid
promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or additional interest
cost. Any such payments made shall be reported to the Council for review and approval
with and in the same manner as other claims at the next meeting following such payment.
The resolution authorizing immediate payment shall specify the type of payment so
authorized and may include but is not limited to payment of utility bills, contractual
obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest.
7.08 FINANCIAL REPORTS. The City Treasurer shall prepare and file the following
financial reports:
1. Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a report
showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program and activity for the
preceding month.
2. Annual Report. Not later than December first of each year there shall be published
an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year of all collections and
receipts, all accounts due the City, and all expenditures, the current public debt of the City,
and the legal debt limit of the City for the current fiscal year. A copy of the annual report
must be filed with the Auditor of State not later than December 1 of each year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
7.09 CONSTRUCTION MAINTENANCE FUND.
1. Whenever the City solicits proposals or bids on any construction project, the
proposal or contract to be entered into shall provide that the contractor shall at the direction
of the City Engineer either post a satisfactory maintenance bond or deposit with the City
Treasurer a cash amount equal to 1.5 percent of the contract amount, prior to acceptance
of the project. Whenever a developer is required to install a public improvement, the
developer shall at the direction of the City Engineer either post a satisfactory maintenance
bond or deposit with the City Treasurer a cash amount equal to 1.5 percent of the cost of
said public improvement, prior to acceptance of the same by the City.
2. If the City Engineer directs either a contractor or developer to make a cash deposit
with the City Treasurer, the same shall be in lieu of a maintenance bond and shall not be
refundable. Such a deposit shall not relieve the contractor or developer of the duty to
remedy any and all defects that may develop in the contractor's or developer's work prior
to the expiration of time as set forth in the contract or in the City Engineer's instructions on
installation of a public improvement by reason of bad workmanship or poor materials.
3. The City Treasurer shall maintain all said deposits in an account called the
Construction Maintenance Fund which shall stand as surety for the contractor or developer,
guaranteeing to indemnify the City should the contractor or developer fail to remedy at his
or her own cost and expense any and all defects that may develop in said work within the
time period prescribed. Said guarantee shall not relieve the contractor or developer of his
or her primary liability any more than would a maintenance bond. The funds shall not be
expended from the Construction Maintenance Fund except as directed by the Council.
(Ch. 7 - Ord. 18-32 – Feb. 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
8.01 Purpose 8.06 Applications
8.02 Definitions 8.07 Approval
8.03 Period of Partial Exemption 8.08 Exemption Repealed
8.04 Amounts Eligible for Exemption 8.09 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
8.05 Limitations
8.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from
property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new
construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, distribution
centers and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as
real estate.
8.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year for
which the exemption is received, except that actual value added by improvements
to machinery and equipment means the actual value as determined by the local
assessor as of January 1 of each year for which the exemption is received.
2. “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for the
storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets.
Distribution center does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store
raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer to store goods to be
used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage of petroleum
products, or used for the retail sale of goods.
3. “New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new
buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings
and structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of an existing
building or structure which does not constitute complete replacement of an
existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or structure unless
the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is required due to economic
obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry
standards for the manufacturing and processing of specific products and the
reconstruction is required for the owner of the building or structure to continue
competitively to manufacture or process those products, which determination shall
receive prior approval from the City Council of the City upon the recommendation
of the Iowa Department of Economic Development.
4. “New machinery and equipment assessed as real estate” means new
machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to Section 427A.1,
Subsection 1, Paragraph “e”, Code of Iowa, unless the machinery or equipment is
part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or expand the
existing operational status.
5. “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings
devoted primarily to research and development activities, including, but not
limited to, the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for
experimental use, and corporate research services which do not have a primary
purpose of providing on-site services to the public.
6. “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse for
the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of Iowa,
except that it does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw
agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail.
8.03 PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION. The actual value added to industrial
real estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities,
warehouses, distribution centers, and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery and
equipment assessed as real estate, is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation
for a period of five (5) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.04 AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION. The amount of actual value
added which is eligible to be exempt from taxation shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
1. For the first year, seventy-five percent (75%)
2. For the second year, sixty percent (60%)
3. For the third year, forty-five percent (45%)
4. For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%)
5. For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%)
8.05 LIMITATIONS. The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new
construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall
not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below the
assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of the new construction added.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.06 APPLICATIONS. An application shall be filed for each project resulting in
actual value added for which an exemption is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
1. The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property
with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which the value
added is first assessed for taxation.
2. Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the
Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the
improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the Director of
Revenue.
8.07 APPROVAL. A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive
prior approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the City Council
resolves to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public hearing
thereon. Thereafter, at least thirty days after such hearing the City Council, by ordinance,
may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction if the new
construction is in conformance with City zoning. Such prior approval shall not entitle the
owner to exemption from taxation until the new construction has been completed and
found to be qualified real estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
8.08 EXEMPTION REPEALED. When in the opinion of the City Council
continuation of the exemption granted by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City,
the City Council may repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until
their expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
8.09 DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED. A property tax exemption under this
chapter shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has
received any other property tax exemption authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
- 65 -
CHAPTER 9
URBAN RENEWAL
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal,
have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and remain in
full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED NAME OF AREA
94-30 October 6, 1994 Collins Road Extension Urban Renewal Area
97-8 April 3, 1997 Highway 13 Urban Renewal Area
00-33 October 5, 2000 Winslow Road Urban Renewal Area
07-22 October 4, 2007 Central Corridor Urban Renewal Area
07-31 December 20, 2007 Amended Winslow Road Urban Renewal Area
08-27 December 4, 2008 Highway 13 North #1 Urban Renewal Area
09-19 July 16, 2009 29th Avenue Urban Renewal Area
09-30 December 3, 2009 Winslow Road Urban Renewal Area
10-27 November 4, 2010 West Tower Terrace Road Urban Renewal Area
10-28 November 4, 2010 Central Corridor Urban Renewal Area
11-21 September 15, 2011 Amended 29th Avenue Urban Renewal Area
11-29 January 5, 2012 Amended West Tower Terrace Road Urban
Renewal Area
13-16 June 25, 2013 Amended Central Corridor Urban Renewal Area
Plan
17-09 May 4, 2017 April, 2017 Addition to the Central Corridor
Urban Renewal Area
17-17 August 3, 2017 July, 2017 Collins Road Extension Urban
Renewal Area Addition
19-23 September 5, 2019 September, 2019 Collins Road Extension Urban
Renewal Area Addition
CHAPTER 10
URBAN REVITALIZATION
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal,
have been adopted designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City and remain
in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE
NO.
ADOPTED NAME EXPIRATION
79-24 September 20, 1979 CBD (See Ordinance 90-25)
82-17 August 5, 1982 Amended CBD (See Ordinance 90-25)
83-9 May 19, 1983 DAVCO May 19, 1988
84-21 December 20, 1984 Amended CBD (See Ordinance 90-25)
88-15 June 2, 1988 REM, Inc. June 2, 1998
88-19 June 23, 1988 REM Amended Legal
(See Ordinance 88-15)
90-25 December 6, 1990 Amended CBD December 31, 1995
99-26 September 16, 1999 Marion Brush
Not less than one year
and until repealed by
the Council
01-45 January 10, 2002 Scott Meadows Not less than one year
and until repealed by
the Council
05-33 October 20, 2005 305 44th St. Not less than one year
and until repealed by
the Council
05-34 November 3, 2005 Community Center Not less than one year
and until repealed by
the Council
05-35 November 3, 2005 12th Street Not less than one year
and until repealed by
the Council
06-33 December 7, 2006 Grand Avenue Not less than one year
and until repealed by
the Council
10-26 October 21, 2010 Genesis Not less than one year
and until repealed by
the Council
ORDINANCE
NO.
ADOPTED NAME EXPIRATION
17-05 February 23, 2017 2017 Multi-Residential
URA
17-16 June 8, 2017 2017 Workforce
Housing URA
18-17 June 21, 2018 2018 Workforce
Housing URA
[The next page is 85]
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
15.01 Powers and Duties 15.03 Compensation
15.02 Appointments
15.01 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
1. Generally. The Mayor shall have all of the powers and shall perform such
duties as are conferred or directed by the statutes of the State of Iowa or as required
by the Charter or ordinance of the City.
2. Presiding Over Council Meetings. The mayor shall preside over all meetings
of the Council.
3. Right to Vote. The Mayor shall have the right to vote as provided in the
Charter.
4. Represent the City. The Mayor, with the Council’s approval, shall represent
the City in all negotiations properly entered into in accordance with law including
but not limited to ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent the City where this duty
is specifically delegated to another officer by the Council or by law, including but
not limited to ordinance.
5. Sign Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, the Mayor shall sign
all contracts on behalf of the City.
6. Special Council Meetings. The Mayor shall call special meetings of the
Council when the Mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
7. Mayor Pro Tempore. Immediately after taking office, the Mayor shall
designate and appoint one member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tempore. This
appointment shall be made subject to the approval of a majority of the Council.
8. Licenses and Permits. The Mayor shall sign all licenses and permits which
have been granted by the Council, except those designated by law, including but not
limited to ordinance, to be issued by another municipal officer.
9. Revocation of Permits and Licenses. Upon authorization of the Council, the
Mayor shall revoke permits or licenses granted by the Council when the terms of
the permits or licenses are violated or the ordinances of the City and the laws of the
State are violated by holders of said permits or licenses.
10. Signing Ordinances and Resolutions. The Mayor shall sign all ordinances
and resolutions passed by the Council before the ordinance or resolution shall be in
full force and effect.
11. Authority to Sue to Void Plat. When authorized by resolution of the Council,
the Mayor shall institute a suit in equity in the District Court to void any plat of the
City filed and recorded in violation of the Code of Iowa.
12. Appointment of Advisory Committee. The Mayor shall have authority, by
and with the approval of the Council, to appoint an Advisory Committee for the
purpose of obtaining information and making recommendations to the Council.
13. Public Emergencies. The Mayor shall exercise the emergency powers
granted the office of Mayor under Section 372.14, subsection 2, of the Code of Iowa.
15.02 APPOINTMENTS. The Mayor shall appoint the following officials, subject to
Council approval:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1. Mayor Pro Tem
2. Library Board of Trustees
3. Water Utility Board of Trustees
4. Civil Service Commission
5. Public Services Board
6. Marion Arts Council
7. Plumbing Board of Appeals
8. Electrical Board of Appeals
9. Fire Board of Appeals
10. Housing Board of Appeals
11. Zoning Board of Adjustment
12. Mechanical Board of Appeals
13. Building Board of Appeals
14. Historic Preservation Commission
15. Tree Board
16. Nuisance Advisory Board
(Ord. 11-05 – May 11 Supp.)
15.03 COMPENSATION. The salary of the Mayor is nine thousand six hundred dollars
($9,600.00) per year, payable monthly. Effective and starting January 1, 2018, the salary
of the Mayor shall annually be reviewed in November, 2018 and each November thereafter.
The Mayor's salary shall be adjusted up by the same percentage as the percentage change
in the Consumer Price Index (CPI-U, US City Average, All Items) published by the United
States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, for the most recent twelve-month
period published in November of each calendar year. In the event that the published CPIU
is zero or below, Council pay shall not be adjusted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
(Ord. 17-33 – Feb. 18 Supp.)
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties 16.04 Compensation
16.01 VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL. The Mayor Pro Tem is vice president of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein,
the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability
of the Mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor
Pro Tem shall not have power to employ, or discharge from employment, officers or
employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ or discharge without the
approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03 VOTING RIGHTS. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a
member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04 COMPENSATION. If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor
during the Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days or
more, the Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by
the Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and
upon the compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 17
COUNCIL
17.01 Powers and Duties 17.03 Appointments
17.02 Council Meetings 17.04 Compensation
17.01 POWERS AND DUTIES. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except
as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. The Council shall perform such powers and
duties as are conferred or directed by the Charter, by the statutes of the State of Iowa, or as
required by ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
17.02 COUNCIL MEETINGS. Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council
and other provisions regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section
5.06 of this Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council meetings are
the following:
1. Regular Meetings. The time and place of the regular meetings of the Council
shall be fixed by resolution of the Council.
2. Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor or
upon the written request of a majority of the members of the Council submitted to
the Clerk. Notice of a special meeting shall specify the date, time, place and subject
of the meeting and such notice shall be given personally or left at the usual place of
residence of each member of the Council. A record of the service of notice shall be
maintained by the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
3. Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
4. Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and maintain
records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
17.03 APPOINTMENTS.
1. The Council shall appoint the following officials:
A. City Clerk
B. City Treasurer
C. City Attorney
D. City Manager
E. Planning and Zoning Commission
2. The Council may approve by resolution a list of designees for each appointed
official enumerated in subsection 1, with the exception of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
3. Any reference in this Code of Ordinances to each of the above enumerated
officials shall apply to any approved designees in the absence of said official or
with the express permission of the official. This shall include the ability to perform
any action authorized by code, unless otherwise stated.
(Ord. 19-06 – May 19 Supp.)
17.04 COMPENSATION. The salary of each Council member is four thousand eight
hundred dollars ($4,800.00) per year, payable monthly. Effective and starting January 1,
2018, the salary of each Council shall annually be reviewed in November, 2018 and each
November thereafter. The salary of each Council Member shall be adjusted up by the same
percentage as the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index (CPI-U, US City
Average, All Items) published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics, for the most recent twelve-month period published in November of each calendar
year. In the event that the published CPI-U is zero or below, Council pay shall not be
adjusted
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
(Ord. 17-33 – Feb. 18 Supp.)
CHAPTER 18A
CITY TREASURER
18A.01 Appointment and Compensation 18A.02 Powers and Duties: General
18A.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by majority
vote a City Treasurer to serve at the discretion of the Council. The City Treasurer shall receive
such compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18A.02 POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL. The City Treasurer performs the following
duties relating to City funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the City in the
manner provided by law, and Council direction.
2. Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities received on
behalf of the City and specify the date, from whom, and for what purpose received.
3. Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements, money or
property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
4. Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received from special
assessments.
5. Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all payments of
interest and principal.
(Ch. 18A - Ord. 18-31 – Feb. 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General 18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes 18.10 Issue Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures 18.11 Notify Appointees
18.05 Publication 18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication 18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certify Measures 18.14 City Treasurer
18.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by
majority vote a City Clerk to serve at the discretion of the Council. The Clerk shall receive
such compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02 POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL. The Clerk, or in the Clerk’s absence or
inability to act, the Deputy Clerk, has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter,
this Code of Ordinances and the law.
18.03 PUBLICATION OF MINUTES. The Clerk shall attend all regular and special
Council meetings and within fifteen (15) days following a regular or special meeting shall
cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published. Such publication shall
include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall show the gross
amount of the claim.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])
18.04 RECORDING MEASURES. The Clerk shall promptly record each measure
considered by the Council and record a statement with the measure, where applicable,
indicating whether the Mayor signed or took no action on the measure.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 & 2])
18.05 PUBLICATION. The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances,
enactments, proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows:
1. Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is required by
this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at least once, not less
than four (4) nor more than twenty (20) days before
the date of the election, hearing or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])
2. Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of Ordinances
or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general
circulation in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])
18.06 AUTHENTICATION. The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions
with the Clerk’s signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
18.07 CERTIFY MEASURES. The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any
zoning district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits
to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08 RECORDS. The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following
manner:
1. Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances and
codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
2. Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all writings
or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise specifically
directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3. Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, for at least five (5) years except that ordinances, resolutions, Council
proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to the
issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption or replacement of public bonds or
obligations shall be kept for at least eleven (11) years following the final maturity
of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records
and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall
be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])
4. Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of any
record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be
necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a copy to
any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council resolution; under
the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix the seal of the City to
those public documents or instruments which by ordinance and Code of Ordinances
are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7[5])
5. Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and petitions
directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall endorse thereon the
action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such communications and
petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS. At the direction of the Council, the Clerk
shall attend meetings of committees, boards and commissions. The Clerk shall record and
preserve a correct record of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10 ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS. The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses
and permits when authorized by this Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and
permits issued which shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt
number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit and purpose for which
issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.11 NOTIFY APPOINTEES. The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the
Mayor or Council to offices in the City government of their position and the time at which
they shall assume the duties of their office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12 ELECTIONS. The Clerk shall perform all duties required by law in regard to
City elections and shall compile and preserve a complete record of every City election,
regular or special.
18.13 CITY SEAL. The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by
the Clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which it may be necessary or proper to
authenticate.
18.14 (Repealed by Ord. 18-30 – Feb. 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 19
CITY ATTORNEY
19.01 Appointment and Compensation 19.06 Provide Legal Opinion
19.02 Attorney for City 19.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
19.03 Power of Attorney 19.08 Prepare Documents
19.04 Ordinance Preparation 19.09 Representation of City Employees
19.05 Review and Comment
19.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by
majority vote a City Attorney to serve at the discretion of the Council. The City Attorney
shall receive such compensation as established by resolution of the Council. An
Assistant City Attorney may also be appointed by the Council if deemed necessary.
19.02 ATTORNEY FOR CITY. The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City
in all matters affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any
court, tribunal, commission or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all
actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
19.03 POWER OF ATTORNEY. The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City
to all appeal bonds and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to
the prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon
the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
19.04 ORDINANCE PREPARATION. The City Attorney shall prepare those
ordinances which the Council may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the
Council upon all such ordinances before their final passage by the Council and
publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
19.05 REVIEW AND COMMENT. The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a
report to the Council giving an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or
ordinances submitted to or coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
19.06 PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION. The City Attorney shall give advice or a
written legal opinion on City contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters
submitted by the Mayor, Council, individual Council members or any board, commission
or head of any department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
19.07 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS. The City Attorney shall attend
all regular meetings of the Council and such special meetings of the Council as the
Council shall direct.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
19.08 PREPARE DOCUMENTS. The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate
drafts for contracts, forms and other writings which may be required for the use of the
City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
19.09 REPRESENTATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES. The City Attorney shall not
appear on behalf of any City officer or employee before any court or tribunal for the
purely private benefit of said officer or employee. The City Attorney shall, however, if
directed by the Council, appear to defend any City officer or employee in any cause of
action arising out of or in the course of the performance of the duties of his or her office
or employment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.8)
CHAPTER 20
CITY MANAGER
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.03 Appointments; Supervision of Other Personnel
20.02 Duties
20.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by
majority vote a City Manager to hold office at the discretion of the Council. The City
Manager shall receive such salary as established by resolution of the Council.
20.02 DUTIES. The duties of the City Manager are as follows:
1. Enforcement Officer. The City Manager shall see that the laws and
ordinances of the City are faithfully enforced and executed.
2. Council Meetings. The City Manager shall, unless excused, attend all
meetings of the City Council.
3. Recommendations. The City Manager shall recommend to the City Council
such measures as the City Manager may deem necessary or expedient for the good
government and welfare of the City.
4. Supervision. The City Manager shall have the general supervision and
direction of the administration of the City government and may appoint with
approval of the Council such administrative assistants as shall be deemed advisable.
Administrative assistants to the Manager shall hold office at the Manager’s pleasure.
5. Contracts and Purchasing. The City Manager shall supervise the
performance of all contracts for work to be done for the City, make all purchases of
material and supplies, and see that such material and supplies are received, and are
of the quality and character called for by the contract.
6. Public Improvements and Buildings. The City Manager shall supervise and
manage all public improvements, works and undertakings of the City, and all public
buildings. The City Manager shall have charge of their construction, improvements,
repair and maintenance. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent cooperation
between the City Manager and any commission, board of trustees or other body.
7. Public Improvements and Maintenance. The City Manager shall have charge
of the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans, drawings, specifications
and estimates for public works or public improvements, the cleaning, sprinkling and
lighting of streets, alleys and public places; the collection and disposal of waste, and
the preservation of tools, equipment, vehicles and appliances belonging to the City.
8. Investigations. The City Manager may, without notice, summarily cause the
affairs of any department or the conduct of any officer under the City Manager’s
supervision, or of any employee, to be investigated. The City Manager or any
person appointed by the City Manager to examine or investigate the affairs of any
department or the conduct of any officer or employee, shall have power to compel
the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers or other
evidence.
9. Licenses and Permits. The City Manager shall oversee the issuance and
revocation of such licenses and permits as are authorized by law or ordinance.
10. Budget. The City Manager shall prepare and submit to the City Council the
annual budget.
11. Business Systems. The City Manager shall, at all times, see that the business
affairs of the municipal corporation are transacted by modern and scientific methods
and in an efficient and businesslike manner, and that accurate records of all of the
business affairs of the City under the City Manager’s management are fully and
accurately kept.
12. Approval of Public Improvement Actions. The City Manager, after
consultation with the City Engineer or other department heads, may approve
installation of street lights, Iowa Department of Environmental Quality Sanitary
Sewer Treatment Agreements, Iowa Department of Transportation entrance
permits, installation of temporary overhead utilities and authorized partial payments
on public improvement contracts previously entered into by the City Council, but
not final payments. The City Manager shall not be required to approve any of the
above matters and shall refer the matters to the City Council at its next regular
meeting when in doubt as to compliance with code provisions or in case of policy
considerations. Whenever the City Manager approves any item that is provided in
this section, the City Manager shall report the same to the City Council at is next
regular meeting.
13. Rules and Regulations. The City Manager, in the exercise of duties, shall
have the power to prescribe, promulgate, and enforce rules and regulations for the
government of the employees of the City, except sworn Police and Fire Department
employees. The rules and regulations shall be filed with the Council, which shall have
the authority to disapprove the same in whole or in part. The Clerk shall advise the Civil
Service Commission of the filing of the rules and regulations.
14. Additional Duties and Overlap of Powers. The City Manager shall perform such
other and further duties as the Council shall direct. The powers and duties of the City
Manager, as provided for herein, shall, whenever they conflict with the powers and duties
granted herein to any other officers or employees, supersede and have precedence over
powers and duties granted to other municipal officers or employees.
15. Real Property – Offers to Purchase. The City Manager shall, whenever he deems
the same to be in the best interests of the City, be empowered to offer to purchase real
property on behalf of the City, conditioned upon subsequent City Council approval after
acceptance by the seller. If real property is listed for sale in a defined project area and the
City Manager believes it likely will be sold to another party if an offer is conditioned upon
subsequent City Council approval, the City Manager, with the approval of the Mayor or
Mayor Pro Tem may make an offer to purchase on behalf of the City without the same
being conditioned upon subsequent City Council approval after acceptance by the buyer.
(Ord. 13-07 – May 13 Supp.)
20.03 APPOINTMENTS; SUPERVISION OF OTHER PERSONNEL.
1. Individual Appointments. The City Manager shall appoint the following persons:
A. Police Chief (subject to Council approval)
B. Fire Chief (subject to Council approval)
C. City Engineer
D. Public Services Director
E. Parks Director, subject to consultation with Park Board
F. Planning and Development Director
G. Acting City Manager. This person shall regularly act as City Manager
during absences, incapacity or unavailability of the City Manager except when the
City Manager has designated some other City employee to act as Acting City
Manager for a specific occasion of the Managers absence. The City Manager may
also designate an employee to be the Acting City Manager Pro-Tem in the event
that the designated Acting City Manager is absent, incapacitated or unavailable. If
the City Manager is absent, incapacitated or unavailable and no person has been
designated as the Acting City Manager or the Acting City Manager Pro-Tem, then
the Mayor, or Mayor Pro-Tem in the absence of the Mayor, shall designate an
Acting City Manager.
(Ord. 19-12 – May 19 Supp.)
2. Other Personnel.
A. The City Manager shall have the power to appoint or employ persons to fill
all places for which no other mode of appointment is provided.
B. The City Manager shall act as the Personnel Manager for the Park Board
and shall have the power to appoint and discipline, up to and including termination,
the Director of the Parks Department, after consultation with the Park Board, and
shall hear any appeals from the Director’s decisions to employ, reclassify or
discharge other employees of the said Board.
C. All employees of the Public Services Department are Public Services Board
employees. No employee of the Board shall be hired, disciplined or terminated
except through action of the Director. An employee of the Public Services
Department who believes that the Director has abused his or her discretion, may
appeal to the City Manager from a decision of the Director to suspend, demote or
terminate the employee. An employee of the Public Services Department who
believes that the City Manager has abused his or her discretion, may appeal to the
Public Services Board from a decision of the City Manager upholding the decision
of the Director to suspend, demote or terminate the employee. Said appeals must
be in writing and filed with the City Clerk, within 20 days of the decision appealed.
Appeals to the Public Services Board are subject to such rules and regulations as it
may promulgate. The decision of the Board is final.
(Ord. 04-13 – Nov. 04 Supp.)
D. The City Manager shall have authority to make written application for
Arbitration in labor disputes, as provided in Chapter 20 of the Code of Iowa.
3. Suspension or Discharge. The City Manager shall have the power to suspend,
demote or discharge summarily any officer, appointee or employee that the City Manager
has appointed, subject to the approval of the Council with respect to the Police Chief and
Fire Department.
4. Supervision of Officers and Departments. The City Manager shall supervise and
direct the official conduct of all officers of the City whom the City Manager has appointed,
and shall take responsibility and control of all City departments.
CHAPTER 21
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
21.01 Establishment of Public Library 21.07 Nonresident Use
21.02 Library Trustees 21.08 Library Account
21.03 Organization of the Board 21.09 Annual Report
21.04 Powers and Duties 21.10 Injury to Books or Property
21.05 Gifts to City 21.11 Theft
21.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 21.12 Notice Posted
21.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF PUBLIC LIBRARY. There is hereby established a free
public library for the use of residents of the City, to be known as the Marion Public Library.
It is referred to in this chapter as the Library.
21.02 LIBRARY TRUSTEES. The Mayor, with the approval of the Council, shall
appoint nine (9) persons to constitute a Board of Library Trustees. The Mayor shall appoint
bona fide citizens and residents of the City over the age of twenty-one (21).
21.03 ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD. The organization of the Board shall be
as follows:
1. Term of Office. All appointments shall be for six (6) years, from July 1
following appointment, except appointments to fill vacancies. Appointment of three
(3) of the Board members shall be made every two (2) years, to stagger the terms.
No person shall hold appointment as a member of the Library Board for more than
two (2) full consecutive terms, except that when the initial appointment was to fill
a vacancy there may be appointment for two (2) full consecutive terms thereafter.
Any person may be appointed to the Library Board again after an interval of two (2)
years, subject to the above limit of two (2) full consecutive terms. Board members
appointed and serving at the time of the approval of this measure my be reappointed
for two (2) full consecutive terms after the expiration of their current term.
(Ord. 09-23 – Dec. 09 Supp.)
2. Honorary of Ex Officio Members. The Board may, on its own motion,
establish honorary board positions or ex officio board positions as the Board deems
advisable under such term limitations as the Board may set.
3. Vacancies. The position of any Trustee shall be vacated if such member
moves permanently from the City, or if the Trustee is absent without due
explanation from six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in the
case of sickness or temporary absence from the City. The Mayor, with the approval
of the Council, shall fill any vacancy by appointment of a new trustee to fill the
unexpired terms.
4. Quorum and Voting. All action by the Board shall require a majority vote of
the whole number of members appointed to the Board. The removal of the librarian,
however, shall require a two-thirds vote of the Board.
5. Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services.
21.04 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board shall have and exercise the following
powers and duties:
1. Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary, and
such other officers as it deems necessary.
2. Physical Plant. To have charge, control and supervision of the Library, its
appurtenances, fixtures and rooms.
3. Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
4. Hiring of Personnel. To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to
employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper
management of the Library, and fix their compensation, provided, however, that
prior to such employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and
employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the
Board voting in favor thereof.
5. Removal of Personnel. To remove the librarian, by a two-thirds vote of the
Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or employees for
misdemeanor, incompetence or inattention to duty, subject however, to the
provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
6. Purchases. To authorize the librarian to select and make purchases of books,
pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other Library materials,
furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the Library within budgetary limits
set by the Board.
7. Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by nonresidents of
the City and to fix charges for this privilege.
8. Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal bylaws,
rules and regulations for the care, use, government and management of the Library
and the business of the Board, and to fix and enforce penalties for violations. Copies
of such bylaws, rules and regulations shall be made available to the public at the
circulation desk.
9. Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by gift
or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other moneys belonging
to the Library, including fines and rentals collected under the rules of the Board.
10. Budget. To make and send to the Council, following City procedures and
timelines, an estimate of the amount necessary for the improvement, operation and
maintenance of the Library for the coming fiscal year, the amounts expended for
like purposes for the two preceding years, and the amount of income expected for
the next fiscal year from sources other than taxation.
11. Gifts. To accept gifts, in the name of the Library, of real property, personal
property, or mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to
execute deeds and bills of sale for the conveyance of said property; and to expend
the funds received from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
12. Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the performance
of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by the City on
behalf of the Library by action against the Council.
13. Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
21.05 GIFTS TO CITY. All gifts, donations, devises and bequests that may be made to
the City for the purpose of establishing, increasing or improving the Library shall be
administered by the Board of Library Trustees.
21.06 CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES. The Board has power to
contract with other libraries in accordance with the following:
1. Contracting. The Board may contract with any other city, town, school
corporation, township, county, or with the trustees of a county library district for the
use of the Library by their respective residents. Such a contract between the Board
and a county shall supersede all contracts between the Board and townships or
school corporations outside of cities or towns in that county. All of the contracts
mentioned in this subsection shall provide for the rate of tax to be levied by the other
city, town, school corporation, township, county or county library district.
2. Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority vote of
the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a termination
proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing body of a contracting
party on a written petition of not less than five percent (5%) in number of the electors
who voted for governor in the territory of the contracting party at the last general
election. The petition must be presented to the governing body not less than forty
(40) days before the election. The proposition may be submitted at any election
provided by law that is held in the territory of the party seeking to terminate the
contract.
21.07 NONRESIDENT USE. The Board may authorize the use of the Library by
persons not residents of the City in any one or more of the following ways:
1. Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or County,
or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
2. Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other materials
to be loaned to nonresidents.
3. Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that
books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
4. Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other
Library materials to nonresidents.
21.08 LIBRARY ACCOUNT. All money appropriated by the Council from the
General Fund for the operation and maintenance of the Library shall be set aside in an
account for the Library. Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed
by its President (or Vice President in the absence of the President) or the Secretary. The
warrant writing officer is the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 19-01 – Feb. 19 Supp.)
21.09 ANNUAL REPORT. The Library Director, on behalf of the Board, shall make a
report to the Council soon after the close of the fiscal year. This report shall contain
statements as to the condition of the Library.
21.10 INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY. It is unlawful for a person willfully,
maliciously or wantonly to tear, deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any
newspaper, periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging to
the Library or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
21.11 THEFT. No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library
with the intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
21.12 NOTICE POSTED. There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library
notices informing the public of the following:
1. Failure To Return. Failure to return Library materials for two (2) months or
more after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or failure to
return Library equipment for one (1) month or more after the date the person agreed
to return the Library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive the owner, provided
a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that
such material or equipment is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been
made to reclaim the materials or equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
2. Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be detained
and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
CHAPTER 22
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
22.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 22.04 Compensation
22.02 Term of Office 22.05 Powers and Duties
22.03 Vacancies
22.01 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. There shall be appointed by the
Council, after recommendation by the Mayor, a City Planning and Zoning Commission,
hereinafter referred to as the Commission, consisting of nine (9) members, who shall be
residents of the City and qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters
pertaining to the development of a City plan and who shall not hold any elective office in
the City government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 & 392.1)
22.02 TERM OF OFFICE. The term of office of the members of the Commission
shall be five (5) years. The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire
in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
22.03 VACANCIES. If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation,
or otherwise, a successor for the remainder of the term shall be appointed in the same
manner as the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
22.04 COMPENSATION. All members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation, except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
22.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall have and exercise the
following powers and duties:
1. Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its first
regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice
Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during the
Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2. Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
3. Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties
and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other related matters
and may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments, supplements,
changes or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
4. Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of subdivision
or re-subdivisions of land embraced in the City or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots
or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be
dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to the Commission and
its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 23
PARK BOARD
23.01 Creation 23.05 Rules
23.02 Composition 23.06 Penalties
23.03 Duties of the Board 23.07 Rates and Charges
23.04 Reports
23.01 CREATION. A Park Board is hereby created to advise the Council on the needed
facilities and programs to provide open space such as parks, playgrounds, swimming pools
and community facilities for other forms of recreation. It shall also plan and oversee City
programs and encourage other programs for the leisure time of the City’s residents of all
ages. It shall manage all such facilities and Oakshade Cemetery.
23.02 COMPOSITION. The Board shall be composed of five (5) citizen members
appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval of the City Council, for terms of four (4) years.
Board members' terms shall be staggered. The Board shall select its own Chair and shall
establish its own rules of procedure. Members shall receive no compensation for their
services.
(Ord. 18-06 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
23.03 DUTIES OF THE BOARD. In addition to its duty to make a plan for parks,
recreation and the cemetery and for the facilities therefor, and to update and revise these
plans as required, the Board shall have authority over the properties and personnel devoted
to parks, recreation, Community Center, swimming pool and cemetery subject to the
limitation of expenditures for salaries and supplies, contracts and capital outlays set forth
in the annual budget provided by the City Council for park, recreation and cemetery
operations. The Board shall cooperate with the City Manager in the allotment of time of
City employees for park, recreation and cemetery purposes. The Board shall order supplies
by the procedures established by the City Council for all departments of the City, and
payments will be made by warrant check written by the City Treasurer for invoices
submitted and approved by the Board.
(Ord. 18-34 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
23.04 REPORTS. The Board shall make written reports to the City Council of its
activities from time to time as it deems advisable or upon Council request. Its revenues and
expenditures shall be reported monthly by the City Treasurer in the manner of other
departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each member of the Board and
in the City Treasurer report to the City Council.
(Ord. 18-34 – Jan. 19 Supp.)
23.05 RULES. The Board shall have power to make rules and regulations for the use of
parks, Community Center, swimming pool, other recreational facilities and the cemetery,
subject to the approval of the rules by ordinance adopted by the Council. Such rules may
be posted near entrances of the facility in a manner to provide notice to the using public.
However, publication of the ordinance shall be a sufficient notice alone, and failure to post
shall not constitute a defense.
23.06 PENALTIES. Violation of a Board rule which has been approved by the Council
and adopted by ordinance may be cause for denial of use of a facility or participation in a
program, but such denial which extends more than one day may be appealed to the Board,
or the violation may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor.
23.07 RATES AND CHARGES. The Park Board shall at such times as it deems
appropriate recommend changes in fees and charges to the City Council for its
consideration and adoption by resolution.
(Ord. 09-29 – Dec. 09 Supp.)
CHAPTER 24
WATER UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
24.01 Purpose 24.06 Powers and Duties of the Board
24.02 Board Established 24.07 Control of Funds
24.03 Appointment of Trustees 24.08 Accounting
24.04 Compensation 24.09 Discriminatory Rates Illegal
24.05 Vacancies 24.10 Discontinuance of Board
24.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation of the
municipally owned water utility by a board of trustees.
24.02 BOARD ESTABLISHED. Pursuant to an election held August 15, 1950, the
management and control of the municipally owned Water Utility were placed in the
hands of a Board of Trustees.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)
24.03 APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEES. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the
approval of the Council, five (5) persons to serve as trustees for staggered six (6) year
terms. No public officer or salaried employee of the City may serve on the utility board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
(Ord. 12-30 – Feb. 13 Supp.)
24.04 COMPENSATION. The Council shall by resolution set the compensation of
Board members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
24.05 VACANCIES. An appointment to fill a vacancy on the Board of Trustees shall
be made in the same manner as an original appointment except that such appointment
shall be for the balance of the unexpired term.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
24.06 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD. The Board of Trustees may
exercise all powers of the City in relation to the City Utility, with the following
exceptions:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4)
1. Taxes, Ordinances and Bonds. The Board may not certify taxes to be
levied, pass ordinances or amendments, or issue general obligation or special
assessment bonds.
Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[1])
2. Property. Title to all property must be in the name of the City but the
Board has full control of such property subject to limitations imposed by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[2])
3. Reports to Council. The Board shall make a detailed annual report to the
Council including a complete financial statement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[3])
4. Proceedings Published. Immediately following a regular or special
meeting, the Board Secretary shall prepare and cause to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City a condensed statement of proceedings
including a list of all claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[4])
24.07 CONTROL OF FUNDS. The Board shall control tax revenues allocated to it as
well as all moneys derived from operations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)
24.08 ACCOUNTING. Utility moneys are held in a separate utility fund.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)
24.09 DISCRIMINATORY RATES ILLEGAL. The utility may not provide use or
service at a discriminatory rate, except to the City or its agencies, as provided in Section
384.91, Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.6)
24.10 DISCONTINUANCE OF BOARD. A proposal, on motion of the Council or
upon receipt of a valid petition, to discontinue the utility board is subject to the approval
of the voters of the City, except that the Board may be discontinued by resolution of the
Council when the utility it administers is disposed of or leased for a period of over five
(5) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)
CHAPTER 25
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
25.01 Purpose 25.06 Chairperson
25.02 Appointment and Term 25.07 Clerk
25.03 Qualifications 25.08 Records
25.04 Human Rights Commission 25.09 Rooms and Supplies
25.05 Compensation 25.10 Powers and Duties
25.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the appointment,
powers and duties of a Civil Service Commission in accordance with the requirements of
State law.
25.02 APPOINTMENT AND TERM. A Civil Service Commission consisting of
three (3) members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council for
staggered terms of four (4) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.1)
25.03 QUALIFICATIONS. Commissioners must be citizens of Iowa, eligible electors
and residents of the City preceding their appointment. No person while on said
Commission shall hold or be a candidate for any office of public trust.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
25.04 HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
25.03, when a human rights commission has been established, the director thereof shall
ex officio be a member, without vote, of the Civil Service Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
25.05 COMPENSATION. Civil Service Commissioners shall serve without
compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
25.06 CHAIRPERSON. The Commission shall elect a chairperson from among its
members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
25.07 CLERK. The City Clerk shall be clerk of the Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
25.08 RECORDS. The Civil Service Commission shall keep a record of all its
meetings and also a complete individual service record of each civil service employee
which record shall be permanent and kept up to date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
25.09 ROOMS AND SUPPLIES. The Council shall provide suitable rooms in which
the Commission may hold its meetings and supply the Commission with all necessary
equipment and a qualified shorthand reporter or an electronic voice recording device to
enable it to properly perform its duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.5)
25.10 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall administer the civil service
procedure as contained in Chapter 400, Code of Iowa, and amendments thereto and shall
have, exercise and perform all powers and duties as provided thereby.
CHAPTER 26
PUBLIC SERVICES BOARD
26.01 Establishment 26.04 Compensation
26.02 Composition 26.05 Duties
26.03 Vacancies 26.06 Holiday Extra Bag Program
26.01 ESTABLISHMENT. There is established a Marion Public Services Board
which is referred to in this chapter as “the Board.”
26.02 COMPOSITION. The Board shall be composed of five (5) citizen members
appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval of the Council for terms of two (2) years.
Board members’ terms shall be staggered. The Board shall select its own Chair and shall
establish its own rules of procedure.
26.03 VACANCIES. If any vacancy exists on the Board caused by resignation or
otherwise, a successor for the remainder of the term shall be appointed in the same
manner as the original appointee.
26.04 COMPENSATION. The Council shall by resolution set the compensation of
Board members.
26.05 DUTIES. The Board shall have the following duties:
1. Review the day-to-day operations of the Public Services Department and
oversee the proper maintenance of the City streets, sewers, refuse collection and
responsibility of the Public Services Department, including but not limited to:
A. Street installation, maintenance and repair.
B. Snow and ice removal and control.
C. Sanitary sewer installation, maintenance and repair.
D. Storm sewer/drainage facilities installation, maintenance and repair.
E. Solid waste collection and disposal.
F. Recycling.
G. Yard waste collection and composting.
H. Street sweeping.
I. Sidewalk installation, maintenance and repair.
J. Traffic signage and sign maintenance.
K. Street painting.
L. Street tree maintenance and removal.
M. Emergency management (including but not limited to flooding,
windstorm, blizzards and other natural emergencies).
N. Fleet and equipment management and purchase.
2. Propose such ordinance revisions related to the Public Services Department
activities to the Council as the Board deems necessary.
3. Monitor the budget of the Public Services Department.
4. Prepare and submit to the Council a proposed budget for each subsequent
fiscal year.
5. Promulgate rules and regulations for the operation of the Public Services
Department.
6. Make recommendations to the Council regarding any major changes in the
provision of services provided by the Public Services Department.
7. Make recommendations to the Council regarding fee charges for services
provided by the Public Services Department.
8. Make recommendations to the Council regarding department fleet and
equipment purchases.
9. Hear appeals of disciplinary decisions of the City Manager to suspend,
demote or terminate an employee. The Board shall review the same for abuse of
discretion and is not empowered to alter the basic employment relationship from
that of employment at will.
(Ord. 03-34 – Feb. 04 Supp.)
26.06 HOLIDAY EXTRA BAG PROGRAM. The Board shall annually implement a
program allowing residents who receive curb side solid waste pick up service to place a
second refuse container for collection without having placed a sticker on the container for
the collection next following December 25.
(Ord. 03-34 – Feb. 04 Supp.)
CHAPTER 27 PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
CHAPTER 27
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
27.01 Department Created 27.04 Rules
27.02 Duties of the Department 27.05 Building Inspection Division
27.03 Duties of the Director
27.01 DEPARTMENT CREATED. There is created a department of municipal
administration to be known as the Planning and Development Department, referred to in this
chapter as “the Department.” The Department shall be attached to the office of City Manager
and under the City Manager’s general supervision. The Department shall be administered by a
Planning and Development Director, who may be designated as an Assistant to the City
Manager.
27.02 DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT. The Department shall have the following powers
and duties:
1. Administration of planning and zoning matters, to include providing technical
assistance to the Planning and Zoning Commission, City Council and Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
2. Administration of subdivisions and similar platting matters.
3. Administration of street and alley vacation requests.
4. Preparation and administration of grant applications to State and Federal agencies.
5. Provision of assistance to existing and new businesses to promote economic
development efforts.
6. Provision of technical assistance to various boards and commissions as assigned
by the City Manager.
7. As a part of the platting process or at such time as the Director deems it a matter
of public convenience or necessity, the Director shall designate or change the name of
any street in the City and shall assign or change the numbers of the houses or other
buildings located along said street. If not on a plat, the assignment of a name or number
shall be by letter addressed to the property owner as shown in the records of the County
Assessor. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Director on the naming of a street
or the assignment of numbers may appeal within twenty (20) days of the date of his letter
to the City Council.
(Ord. 01-14 – Aug. 01 Supp.)
27.03 DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department shall have the
following duties:
CHAPTER 27 PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
1. Serve as Acting City Manager during the absence of the City Manager.
2. Employ and discharge all assistants necessary to enable the Director to perform
the powers and duties assigned, subject to the provisions of Chapter 400 of the Code of
Iowa.
3. Perform such other and further duties as may be assigned by the City Manager.
27.04 RULES. The Director shall have the power to adopt rules necessary for the exercise of
the powers and duties granted by this chapter and the proper administration of the Department.
Copies of proposed rules shall be filed with the Clerk and submitted to the Council for its review.
If the Council does not amend said rules by resolution within thirty (30) days of filing, the rules
shall be in full force and effect.
27.05 BUILDING INSPECTION DIVISION. Repealed by Ordinance No. 00-39 – Nov. 00
Supplement.
CHAPTER 28 MARION ARTS COUNCIL
CHAPTER 28
MARION ARTS COUNCIL
28.01 Establishment 28.02 Powers and Duties
28.01 ESTABLISHMENT. There is hereby established a Marion Fine Arts Council,
hereinafter referred to in this chapter as “the Arts Council.” The Arts Council shall serve as an
advisory body, and shall be composed of seven (7) persons at least five of whom are residents of
the City, appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the City Council. The members are
to be appointed for staggered three-year terms. The members so appointed shall serve without
compensation. In the event that vacancies may occur in membership of the Arts Council due to
death, resignation or any other cause, the remaining members of the Arts Council shall be
enabled to act even if the vacancy causes there to be fewer than four members who are residents
of the City. Whenever any vacancy on the Arts Council occurs, the remaining members of the
Arts Council shall promptly recommend to the Mayor and City Council that a position is vacant
and that it be filled for an unexpired term. (Ord. 00-34 – Nov. 00 Supp.)
28.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Arts Council shall have the following powers and
duties:
1. Establish its own rules of procedure.
2. Encourage the cooperation and coordination of projects in the field of arts and
other creative events that will enhance the cultural level and activities of the arts in the
community.
3. Encourage individual and group activity in the area of creative writing, music,
drama, plastic and visual art and related activity, as well as any special historical or other
special events as directed by the City Council.
4. Cooperate with colleges and school districts in the Cedar Rapids-Marion area as
well as other groups in the use of facilities and programs which may be available for
future use to foster a broad arts program in the community.
5. Accept or reject gifts made or offered to the Arts Council for use in connection
with the Marion Arts Programs. (Gifts of money shall be deposited with the Finance
Director and shall be credited to the Marion Arts Council Account.)
6. Use space designated by the Parks and Recreation Department in the Marion
Community Center for programs and office needs.
7. Work with the Parks and Recreation Department of the City. (Any matters
requiring the use of funds shall be handled through the normal City receivables and
disbursements procedures.)
8. Cooperate and coordinate activities with the Cedar Rapids-Marion Fine Arts
Council, taking advantage of local and State program assistance. (Members of the
CHAPTER 28 MARION ARTS COUNCIL
Marion Arts Council may be required to serve on the Cedar Rapids-Marion Fine Arts
Council.)
CHAPTER 30 BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT
CHAPTER 30
BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT
30.01 Department Created 30.04 Rules
30.02 Duties of the Department 30.05 Construction Code Review Board
30.03 Duties of the Director
30.01 DEPARTMENT CREATED. There is created a department of municipal
administration to be known as the Building Inspection Department, referred to in this chapter as
“the Department.” The Department shall be attached to the office of City Manager and under the
City Manager’s general supervision. The Department shall be administered by a Building
Inspection Director.
30.02 DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT. The Department shall have the following powers
and duties:
1. Performance of plan reviews and all inspections necessary under the Marion
building, mechanical, plumbing, electrical, dangerous and abandoned building code and
other related codes or ordinances and such other inspections as may be assigned by the
City Manager.
2. Provision of technical assistance to various boards and commissions as assigned
by the City Manager.
3. Perform such other and further duties as may be assigned by the City Manager.
30.03 DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department shall have the
following duties:
1. Employ, discipline and discharge all assistants necessary to enable the Director to
perform the powers and duties assigned, subject to the provisions of Chapter 400 of the
Code of Iowa.
2. Develop rules to implement this chapter.
3. Perform such other and further duties as may be assigned by the City Manager.
30.04 RULES. The Director shall have the power to adopt rules necessary for the exercise of
the powers and duties granted by this chapter and the proper administration of the Department.
Copies of proposed rules shall be filed with the Clerk and submitted to the Council for its review.
If the Council does not amend said rules by resolution within thirty (30) days of filing, the rules
shall be in full force and effect.
(Ord. 00-39 – Nov. 00 Supp.)
CHAPTER 30 BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT
30.05 CONSTRUCTION CODE REVIEW BOARD.
1. Organization. A Construction Code Review Board is hereby established, which
shall consist of eleven members. The word “Board” when used in this section shall mean
the Construction Code Review Board. Membership of the Board shall be as follows:
A. Two (2) members of the Board shall represent general construction
contractors of residential construction and commercial/industrial construction,
five (5) members of the Board shall represent the construction trades including;
electrical, plumbing, mechanical, fire protection or similar, two (2) members of
the Board shall represent State licensed professionals including; registered
architect in the State of Iowa and registered structural or civil engineer in the State
of Iowa and two (2) members of the Board shall be private citizens, all of whom
shall be residents of the City. Board membership shall be a diverse and fair
representation of all building construction interested parties and facets such as;
contractor and journeyman, management and labor, licensed professional and
private citizens.
B. Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the Council to serve four year terms. Initial members shall be appointed for the
following terms from January 1: three for one year, three for two years, three for
three years and two for four years.
C. Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council for
any unexpired term.
D. The Board shall elect a Chairperson and shall adopt rules of procedure in
accordance with the provisions of this section and the Code of Iowa.
E. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at
such other times as the Board may determine.
2. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this Board is to:
A. Promote public safety and general welfare through the recognition of a
coordinated set of construction codes.
B. Provide a centralized point of construction code communications for all
interested groups and individuals.
C. Promote harmony and consistency in construction code adoption.
3. Powers. The Board shall have the following powers:
A. To make recommendations to the City Council such new legislation for
adoption of construction codes as is consistent with the findings of the Board.
B. To hear testimony, conduct studies and review documentation necessary
for the determination of the Board.
(Ord. 03-35 – Feb. 04 Supp.)
CHAPTER 31
CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
31.01 Declaration of Purpose 31.20 Fair Housing – Discrimination in Provision of
31.02 Definitions Brokerage Services
31.03 Marion Civil Rights Commission 31.21 Fair Housing – Exceptions for Lawful Source
31.04 Powers and Duties of Income
31.05 Unfair Employment Practices 31.22 Fair Housing – Administrative Enforcement;
31.06 Unfair Practices – Public Accommodations Preliminary Matters
31.07 Unfair Credit Practices 31.23 Fair Housing – Probable Cause Determination
31.08 Unfair or Discriminatory Practices – Education and Effect
31.09 Aiding, Abetting, or Retaliation 31.24 Fair Housing – Enforcement by Commission
31.10 Interference, Coercion, or Intimidation 31.25 Fair Housing – Review by Commission; Service
31.11 Sex or Age Provisions Not Applicable to Retirement of Final Order
Plans 31.26 Fair Housing – Judicial Review; Review of Order
31.12 Complaint Investigation 31.27 Fair Housing – Civil Action Elected
31.13 Administrative Hearing 31.28 Fair Housing – Civil Proceedings
31.14 Remedies 31.29 Fair Housing – Attorney’s Fees
31.15 Judicial Review of Commission Action 31.30 Fair Housing – Conciliation and Persuasion
31.16 Judicial Review – Enforcement 31.31 Fair Housing – Failure to Honor Commitment
31.17 Sixty-Day Administrative Release 31.32 Fair Housing – Confidentiality
31.18 Fair Housing – General 31.33 Fair Housing – Cooperation with State and
31.19 Fair Housing – Discrimination in Residential Real Federal Agencies Administering Fair
Estate-Related Transactions Housing Laws
31.01 DECLARATION OF PURPOSE. The purposes of the City in
enacting this chapter are:
1. To secure for all individuals within the City freedom from
discrimination because of age, color, creed, disability, familial status,
gender identity, lawful source of income, including housing subsidies
and vouchers, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex, or sexual
orientation in connection with employment, public accommodations,
housing, credit, and education; and thereby to protect the personal
dignity of these individuals, to ensure their full productive capacities, to
preserve the public safety, health, and general welfare, and to promote
the interests, rights, and privileges of individuals within the City;
2. To provide for execution within the City of the policies embodied
in the Iowa Civil Rights Act of 1965, as amended, in the Federal Civil
Rights Act, as amended, the Federal Fair Housing Act, as amended, and
in the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, and to
promote cooperation between the City and the State and Federal
agencies enforcing those acts; and
3. To provide, at the local level, a Civil Rights Commission
dedicated to the following: effective enforcement of this chapter; service
as a source of information to employers, business persons, employees,
laborers, tenants, and other individuals relative to various civil rights
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
legislation and regulations; and active assistance to prevent and eliminate
the effects of discriminatory acts and/or discriminatory practices.
This chapter shall be interpreted according to the fair import of its terms and
shall be liberally construed to further the general purposes stated in this section
and the special purposes of the particular provision involved.
31.02 DEFINITIONS. Unless the context otherwise requires:
1. “Assistance animal” means any animal that assists, supports, or
provides service to a person with a disability. An assistance animal is
not a pet. The term “assistance animal” includes, but is not limited to:
A. Support animals that provide an individual with a disability
with emotional support, comfort, therapy, companionship, or
therapeutic benefits, promote the individual’s emotional wellbeing,
or by their mere presence and without training, ameliorate
one or more identified symptoms or effects of the individual’s
mental or emotional disability. Support animals are not required
to be certified or trained.
B. Assistive animals that perform or provide a disabilityrelated
service, task, or function for an individual with a
disability, including, but not limited to, guiding individuals who
are blind or have low vision, alerting individuals who are deaf or
hard of hearing to the presence of people or sounds, providing
minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, fetching
items, alerting an individual to the onset of a seizure, assisting an
individual during a seizure, retrieving medicine or the telephone,
providing physical support to assist with balance and stability to
individuals with mobility disabilities, and assisting individuals,
including those with cognitive disabilities, with navigation.
Assistive animals are not required to be certified but must either
be individually trained to do work or perform or provide a
service, function, or a task for the benefit of an individual with a
disability or, despite the lack of individual training, be able to
work or perform or provide a service, function, or a task for the
benefit of an individual with a disability.
2. “Commission” means the Marion Civil Rights Commission
created by this chapter.
3. “Commissioner” means a member of the Commission.
4. “Complainant” means that person filing a complaint as provided
in this chapter.
5. “Court” means the District Court in and for Linn County, Iowa.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
6. “Disability,” with respect to an individual, means:
A. A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits
one or more major life activities of such individual and the
condition of a person with a positive human immunodeficiency
virus test result, a diagnosis of acquired immune deficiency
syndrome, a diagnosis of acquired immune deficiency syndrome
related complex, or any other condition related to acquired
immune deficiency syndrome. The inclusion of a condition
related to a positive human immunodeficiency virus test results,
in the meaning of “disability” under the provisions of this chapter,
does not preclude the application of the provisions of this chapter
to conditions resulting from other infectious or contagious
diseases.
(1) As described, a “physical or mental impairment”
means: (i) any physiological disorder or condition,
cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or
more of the following body systems: neurological,
musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory
(including speech organs), cardiovascular, reproductive,
digestive, genitourinary, hemic and lymphatic, skin, and
endocrine; or (ii) any mental or psychological disorder such
as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or
mental illness, and specific learning disabilities.
(2) The phrase “physical or mental impairment”
includes, but is not limited to, such contagious and noncontagious
diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual,
speech, and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, epilepsy,
muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart
disease, diabetes, mental retardation, emotional illness,
specific learning disabilities, HIV disease (whether
symptomatic or asymptomatic), tuberculosis, drug
addiction (other than addiction caused by current, illegal
use of a controlled substance), and alcoholism.
(3) As described, “major life activities” include, but are
not limited to, caring for oneself, performing manual tasks,
seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, lifting,
bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading,
concentrating, thinking, communicating, and working; and
also include the operation of a major bodily function,
including, but not limited to, functions of the immune
system, normal cell growth, digestive, bowel, bladder,
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
neurological, brain, respiratory, circulatory, endocrine, and
reproductive functions.
B. A record of such an impairment.
C. Being regarded as having such an impairment, as
described:
(1) An individual meets the requirement of being
regarded as having such an impairment if the individual
establishes that he or she has been subjected to an action
prohibited under this chapter because of an actual or
perceived physical or mental impairment, whether or not
the impairment limits or is perceived to limit a major life
activity.
(2) This provision shall not apply to impairments that
are both transitory and minor. A “transitory impairment”
is an impairment with an actual or expected duration of six
months or less.
D. The definition of “disability” shall be construed in
accordance with the following:
(1) In favor of broad coverage of individuals under this
chapter, to the maximum extent permitted by the terms of
this chapter.
(2) “Substantially limits” shall be interpreted
consistently with the findings and purposes of the ADA
Amendments Act of 2008.
(3) An impairment that substantially limits one major
life activity need not limit other major life activities in
order to be considered a disability.
(4) An impairment that is episodic or in remission is a
disability if it would substantially limit a major life activity
when active.
(5) The determination of whether an impairment
substantially limits a major life activity shall be made
without regard to the ameliorative effects of mitigating
measures such as:
a. Medication, medical supplies, equipment,
appliances, low vision devices (which do not
include ordinary eyeglasses or contact lenses),
prosthetics including limbs and devices, hearing
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
aids and cochlear implants or other implantable
hearing devices, mobility devices, or oxygen
therapy equipment and supplies.
b. Use of assistive technology.
c. Reasonable accommodations or auxiliary
aids or services.
d. Learned behavioral or adaptive neurological
modifications.
The ameliorative effects of the mitigating measures of
ordinary eyeglasses or contact lenses shall be considered in
determining whether an impairment substantially limits a
major life activity. As used in this paragraph, “ordinary
eyeglasses or contact lenses” means lenses that are intended
to fully correct visual acuity or eliminate refractive error.
“Low vision devices” means devices that magnify, enhance,
or otherwise augment a visual image.
7. “Employee” means any person employed by an employer.
8. “Employer” means the City of Marion or any board, commission,
or department thereof, or any political subdivision, institution, or school
district and every other person who employs employees within the City.
9. “Employment agency” means any person undertaking to procure
employees or opportunities to work for any other person or persons
holding himself/herself or itself to be equipped to do so.
10. “Executive Director” means an employee of the Commission,
selected by and serving at the will of the Commission as Executive
Director, who shall have such duties, powers, and authority as may be
conferred upon him/her by the Commission, subject to the provisions of
this chapter.
11. “Familial status” means one or more individuals under the age of
18 domiciled with one of the following:
A. A parent or another person having legal custody of the
individual or individuals;
B. The designee of the parent or the other person having
custody of the individual or individuals, with the written
permission of the parent or other person;
C. A person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing
legal custody of the individual or individuals.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
12. “Gender identity” means a person’s actual or perceived genderrelated
identity, appearance, expression, behavior, or other attributes,
regardless of the person’s assigned sex at birth.
13. “Labor organization” means any organization which exists for the
purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining, of dealing with
employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or
of other mutual aid or protection in connection with employment.
14. “Lawful source of income” means any lawful, verifiable source of
money paid directly or indirectly to or on behalf of a renter or buyer of
housing, including income derived from:
A. Any lawful profession or occupation.
B. Any government or private assistance, subsidy, voucher,
grant, or loan program.
C. Any gift, inheritance, pension, annuity, alimony, child
support, or other consideration or benefit.
D. Any sale or pledge of property or interest in property.
15. “Marital status” means the state of being single, married,
separated, divorced, remarried, or a surviving spouse.
16. “Person” means one or more individuals, partnerships,
associations, corporations, labor organizations, mutual companies, jointstock
companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, legal
representatives, trustees, trustees in cases under Title 11 (of the United
States Code), receivers, fiduciaries, any other business entity whether for
profit or otherwise, and the City of Marion, or any board, commission,
department, agency, or other political subdivision or part thereof within
the City.
17. “Person charged” or “respondent” means that person or persons who
are alleged or found to have committed an act prohibited by this chapter.
[The next page is 154.1]
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
18. “Public accommodation” means each and every place, establishment, or
facility, of whatever kind, nature, or class, that caters or offers services, facilities,
or goods for a fee or charge to nonmembers of any organization or association
utilizing the place, establishment, or facility, provided that any place,
establishment, or facility that caters or offers services, facilities, or goods to the
nonmembers gratuitously shall be deemed a public accommodation if the
accommodation receives any governmental support or subsidy. Public
accommodation does not mean any bona fide private club or other place,
establishment, or facility that by its nature is distinctly private, except where such
distinctly private place, establishment, or facility caters or offers services,
facilities, or goods to the nonmembers for a fee or charge or gratuitously, it shall
be deemed a public accommodation during such period. Public accommodation
includes each local government unit or tax-supported district of whatever kind,
nature, or class that offers services, facilities, benefits, grants or goods to the
public, gratuitously, or otherwise. This paragraph shall not be construed by
negative implication or otherwise to restrict any part or portion of the pre-existing
definition of the term “public accommodation.”
19. “Service animal” means any dog or animal individually trained to do work
or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, but
not limited to, guiding individuals who are blind or have low vision, alerting
individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing to the presence of people or sounds,
providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, fetching items,
assisting an individual during a seizure, retrieving medicine or the telephone,
providing physical support to assist with balance and stability to individuals with
mobility disabilities, and assisting individuals, including those with cognitive
disabilities, with navigation. The term service animal includes individually trained
animals that do work or perform tasks for the benefit of individuals with
disabilities, including psychiatric, cognitive, and mental disabilities. A service
animal is not a pet.
20. “Sexual orientation” means actual, history of or perceived heterosexuality,
homosexuality, or bisexuality. “Sexual orientation” does not include participation
in acts which are prohibited. (2-99)
21. “Unfair practice” or “discriminatory practice” means those practices
specified as unfair or discriminatory in this chapter. An unfair or discriminatory
practice shall be deemed to be a continuing violation of this chapter where such
practice is one of a series of acts each of which constitutes an unfair or
discriminatory practice in whole or in part, and as otherwise specified in this
chapter.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
31.03 MARION CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION.
1. The Marion Civil Rights Commission shall consist of 11 members
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Membership on
the Commission shall be broadly representative of the City’s population and shall
have diverse representation of the City’s population and its protected classes.
2. The term of office of each member of the Commission is three years, and
members shall continue to serve until reappointed or replaced. A member chosen
to fill a vacancy otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be appointed for the
unexpired term of the member whom he/she is to succeed. A member of the
Commission is eligible for reappointment but shall not serve more than three
consecutive three-year terms. Members who miss three consecutive meetings or
four meetings within 12 months will be replaced; however, special or unusual
circumstances will be considered.
3. The Commission members shall serve without compensation but shall be
reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties with
approval of the Commission and within the limits established in the City budget.
4. The Commission shall annually elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson
from among its members. The Chairperson shall serve for no more than three
consecutive 12-month periods. The Vice Chairperson shall serve for no more than
three consecutive 12-month periods. The election of officers shall be held at the
first regularly scheduled meeting after the first of the year.
5. The Commission may name subcommittees which, in its judgment, will aid
in effectuating the purpose of this chapter, and may empower them to study the
problems of prejudice, intolerance, bigotry, and discrimination in any fields of
human relationships within the purview of this chapter. The Commission may, by
rule, establish committees to exercise its powers. Officers shall serve in their
respective offices for a term of one year or until a successor shall be appointed.
6. The Commission is authorized to employ and dismiss a Commission staff
consisting of a full-time paid Executive Director, and to employ such additional
staff and supply such facilities as it deems necessary to properly carry out its
work. This shall be done within the budget established by the Commission and to
be first approved by the City Council before any expenses are incurred.
7. The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting during each
calendar month. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the current members
serving. The Chairperson or Vice Chairperson, in the absence of the Chairperson,
or any three members may call a special meeting by giving at least three days’
notice to every member of the Commission. The notice for a special meeting shall
include an agenda and only matters included in that agenda may be discussed at
the meeting.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
8. The Commission may, pursuant to Commission rules, recommend to the
Mayor and City Council that a Commissioner be removed for neglect of duties or
malfeasance in office.
9. The Commission may adopt, amend, or rescind such rules as may be
necessary for the conduct of its business.
31.04 POWERS AND DUTIES. In the enforcement of this chapter, the Commission
shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To appoint and prescribe the duties of Executive Director and such
investigators and other employees and agents as the Commission shall deem
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
2. To initiate, receive, investigate, conciliate, and determine the merits of
complaints alleging unfair or discriminatory practices.
3. To investigate and study the existence, character, causes, and extent of
discrimination in public accommodations, employment, apprenticeship programs, onthe-
job training programs, vocational schools, credit practices, housing, and education
in the City and to attempt the elimination of such discrimination by education and
conciliation.
4. To seek a temporary injunction against a respondent when it appears that a
complainant may suffer irreparable injury as a result of an alleged violation of this
chapter. A temporary injunction may only be issued ex-parte, if the complaint filed
with the Commission alleges discrimination in housing. In all other cases, a
temporary injunction may be issued only after the respondent has been notified and
afforded the opportunity to be heard.
5. To petition the District Court to seek a subpoena for books, papers, records
and any other material evidence necessary to the investigation of any complaint filed
pursuant to this chapter.
6. To hold hearings upon any complaint made against a respondent; to
subpoena witnesses and compel their attendance at such hearings; to administer oaths
and take the testimony of any person under oath and to compel such person to
produce for examination any books and papers relating to any matter involved in
such complaint. Such hearing may be held by the Commission, a panel of the
Commission, or any Commissioner, or any hearing examiner appointed by the
Commission. If a witness either fails or refuses to obey a Commission demand,
the Commission may direct the City Attorney to file a petition in the name of the
Commission in the District Court to issue a subpoena for witnesses in the same
manner and for the same purposes on behalf of the respondent, on respondent’s
request.
7. To issue such publications and reports of investigations and research as in
the judgment of the Commission shall tend to promote good will amongst the
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
various protected classes, including age, color, creed, disability, familial status,
gender identity, lawful source of income, marital status, national origin, race,
religion, sex, or sexual orientation, of the City and which shall tend to minimize or
eliminate discrimination in public accommodations, employment, apprenticeship
and on-the-job training programs, vocational schools, or housing.
8. To prepare and transmit to the Mayor and City Council from time to time,
but not less than once a year, reports describing the proceedings, investigations,
hearings conducted and the outcome thereof, decisions rendered, and the other work
performed by the Commission.
9. To make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council for such further
legislation concerning discrimination because age, color, creed, disability, familial
status, gender identity, lawful source of income, marital status, national origin,
race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation as it may deem necessary and desirable.
10. To cooperate, within the limits of any appropriations made for its operation
with other agencies or organizations, both public and private, whose purposes are
consistent with those of this chapter, and in the planning and conducting of
programs designed to fulfill the declaration of purpose as specified in Section
31.01 of this chapter.
11. To adopt, publish, amend, and rescind regulations consistent with and
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
12. To hold meetings at intervals of not less than one per month at a time and
place to be determined by the Commission.
13. To receive, administer, dispense, and account for any funds that may be
voluntarily contributed to the Commission and any grants that may be awarded the
Commission for furthering the purposes of this chapter with the approval of the
Mayor and City Council.
14. To issue subpoenas and order discovery as provided by this section in aid
of investigations and hearings of alleged unfair or discriminatory practices. The
subpoenas and discovery may be ordered to the same extent and are subject to the
same limitations as subpoenas and discovery in a civil action in District Court.
15. The Commission may delegate any of its functions, duties, and powers to
its staff including functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating,
conciliating, determining, certifying, reporting, or otherwise acting as to any work,
business or matter under this chapter.
31.05 UNFAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.
1. It is an unfair or discriminatory practice for any:
A. Person to refuse to hire, accept, register, classify, or refer for
employment, to discharge any employee, or to otherwise discriminate in
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
employment against any applicant for employment or any employee
because of the age, color, creed, disability, familial status, gender identity,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation of
the applicant or employee, unless based upon the nature of the occupation.
B. Labor organization, or the employees, agents or members thereof, to
refuse to admit to membership any applicant, to expel any member, or to
otherwise discriminate against any applicant for membership or any
member in the privileges, rights, or benefits of such membership because of
the age, color, creed, disability, familial status, gender identity, marital
status, national origin, race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation of such
applicant or member.
C. Employer, employment agency, labor organization, or the
employees, agents or members thereof, to directly or indirectly advertise or
in any other manner indicate or publicize that individuals of any particular
age, color, creed, disability, familial status, gender identity, marital status,
national origin, race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation are unwelcome,
objectionable, not acceptable, or not solicited for employment or
membership unless based on the nature of the occupation.
D. Person to solicit or require as a condition of employment of any
employee or prospective employee a test for the presence of the antibody to
the human immunodeficiency virus or to affect the terms, conditions or
privileges of employment or terminate the employment of any employee
solely as a result of the employee obtaining a test for the presence of the
antibody to the human immunodeficiency virus. An agreement between an
employer, employment agency, labor organization, or their employees, agents,
or members and an employee or prospective employee concerning
employment, pay or benefits to an employee or prospective employee in return
for taking a test for the presence of the antibody to the human
immunodeficiency virus, is prohibited. The prohibitions of this paragraph, as
it relates to tests for the presence of the antibody to the human
immunodeficiency virus, do not apply if the state epidemiologist determines
and the director of public health declares through the utilization of guidelines
established by the Centers for Disease Control of the United States
Department of Health and Human Services that a person with a condition
related to acquired immune deficiency syndrome poses a significant risk of
transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus to other persons in a
specific occupation.
2. Employment policies relating to pregnancy and childbirth shall be governed
by the following:
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
A. A written or unwritten employment policy or practice which
excludes from employment applicants or employees because of the
employee’s pregnancy is a prima facie violation of this chapter.
B. Disabilities caused or contributed to by the employee's pregnancy,
miscarriage, childbirth, and recovery there from are, for all job-related
purposes, temporary disabilities and shall be treated as such under any
health or temporary disability insurance or sick leave plan available in
connection with employment. Written and unwritten employment policies
and practices involving matters such as the commencement and duration of
leave, the availability of extensions, the accrual of seniority and other
benefits and privileges, reinstatement, and payment under any health or
temporary disability insurance or sick leave plan, formal or informal, shall
be applied to a disability due to the employee's pregnancy or giving birth,
on the same terms and conditions as they are applied to other temporary
disabilities.
C. Disabilities caused or contributed to by legal abortion and recovery
there from are, for all job-related purposes, temporary disabilities and shall
be treated as such under any temporary disability or sick leave plan
available in connection with employment. Written and unwritten
employment policies and practices involving matters such as the
commencement and duration of leave, the availability of extensions, the
accrual of seniority and other benefits and privileges, reinstatement, and
payment under any temporary disability insurance or sick leave plan,
formal or informal, shall be applied to a disability due to legal abortion on
the same terms and conditions as they are applied to other temporary
disabilities. The employer may elect to exclude health insurance coverage
for abortion from a plan provided by the employer, except where the life of
the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term or where
medical complications have arisen from an abortion.
D. An employer shall not terminate the employment of a person
disabled by pregnancy because of the employee's pregnancy.
E. Where a leave is not available or a sufficient leave is not available
under any health or temporary disability insurance or sick leave plan
available in connection with employment, the employer of the pregnant
employee shall not refuse to grant to the employee who is disabled by the
pregnancy a leave of absence if the leave of absence is for the period that
the employee is disabled because of the employee’s pregnancy, childbirth,
or related medical conditions, or for eight weeks, whichever is less.
However, the employee must provide timely notice of the period of leave
requested, and the employer must approve any change in the period
requested before the change is effective. Before granting the leave of
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
absence, the employer may require that the employee’s disability resulting
from pregnancy be verified by medical certification stating that the
employee is not able to reasonably person the duties of employment.
3. This section shall not apply to:
A. Discrimination on the basis of age if the person subject to the
discrimination is under the age of 18 years, unless that person is considered
by law to be an adult.
B. Employment of individuals for work within the home of the
employer if the employer or members of the employer’s family reside
therein during such employment.
C. A State or Federal program designed to benefit a specific age
classification which serves a bona fide public purpose.
D. Age discrimination in a bona fide apprenticeship program if the
employee is over 45 years of age.
E. Any employer who regularly employs fewer than four individuals.
For purposes of this subsection, individuals who are members of the
employer's family shall not be counted as employees.
F. The employment of individuals to render personal services to the
person of the employer or members of the employer’s family.
G. Any bona fide religious institution or its educational facility,
association, corporation, or society with respect to any qualifications for
employment based on religion when such qualifications are related to a
bona fide religious purpose. A religious qualification for instructional
personnel or an administrative officer serving in a supervisory capacity of a
bona fide religious educational facility or religious institution shall be
presumed to be a bona fide occupational qualification.
31.06 UNFAIR PRACTICES - PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS.
1. Discriminatory Practices. It is an unfair or discriminatory practice for any
owner, lessee, sub-lessee, proprietor, manager, or superintendent of any public
accommodation or any agent or employee thereof:
A. To refuse or deny to any person, because of age, color, creed,
disability, familial status, gender identity, marital status, national origin,
race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation, the accommodations, advantages,
facilities, services, or privileges thereof, or otherwise to discriminate
against any person because of age, color, creed, disability, familial status,
gender identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex, or sexual
orientation in the furnishing of such accommodations, advantages,
facilities, services, or privileges. A public accommodation shall not
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
discriminate against a person because of age, color, creed, disability,
familial status, gender identity, marital status, national origin, race, religion,
sex, or sexual orientation by: (i) providing any disposition, service,
financial aid, or benefit to an individual which is different, or is provided in
a different manner, from that provided to other members of the general
public, except to reasonably accommodate a member of the protected
classes who otherwise might be precluded from receiving a benefit, access
to, or participation in a program; (ii) subjecting any individual to
segregation or separate treatment in any matter related to that individual’s
receipt of any disposition, service, financial aid, or benefit provided to other
members of the general public; (iii) restricting an individual in any way in
the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege enjoyed by others receiving
any disposition, service, financial aid, or benefit provided to other members
of the general public; (iv) treating an individual differently from others in
determining whether that individual satisfies any admission, enrollment,
quota, eligibility, membership, or other requirement or condition which
individuals must meet in order to be provided any disposition, service,
financial aid, function, or benefit available to other members of the general
public; or (v) denying an individual an opportunity to participate in a
program through the provision of service or otherwise afford that individual
an opportunity to do so which is different from that afforded to other
members of the general public.
B. To directly or indirectly advertise or in any other manner indicate or
publicize that the patronage of persons of any particular age, color, creed,
disability, familial status, gender identity, marital status, national origin,
race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation is unwelcome, objectionable, not
acceptable, or not solicited.
2. Disability Discrimination – Additional Provisions. It shall be an unfair or
discriminatory practice for any owner, lessee, sub-lessee, proprietor, manager, or
superintendent of any public accommodation or any agent or employee thereof:
A. To subject an individual or class of individuals on the basis of a
disability or disabilities of such individual or class, directly, or through
contractual, licensing, or other arrangements, to a denial of the opportunity
of the individual or class to participate in or benefit from the goods,
services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of an entity.
B. To afford an individual or class of individuals, on the basis of a
disability or disabilities of such individual or class, directly, or through
contractual, licensing, or other arrangements with the opportunity to
participate in or benefit from a good, service, facility, privilege, advantage,
or accommodation that is not equal to that afforded to other individuals.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
C. To provide an individual or class of individuals, on the basis of a
disability or disabilities of such individual or class, directly, or through
contractual, licensing, or other arrangements with a good, service, facility,
privilege, advantage, or accommodation that is different or separate from
that provided to other individuals, unless such action is necessary to
provide the individual or class of individuals with a good, service, facility,
privilege, advantage, or accommodation, or other opportunity that is as
effective as that provided to others.
For purposes of Section 2 (A) through (C), the term “individual or class of
individuals” refers to the clients or customers of the covered public
accommodation that enters into the contractual, licensing or other
arrangement.
D. To fail to afford goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages,
and accommodations to an individual with a disability in the most
integrated setting appropriate to the needs of the individual.
Notwithstanding the existence of separate or different programs or
activities provided in accordance with this section, an individual with a
disability shall not be denied the opportunity to participate in such
programs or activities that are not separate or different to permit the use of
a service animal by an individual with a disability.
(1) A public accommodation may ask an individual with a
disability to remove a service animal from the premises if:
a. The animal is out of control and the animal’s handler
does not take effective action to control it;
b. The animal is not housebroken or the animal’s
presence or behavior fundamentally alters the nature of the
service the public accommodation provides (e.g., repeated
barking during a live performance); or
c. The animal poses a direct threat to the health or safety
of others that cannot be eliminated by reasonable
modifications.
(2) If a place of accommodation properly excludes a service
animal, it shall give the individual with a disability the opportunity
to obtain goods, services, and accommodations without having the
service animal on the premises.
(3) The work or tasks performed by a service animal shall be
directly related to the handler’s disability. A service animal that
accompanies an individual with a disability into a place of public
accommodation shall be individually trained to do work or perform a
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
task, housebroken, and under the control of its handler. A service
animal shall have a harness, leash, or other tether.
(4) A public accommodation is not responsible for caring for or
supervising a service animal.
(5) A public accommodation shall not ask about the nature or
extent of a person’s disability, but can determine whether an animal
qualifies as a service animal. For example, a public accommodation
may ask if the animal is required because of a disability; and what
work or task the animal has been trained to perform. A public
accommodation shall not require documentation, such as proof that
the animal has been certified or licensed as a service animal.
(6) Individuals with disabilities who are accompanied by service
animals may access all areas of a place of public accommodation
where members of the public, program participants, and invitees are
allowed to go.
(7) A public accommodation shall not ask or require an
individual with a disability to post a deposit, pay a fee or surcharge,
or comply with other requirements not generally applicable to other
patrons as a condition of permitting a service animal to accompany
its handler in a place of public accommodation, even if people
accompanied by pets are required to do so. If a public
accommodation normally charges its clients or customers for
damage that they cause, a customer with a disability may be charged
for damage caused by his or her service animal.
E. To fail to take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that no
individual with a disability is excluded, denied services, segregated, or
otherwise treated differently than other individuals because of the absence
of auxiliary aids and services, unless the public accommodation can
demonstrate that taking such steps would fundamentally alter the nature of
the good, service, facility, privilege, advantage, or accommodation being
offered or would result in an undue burden. For purposes of this paragraph:
(1) “Auxiliary aids and services” means:
a. Qualified interpreters or other effective methods of
making aurally delivered materials available to individuals
with hearing impairments;
b. Qualified readers, taped texts, or other effective
methods of making visually delivered materials available to
individuals with visual impairments;
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
c. Acquisition or modification of equipment or devices;
and
d. Other similar services and actions.
(2) “Undue burden” means significant difficulty or expense. In
determining whether an action would result in an undue burden,
factors to be considered include:
a. The nature and cost of the action needed under this
part;
b. The overall financial resources of the site or sites
involved in the action; the number of persons employed at the
site; the effect on expenses and resources; legitimate safety
requirements that are necessary for safe operation, including
crime prevention measures; or the impact otherwise of the
action upon the operation of the site;
c. The geographic separateness, and the administrative or
fiscal relationship of the site or sites in question to any parent
corporation or entity;
d. If applicable, the overall financial resources of any
parent corporation or entity; the overall size of the parent
corporation or entity with respect to the number of its
employees; the number, type, and location of its facilities; and
e. If applicable, the type of operation or operations of any
parent corporation or entity, including the composition,
structure, and functions of the workforce of the parent
corporation or entity.
F. To fail to remove architectural barriers and communication barriers
that are structural in nature in facilities constructed for first occupancy on
or after a date that is one year after effective date of this code revision, and
transportation barriers in existing vehicles and rail passenger cars used by
an establishment for transporting individuals (not including barriers that
can only be removed through the retrofitting of vehicles or rail passenger
cars by the installation of hydraulic or other lift), where such removal is
readily achievable.
(1) Examples of steps to remove barriers include, but are not
limited to, the following actions:
a. Installing ramps;
b. Making curb cuts in sidewalks and entrances;
c. Repositioning shelves;
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
d. Rearranging tables, chairs, vending machines, display
racks, and other furniture;
e. Repositioning telephones;
f. Adding raised markings on elevator control buttons;
g. Installing flashing alarm lights;
h. Widening doors;
i. Installing offset hinges to widen doorways;
j. Eliminating a turnstile or providing an alternative
accessible path;
k. Installing accessible door hardware;
l. Installing grab bars in toilet stalls;
m. Rearranging toilet partitions to increase maneuvering
space; Insulating lavatory pipes under sinks to prevent burns;
n. Installing a raised toilet seat;
o. Installing a full-length bathroom mirror;
p. Repositioning the paper towel dispenser in a bathroom;
q. Creating designated accessible parking spaces;
r. Installing an accessible paper cup dispenser at an existing
inaccessible water fountain;
s. Removing high pile, low density carpeting; or
t. Installing vehicle hand controls.
(2) Where the public accommodation can demonstrate that the
removal of a barrier under this section is not readily achievable, a
failure to make such goods, services, facilities, privileges,
advantages, or accommodations available through alternative
methods if such methods are readily achievable.
(3) Barrier removal under this section should be accomplished in
accordance with the following order of priorities.
a. First, a public accommodation should take measures to
provide access to a place of public accommodation from
public sidewalks, parking, or public transportation. These
measures include, for example, installing an entrance ramp,
widening entrances, and providing accessible parking spaces.
b. Second, a public accommodation should take measures
to provide access to those areas of a place of public
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
accommodation where goods and services are made available to
the public. These measures include, for example, adjusting the
layout of display racks, rearranging tables, providing braided
and raised character signage, widening doors, providing
visual alarms, and installing ramps.
c. Third, a public accommodation should take measures
to provide access to restroom facilities. These measures include,
for example, removal of obstructing furniture or vending
machines, widening of doors, installation of ramps, providing
accessible signage, widening of toilet stalls, and installation
of grab bars.
d. Fourth, a public accommodation should take any other
measures necessary to provide access to the goods, services,
facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of a
place of public accommodation.
If the measures required to remove a barrier would not be readily
achievable, a public accommodation may take other readily achievable
measures to remove the barrier that do not fully comply with the specified
requirements. Such measures include, for example, providing a ramp with
a steeper slope or widening a doorway to a narrower width than that
mandated by the alterations requirements. No measure shall be taken,
however, that poses a significant risk to the health or safety of individuals
with disabilities or others.
G. To fail to design and/or construct facilities for first occupancy on or
after one year following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this
section that are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with
disabilities, which for the purposes of this section means meeting the
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility
Guidelines For Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG), except where the public
accommodation can demonstrate that it is structurally impracticable to meet
such requirements or it is specifically exempted by law or regulation from
complying with the ADAAG. With respect to a facility or part thereof that
is altered by, on behalf of, or for the use of an establishment in a manner
that affects or could affect the usability of the facility or part thereof, a
failure to make alterations in such a manner that, to the maximum extent
feasible, the altered portions of the facility are readily accessible to and
usable by individuals with disabilities, including individuals who use
wheelchairs. Where the public accommodation is undertaking an alteration
that affects or could affect usability of or access to an area of the facility
containing a primary function, the public accommodation shall also make
the alterations in such a manner that, to the maximum extent feasible, the
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
path of travel to the altered area and the bathrooms, telephones, and
drinking fountains serving the altered area, are readily accessible to and
usable by individuals with disabilities where such alterations to the path of
travel or the bathrooms, telephones, and drinking fountains serving the
altered area are not disproportionate to the overall alterations in terms of
cost and scope.
3. Elevators. This section shall not be construed to require the installation of
an elevator for facilities that are less than three stories or have less than 3,000
square feet per story unless the building is a shopping center, a shopping mall, or
the professional office of a healthcare provider.
4. Accessibility Guidelines Adopted. For the purposes of this section, the
City hereby adopts by reference the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility
Guidelines (Appendix A to 28 CFR Part 36-Standards for Accessible Design). In
the event a facility or any part of a facility is subject to more than one accessibility
standard or guideline, the building, structure, or site shall comply with the stricter
standard or guideline.
5. Definitions. For purposes of this Section 31.06:
A. “Facility” means all or any portion of buildings, structures, sites,
complexes, equipment, rolling stock or other conveyances, roads, walks,
passageways, parking lots, or other real or personal property, including the
site where the building, property, structure, or equipment is located.
B. “Readily achievable” means easily accomplishable and able to be
carried out without much difficulty or expense. In determining whether an
action is readily achievable factors to be considered include:
(1) The nature and cost of the action needed under this part;
(2) The overall financial resources of the site or sites involved in
the action; the number of persons employed at the site; the effect on
expenses and resources; legitimate safety requirements that are
necessary for safe operation, including crime prevention measures;
or the impact otherwise of the action upon the operation of the site;
(3) The geographic separateness, and the administrative or fiscal
relationship of the site or sites in question to any parent corporation
or entity;
(4) If applicable, the overall financial resources of any parent
corporation or entity; the overall size of the parent corporation or
entity with respect to the number of its employees; the number, type,
and location of its facilities; and
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
(5) If applicable, the type of operation or operations of any parent
corporation or entity, including the composition, structure, and
functions of the workforce of the parent corporation or entity.
6. Violations. Any violation of this Section 31.06 shall be deemed to be a
continuing violation of this chapter from the date a certificate of occupancy is
issued for the facility until the date the violation is cured and the unfair or
discriminatory practice is ceased.
7. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
A. Any bona fide religious institution with respect to any qualifications
the institution may impose based on religion when such qualifications are
related to a bona fide religious purpose.
B. The rental or leasing to transient individuals of fewer than 4 rooms
within a single housing accommodation by the occupant or owner of such
housing accommodation if the occupant or owner resides therein.
C. Discounts for services or accommodations based upon age.
31.07 UNFAIR CREDIT PRACTICES. It is an unfair or discriminatory practice for
any:
1. Creditor to refuse to enter into a consumer credit transaction or impose
finance charges or other terms or conditions more onerous than those regularly
extended by that creditor to consumers of similar economic backgrounds because
of age, color, creed, disability, familial status, gender identity, marital status,
national origin, race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation.
2. Persons authorized or licensed to do business in this State pursuant to
Chapter 524, 533, 534, 536, or 536A of the Code of Iowa to refuse to loan or
extend credit or to impose terms or conditions more onerous than those regularly
extended to persons of similar economic backgrounds because of age, color, creed,
disability, familial status, gender identity, marital status, national origin, race,
religion, sex, or sexual orientation. This subsection shall not be applied to limit
the Fair Housing sections of this chapter or any other provision.
3. Creditor to refuse to offer credit life or health and accident insurance
because age, color, creed, disability, familial status, gender identity, marital status,
national origin, race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation. Refusal by a creditor to
offer credit life or health and accident insurance based upon the age or disability of
the consumer shall not be an unfair or discriminatory practice if such denial is
based solely upon bona fide underwriting considerations not prohibited by the
Code of Iowa or the United States Code.
The provisions of this section shall not be construed by negative implication or otherwise
to narrow or restrict any other provisions of this chapter.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
31.08 UNFAIR OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES – EDUCATION. It is an
unfair or discriminatory practice for any educational institution to discriminate on the
basis of age, color, creed, disability, familial status, gender identity, marital status,
national origin, race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation in any program or activity. Such
discriminatory practices shall include but not be limited to the following practices:
1. Exclusion of a person or persons from participation in, denial of the
benefits of, or subjection to discrimination in any academic, extracurricular,
research, occupational, training, or other program or activity.
2. Denial of comparable opportunity in intramural and interscholastic athletic
programs.
3. Discrimination among persons in employment and the conditions thereof.
4. The application of any rule concerning the actual or potential parental,
family or marital status of a person, or the exclusion of any person from any
program or activity or employment because of pregnancy or related conditions
dependent upon the physician's diagnosis and certification.
For the purposes of this section, “educational institution” includes any preschool,
elementary, secondary, or merged area school, area education agency, community
college, or post-secondary college or university and their governing boards. This section
does not prohibit an educational institution from maintaining separate toilet facilities,
locker rooms, or living facilities for the different sexes so long as comparable facilities
are provided. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any bona fide
religious institution from imposing qualifications based on religion when such
qualifications are related to a bona fide religious purpose or any institution from
admitting students of only one sex.
31.09 AIDING, ABETTING, OR RETALIATION. It is an unfair or discriminatory
practice for:
1. Any person to intentionally aid, abet, compel, or coerce another person to
engage in any of the practices declared unfair or discriminatory by this chapter.
2. Any person to discriminate or retaliate against another person in any of the
rights protected against discrimination by this chapter because such person has
lawfully opposed any practice forbidden under this chapter, obeys the provisions
of this chapter, or has filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in any proceeding
under this chapter.
3. Any person to discriminate against another person because of the person's
relationship or association with a person protected under this chapter.
31.10 INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION. It is an unfair or
discriminatory practice to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the
exercise or enjoyment of, on account of the person having exercised or enjoyed, or on
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
account of the person having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or
enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this chapter.
31.11 SEX OR AGE PROVISIONS NOT APPLICABLE TO RETIREMENT
PLANS. The provisions of this chapter relating to discrimination because of sex or age
shall not be construed to apply to any retirement plan or benefit system of any employer
unless such plan or system is a mere subterfuge adopted for the purpose of evading the
provisions of this chapter.
1. However, a retirement plan or benefit system shall not require involuntary
retirement of a person under the age of 70 because of that person’s age. This
paragraph does not prohibit the following:
A. The involuntary retirement of a person who has attained the age of
65 and has for the 2 prior years been employed in a bona fide executive or
high policy-making position and who is entitled to an immediate, nonforfeitable
annual retirement benefit from a pension, profit-sharing, savings
or deferred compensation plan of the employer which equals $27,000. This
retirement benefit test may be adjusted according to the regulations
prescribed by the United States Secretary of Labor pursuant to Public Law
95-256, Section 3.
B. The involuntary retirement of a person covered by a collective
bargaining agreement which was entered into by a labor organization and
was in effect on September 1, 1977. This exemption does not apply after
the termination of that agreement or January 1, 1980, whichever first
occurs.
2. A health insurance program provided by an employer may exclude
coverage of abortion, except where the life of the mother would be endangered if
the fetus were carried to term or where medical complications have arisen from an
abortion.
3. An employee welfare plan may provide life, disability, or health insurance
benefits which vary by age based on actuarial differences if the employer
contributes equally for all the participating employees or may provide for
employer contributions differing by age if the benefits for all the participating
employees do not vary by age.
31.12 COMPLAINT INVESTIGATION. This section applies to all complaints filed
under this chapter except for Fair Housing complaints, which are to be processed and
adjudicated in accordance with the Fair Housing provisions in this chapter, Sections
31.18 through 31.33.
1. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory or unfair practice
may by himself/herself, his/her attorney, or personal representative, as defined by
rule, make, sign, and file with the Commission a verified, written complaint which
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
shall state the name and address of the person, employer, employment agency, or
labor organization alleged to have committed the discriminatory or unfair practice
of which complained, shall set forth the particulars thereof, and shall contain such
other information as may be required by the Commission. The Commission, a
Commissioner, or the City Attorney may in like manner, make, sign, and file such
complaint.
2. Any place of public accommodation, employer, labor organization, or other
person who has any employees or members who refuse or threaten to refuse to
comply with the provisions of this chapter may file with the Commission a
verified written complaint asking the Commission for assistance to obtain their
compliance by conciliation or other remedial action. A claim under this chapter
shall not be maintained unless a complaint is filed with the Commission within
300 days after the alleged discriminatory or unfair practice occurred, except for
Fair Housing complaints, which shall be filed within one year after the alleged
discriminatory or unfair practice occurred or terminated. If the alleged unlawful
discriminatory practice or act is of a continuing nature, the date of the occurrence
of said alleged unlawful practice shall be deemed to be any date subsequent to the
commencement of the alleged unlawful practice up to and including the date upon
which the unlawful practice has ceased.
3. The members of the Commission and its staff shall not disclose the filing of
a complaint, the information gathered during the investigation, or the endeavors to
eliminate such discriminatory or unfair practice by conference, conciliation, and
persuasion, unless such disclosure is made in connection with the conduct of such
investigation. This section shall not prohibit disclosures to the Iowa Civil Rights
Commission or similar government agencies conducting investigations involving
illegal discriminatory practices.
4. Investigative Procedure.
A. After the filing of a verified complaint, a true copy shall be served
within 20 days by certified mail on the person against whom the complaint
is filed. Alternative service may be effectuated by personal delivery by the
Executive Director or a member of the staff of the Commission appointed
by the Executive Director.
B. An authorized member of the Commission staff shall make a prompt
investigation of the alleged unfair or discriminatory practices. The
investigator shall review all of the evidence and complete the investigation.
The investigator shall prepare a written report. The Executive Director
shall review the report and make a recommendation of probable cause or no
probable cause or other appropriate action to the assigned Commissioner
who shall then consider the Executive Director’s recommendation and rule
on whether probable cause exists for the complaint; the Chairperson shall
assign and designate that Commissioner.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
C. If it is determined by the assigned Commissioner that no probable
cause exists for the complaint, the complaint may be closed with a finding
of no probable cause and the complainant and respondent shall be so
notified in writing by certified mail.
D. The complainant, within 10 days of receipt of a copy of the
determination of no probable cause, may file with the Commission an
application for reconsideration of the finding. Upon such application the
Chairperson or a member of the Commission designated by the
Chairperson, other than the first Commissioner assigned to case shall
consider the application for reconsideration. If it is determined that no
probable cause exists, the Chairperson or designated member of the
Commission shall issue an order dismissing the complaint and shall furnish
a copy of the order to the Complainant. If it is determined that probable
cause exists or that further investigation is necessary, the staff shall be
directed accordingly.
E. If it is determined by the assigned Commissioner that probable cause
exists regarding the allegations of the complaint, the Executive Director
shall promptly endeavor to eliminate the unfair or discriminatory practice
by conference, further conciliation, and persuasion. Nothing in this
subsection shall preclude an earlier satisfactory resolution of the complaint,
if mutually agreed to by all parties.
F. If the complaint is successfully resolved through further conciliation
and persuasion, it shall be formalized and signed by the Chairperson or a
designated representative of the Commission, the complainant, and the
respondent. The Commission shall furnish both the complainant and the
respondent a copy of the terms of the conciliation.
G. At any time in its discretion, the Commission shall investigate whether
the terms of the agreement are being complied with by the respondent. If
the Commission finds that the terms of the conciliation are not being
complied with by the respondent, the Commission shall take appropriate
action to ensure compliance.
H. The Commission staff must endeavor to eliminate the discriminatory
or unfair practice by conference, further conciliation, and persuasion for a
period of 30 days following the initial conciliation meeting between the
respondent and the Commission staff after a finding of probable cause. After
the expiration of 30 days, the Executive Director may order that the
conference, conciliation, and persuasion procedures provided in this section be
by-passed when the Executive Director determines the procedures unworkable
by reasons of past patterns and practices of the respondent, or a statement by
the respondent that the respondent is unwilling to continue with the
conciliation. The Executive Director must have the approval of the
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
Commission Chair or the Chairperson’s designated representative before
bypassing conciliation, conference, and persuasion procedures. Upon the
bypassing of conciliation, the Executive Director shall state in writing to
the Commission the reasons for bypassing.
31.13 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING. If the Commission determines that probable
cause exists to believe that a discriminatory practice has occurred and conciliation
attempts have failed, the Commission shall provide an opportunity for a hearing on the
record with respect to the complaint issued under this chapter. Hearings shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of this section and the rules promulgated by
the Commission.
1. Notice of Hearing. The Commission may issue a notice of hearing. Staff
shall send a copy of the determination and notice of hearing to all of the following
persons: (i) each respondent; and (ii) each aggrieved person on whose behalf the
complaint was filed. The notice shall include:
A. A statement of the time, place, and nature of the hearing;
B. A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the
hearing is to be held;
C. A reference to the particular sections of this chapter and rules
involved; and
D. A short and plain statement of the matters asserted. If the
Commission is unable to state the matters in detail at the time that the
notice is served, the initial notice may be limited to a statement of the
issues involved. Thereafter, upon application, a more definite and detailed
statement shall be furnished.
2. Rights of Parties. At a hearing under this section, each party may appear in
person, be represented by counsel, present evidence, cross-examine witnesses and
obtain the issuance of subpoenas under Section 31.04. Any aggrieved person may
intervene as a party in the proceeding. Iowa Rules of Evidence apply to the
presentation of evidence in such hearing as they would in a civil action in Linn
County District Court.
3. Expedited Discovery and Hearing.
A. Discovery in administrative proceedings under this section shall be
conducted as expeditiously and inexpensively as possible, consistent with
the need of all parties to obtain relevant evidence.
B. A hearing under this section shall be conducted as expeditiously and
inexpensively as possible, consistent with the needs and rights of the parties
to obtain a fair hearing and a complete record.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
4. Resolution of Charge. Any resolution of a charge before a final order under
this section shall require the consent of the aggrieved person on whose behalf the
charge is issued.
5. Hearings, Findings, and Conclusions and Order.
A. The administrative law judge shall commence the hearing under this
section no later than 120 days following the probable cause determination,
unless it is impracticable to do so. If the administrative law judge is unable
to commence the hearing within 120 days after the determination, the
administrative law judge shall notify the Commission, the aggrieved person
on whose behalf the charge was filed, and the respondent in writing of the
reasons for not doing so.
B. The administrative law judge shall make findings of fact and
conclusions of law within 60 days after the end of the hearing under this
section, unless it is impracticable to do so. If the administrative law judge is
unable to make findings of fact and conclusions of law within such period, or
any succeeding 60-day period thereafter, the administrative law judge shall
notify the Commission, the aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge was
filed, and the respondent in writing of the reasons for not doing so.
C. If the administrative law judge finds that a respondent has engaged
in a discriminatory practice, such administrative law judge shall promptly
issue an order for such relief as may be appropriate, which may include
actual damages suffered by the aggrieved person and injunctive or other
equitable relief. Such order may, to vindicate the public interest, assess a
civil penalty against the respondent.
D. Other relief the Commission or Administrative Law Judge considers
to be appropriate, including monetary damages, fines and penalties, may be
given.
E. In the case of an order with respect to a discriminatory practice that
occurred in the course of a business subject to licensing or regulation by a
governmental agency, the Commission shall, not later than 30 days after the
date of the issuance of such order (or, if such order is judicially reviewed 30
days after such order is in substance affirmed upon such review):
(1) Send copies of the findings of fact, conclusion of law, and the
order, to that governmental agency; and
(2) Recommend to that governmental agency appropriate
disciplinary action (including, where appropriate, the suspension or
revocation of the license of the respondent).
F. If the administrative law judge finds that the respondent has not
engaged in a discriminatory practice, as the case may be, such
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
administrative law judge shall enter an order dismissing the charge. The
Commission shall make public disclosure of each such dismissal.
G. An administrative law judge may not continue administrative
proceedings regarding any alleged discriminatory practice after the
beginning of the trial of a civil action commenced by the aggrieved party
under a federal or state law, seeking relief with respect to that discriminatory
practice.
6. Review by Commission; Service of Final Order.
A. The Commission may review any finding, conclusion or order issued
under this section. Such review shall be completed not later than 30 days
after the finding, conclusion or order is so issued; otherwise the finding,
conclusion or order becomes final.
B. The Commission shall cause the findings of fact and conclusions of
law made with respect to any final order for relief under this section,
together with a copy of such order, to be served on each aggrieved person
and each respondent in the proceeding.
7. Judicial Review; Review of Order. Any party aggrieved by a final order for
relief under this Chapter granting or denying in whole or in part the relief sought
may obtain review of such order by filing a petition for review not later than 30
days after the order is issued in Linn County District Court.
31.14 REMEDIES.
1. If, upon taking into consideration all of the evidence at a hearing, the
Commission finds that a respondent has not engaged in any such discriminatory or
unfair practice, the Commission shall issue an order denying relief and stating the
findings of fact and conclusions of the Commission, and shall cause a copy of the
order dismissing the complaint to be served by certified mail on the complainant
and respondent.
2. If, upon taking into consideration all of the evidence at a hearing, the
Commission determines that the respondent has engaged in a discriminatory or
unfair practice, the Commission shall state its findings of fact and conclusions of
law and shall issue an order requiring the respondent to cease and desist from the
discriminatory or unfair practice and to take the necessary remedial action as in
the judgment of the Commission will carry out the purposes of this chapter. A
copy of the order shall be delivered to the respondent, the complainant, and to any
other public officers and persons as the Commission deems proper.
A. For the purposes of this subsection and pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, “remedial action” may include any equitable relief that the
Commission considers appropriate, but is not limited to the following:
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
(1) Granting temporary, preliminary, or permanent relief;
(2) Hiring, reinstatement or upgrading of employees with or
without pay, interim earned income and unemployment
compensation shall operate to reduce the pay otherwise allowable;
(3) Admission or restoration of individuals to a labor
organization, admission to or participation in a guidance program,
apprenticeship training program, on-the-job training program, or
other occupational training or retraining program, with the utilization
of objective criteria in the admission of individuals to such
programs;
(4) Admission of individuals to a public accommodation or an
educational institution;
(5) Providing an auxiliary aid or service, modification of policy,
practice, or procedure, or alternative method;
(6) Making facilities readily accessible to and usable by individuals
with disabilities in new construction, and alterations, or through barrier
removal or other activities;
(7) Sale, exchange, lease, rental, assignment, or sublease of real
property to an individual;
(8) Extension to all individuals of the full and equal enjoyment of
the advantages, facilities, privileges, and services of the respondent
denied to the complainant because of the discriminatory or unfair
practice;
(9) Reporting as to the manner of compliance;
(10) Posting notices in conspicuous places in the respondent’s
place of business in form prescribed by the Commission and
inclusion of notices in advertising material; or
(11) Payment to the complainant of damages for an injury caused
by the discriminatory or unfair practice which damages shall include
but are not limited to actual damages, court costs, and reasonable
attorney fees.
(12) Other relief the Commission or Administrative Law Judge
considers to be appropriate, including monetary damages, fines and
penalties.
B. In addition to the remedies provided in the preceding provision of
this subsection, the Commission may issue an order requiring the
respondent to cease and desist from the discriminatory or unfair practice
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
and to take such affirmative action as in the judgment of the Commission
will carry out the purposes of this chapter as follows:
(1) In the case of a respondent operating by virtue of a license
issued by the State of Iowa or the City of Marion, or any board,
commission, department, agency, or other political subdivision or part
thereof within the City, if the Commission, upon notice to the
respondent with an opportunity to be heard, determines that the
respondent has engaged in a discriminatory or unfair practice and that
the practice was authorized, requested, commanded, performed, or
knowingly or recklessly tolerated by the board of directors of the
respondent or by any officer or executive agent acting within the scope
of the officer's or agent’s employment, the Commission shall so certify
to the licensing agency. Unless the Commission finding of a
discriminatory or unfair practice is reversed in the course of judicial
review the finding of discrimination is binding on the licensing agency.
If a certification is made pursuant to this subsection, the licensing
agency may initiate licensee disciplinary procedures.
(2) In the case of a respondent who is found by the Commission to
have engaged in a discriminatory or unfair practice in the course of
performing under a contract or subcontract with the State of Iowa or
City of Marion, or any board, commission, department, agency, or
other political subdivision or part thereof within the City, if the practice
was authorized, requested, commanded, performed, or knowingly or
recklessly tolerated by the board of directors of the respondent or by an
officer or executive agent acting within the scope of the officer's or
agent’s employment, the Commission shall so certify to the contracting
agency. Unless the Commission’s finding of a discriminatory or unfair
practice is reversed in the course of judicial review, the finding of
discrimination is binding on the contracting agency.
(3) Upon receiving a certification made under this subsection, a
contracting agency may take appropriate action to terminate a contract
or portion thereof previously entered into with the respondent, either
absolutely or on condition that the respondent carry out a program of
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and assist the State of
Iowa and the City of Marion, and any board, commission,
department, agency, or other political subdivision or part thereof
within the City to refrain from entering into further contracts.
C. The election of an affirmative action order under paragraph B of this
subsection shall not bar the election of affirmative remedies provided in
paragraph A of this subsection.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
3. The terms of a conciliation agreement reached with the respondent may
require the respondent to refrain in the future from committing discriminatory or
unfair practices of the type stated in the agreement, to take remedial action as in
the judgment of the Commission will carry out the purposes of this chapter, and to
consent to the entry in an appropriate district court of a consent decree embodying
the terms of the conciliation agreement. Violation of such a consent decree may
be punished as contempt by the court in which it is filed, upon a showing by the
Commission of the violation at any time within six months of its occurrence. In all
cases where a conciliation agreement is entered into, the Commission shall issue an
order stating the terms and furnish a copy of the order to the complainant, the
respondent, and such other persons as the Commission deems proper. At any time in
its discretion the Commission may investigate whether the terms of the agreement
are being complied with by the respondent. Upon a finding that the terms of the
conciliation agreement are not being complied with by the respondent, the
Commission shall take appropriate action to assure compliance.
31.15 JUDICIAL REVIEW OF COMMISSION ACTION.
1. A person or party who has exhausted all adequate administrative remedies
before the Commission and who is aggrieved or adversely affected by any final
Commission action is entitled to judicial review thereof under this section. A
preliminary, procedural or intermediate Commission action is immediately
reviewable if all adequate Commission remedies have been exhausted and review
of the final Commission action would not provide an adequate remedy.
2. Proceedings for judicial review shall be instituted by filing a petition in the
Iowa District Court in and for Linn County within 30 days after the Commission
action complained of. For purposes of the time limit for filing the petition for
judicial review under this section, the issuance of a final decision of the
Commission under this chapter occurs on the date notice of the decision is mailed
by certified mail to the parties. Within 10 days after the filing of a petition for
judicial review, file stamped copies of the petition shall be mailed by the Petitioner
to all parties named in the petition and, if the petition involves review of
Commission action following public hearing, all parties of record in that case
before the Commission. Such mailings shall be jurisdictional and shall be
addressed to the parties at their last known mailing address. Proof of mailing shall
be by affidavit. Any party of record in a case before the Commission wishing to
intervene and participate in the review proceeding thereon must file an appearance
within 45 days from the time that the petition was filed.
3. The petition for review shall name the Commission as respondent and shall
contain a concise statement of:
A. The nature of the Commission action which is the subject of the
petition;
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
B. The particular Commission action appealed from;
C. The grounds upon which relief is sought; and
D. The relief sought.
4. The filing of the petition for review does not itself stay execution or
enforcement of any Commission action. Upon application the Commission or the
reviewing court may, in appropriate cases, order such a stay pending the outcome
of the judicial review proceedings.
5. Within 30 days after filing of the petition, or within further time allowed by
the court, the Commission shall transmit to the reviewing court the original or a
certified copy of the entire record of any proceeding before the Commission which
may be the subject of the petition. By stipulation of all parties to the review
proceedings, the record of such a proceeding may be shortened. A party
unreasonably refusing to stipulate to limit the record may be taxed by the court for
additional costs. The court may require or permit subsequent corrections or additions
to the record. In proceedings for judicial review of Commission action the court may
hear and consider such evidence as it deems appropriate.
6. In proceedings for judicial review of Commission action following public
hearing , the court shall not itself hear any further evidence with respect to those
issues of fact whose determination was entrusted by this chapter to the Commission
in that proceeding. Before the date set for hearing a petition for judicial review of
Commission action following a public hearing application may be made to the court
for leave to present evidence in addition to that found in the record of the case. If it
is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the additional evidence is material and
that there was good reason for failure to present it in the public hearing before the
Commission, the court may order that the additional evidence be taken before the
Commission upon conditions determined by the court. The Commission may modify
its findings and decision in the case by reason of the additional evidence and shall file
that evidence and any modifications, new findings, or decisions with the reviewing
court and mail copies of the new findings or decisions to all parties.
7. The court may affirm, modify, or set aside the Commission action, in whole
or in part, or remand to the Commission for further proceedings; and enforce such
order to the extent that such order is affirmed or modified. The court shall reverse,
modify, or grant any other appropriate relief from the Commission action, equitable
or legal and including declaratory relief, if substantial rights of the petitioner have
been prejudiced because the Commission action is:
A. In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions or the provisions
of this chapter;
B. In excess of the authority of the Commission;
C. In violation of Commission rule;
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
D. Made upon unlawful procedures;
E. Affected by other error of law;
F. In a proceeding for review of Commission action following public
hearing unsupported by substantial evidence in the record made before the
Commission when that record is viewed as a whole; or
G. Unreasonable, arbitrary or capricious, or characterized by an abuse
of discretion or a clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion.
8. The appeal shall be taken as in other civil cases, although the appeal may be
taken regardless of the amount involved.
9. The judicial review provisions of this chapter shall be the exclusive means
by which a person or party aggrieved or adversely affected by Commission actions
may seek judicial review of such action. However, nothing in this chapter shall
abridge or deny any person or party who is aggrieved or adversely affected by any
Commission action the right to seek relief from such action in the courts at a time
and in a manner authorized by the laws of the State of Iowa.
31.16 JUDICIAL REVIEW – ENFORCEMENT.
1. The Commission may obtain an order of court for the enforcement of
Commission orders in a proceeding as provided in this section. Such an
enforcement proceeding shall be brought in the Iowa District Court in and for Linn
County.
2. Such an enforcement proceeding shall be initiated by the filing of a petition
in such court and the service of a copy thereof upon the respondent. Thereupon
the Commission shall file with the court a transcript of the record of the hearing
before it. The court shall have power to grant such temporary relief or restraining
order as it deems just and proper and to make and enter upon the pleadings,
testimony, and proceedings set forth in such transcript an order enforcing,
modifying, and enforcing as so modified, or setting aside the order of the
Commission, in whole or in part.
3. An objection that has not been urged before the Commission shall not be
considered by the court in an enforcement proceeding, unless the failure or neglect
to urge such objection shall be excused because of extraordinary circumstances.
4. Any party to the enforcement proceeding may move the court to remit the
case to the Commission in the interest of justice for the purpose of introducing
additional specified and material evidence and seeking findings thereon, providing
such party shall show reasonable grounds for the failure to introduce such
evidence before the Commission.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
5. In the enforcement proceeding the court shall determine its order on the
same basis as it would in a proceeding reviewing Commission action under
Section 31.15.
6. The Commission’s copy of the testimony shall be available to all parties for
examination at all reasonable times, without cost, and for the purpose of judicial
review of the Commission’s order.
7. Petitions filed under this section shall be heard expeditiously and
determined upon the transcript filed without requirement for printing.
8. If no proceeding to obtain judicial review is instituted within 30 days from
the service of any order of the Commission under Section 31.13 of this chapter,
the Commission may obtain an order of the court for the enforcement of such
order upon showing that respondent is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Commission and resides or transacts business within the City, and the Commission
finding of fact and order shall be conclusive in connection with any petition for
enforcement.
31.17 SIXTY-DAY ADMINISTRATIVE RELEASE.
1. A person claiming to be aggrieved by an unfair or discriminatory practice
must initially seek an administrative relief by filing a complaint with the
Commission in accordance with Section 31.12. A complainant, after the proper
filing of a complaint with the Commission, may subsequently commence an action
for relief in the District Court if all of the following conditions have been satisfied:
A. The complainant has timely filed the complaint with the
Commission as provided in Section 31.12; and
B. The complaint has been on file with the Commission for at least 60
days and the Commission has issued a release to the Complainant pursuant
to paragraph C of this subsection.
C. Upon a request by the complainant, and after the expiration of 60
days from the timely filing of a complaint with the Commission, the
Commission shall issue to the complainant a release stating that the
Complainant has a right to commence an action in the District Court. A
release under this subsection shall not be issued if a finding of no probable
cause has been made on the complaint by the Commissioner charged with
that duty under Section 31.12, subsection 4, a conciliation agreement has
been executed under Section 31.12, the Commission has served notice of
hearing upon the respondent pursuant to Section 31.13, subsection 1, or the
complaint is closed as an administrative closure and two years have elapsed
since the issuance date of the closure. Notwithstanding Section 31.13,
subsection 5, a party may obtain a copy of all documents contained in a
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
case file where the Commission has issued a release to the complainant
pursuant to this subsection.
2. An action authorized under this section is barred unless commenced within
90 days after issuance by the Commission of a release under paragraph C of
subsection 1. If a complainant obtains a release from the Commission under said
paragraph, the Commission shall be barred from further action on that complaint.
3. Venue for an action under this section shall be in the county in which the
respondent resides or has its principal place of business, or in the county in which
the alleged unfair or discriminatory practice occurred.
4. The District Court may grant any relief in an action under this section
which is authorized by Section 31.14, subsection 2, to be issued by the
Commission. The District Court may also award the respondent reasonable
attorney's fees and court costs when the court finds that the complainant's action
was frivolous.
5. It is the legislative intent of this chapter that every complaint be at least
preliminarily screened during the first 60 days.
This section does not authorize administrative closure if an investigation is warranted. In
addition, this section shall not be interpreted so as to require a complainant to file a
complaint with the Commission before filing a civil action based on violations of the Fair
Housing sections of this chapter.
31.18 FAIR HOUSING – GENERAL.†
1. Definitions. The definitions in 31.02 are incorporated herein by reference
and, as used in the Fair Housing sections:
A. “Aggrieved person” includes any person who:
(1) Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice; or
(2) Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
B. “Complainant” means the person who filed a complaint under
Section 31.22(1) of this chapter.
C. “Conciliation” means the attempted resolution of issues raised by a
complaint, or by the investigation of such complaint, through informal
negotiations involving the aggrieved person, the respondent and the
Commission.
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Sections 31.18 through 31.33 of this chapter are herein referred to collectively as “the Fair
Housing sections of this chapter.”
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
D. “Conciliation agreement” means a written agreement setting forth
the resolution of the issues in conciliation.
E. “Discriminatory housing practice” means an act that is unlawful
under Sections 31.18(2), 31.19, 31.20, 31.09 and 31.10 of this chapter.
F. “Dwelling” means any building, structure or portion thereof which is
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one
or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for
the construction or location thereof of any such building, structure or
portion thereof.
G. “Family” includes a single individual.
H. “Prevailing party” has the same meaning as such term has in Section
722 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 U.S.C. 1988).
I. “Respondent” means:
(1) The person or other entity accused in a complaint of an unfair
housing practice; and
(2) Any other person or entity identified in the course of
investigation and notified as required with respect to respondents so
identified under Section 31.22 of this chapter.
J. “Secretary” means the U.S. Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development.
K. “State” means the State of Iowa and any of its political subdivisions.
L. “To rent” includes to lease, sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant
for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
2. Prohibitions/Unfair or Discriminatory Practices – Housing. It is an unfair
or discriminatory practice for any person, owner of rights to housing or real
property, or a person acting for an owner of rights to housing or real property, with
or without compensation, including (but not limited to) persons licensed as real
estate brokers or salespersons, attorneys, auctioneers, architects, builders,
developers, agents, or representatives by power of attorney or appointment, or any
person acting under court order, deed of trust, or will – collectively referred to in
this chapter as a “housing provider”:
A. To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of age, color, creed, disability, familial
status, gender identity, lawful source of income, marital status, national origin,
race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation.
B. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provisions of services or
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
facilities in connection therewith, because of age, color, creed, disability,
familial status, gender identity, lawful source of income, marital status,
national origin, race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation.
C. To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published
any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based
on age, color, creed, disability, familial status, gender identity, lawful source
of income, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex, or sexual
orientation or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination.
D. To represent to any person because of age, color, creed, disability,
familial status, gender identity, lawful source of income, marital status,
national origin, race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation that any dwelling is
not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available.
E. For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any
dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the
neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular age, color, creed, disability,
familial status, gender identity, lawful source of income, marital status,
national origin, race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation.
F. To discriminate against an individual who is receiving or has a Federal,
State or local housing subsidy, including rental assistance or Section 8
vouchers, because the individual is such a recipient or because of any
requirement of such rental assistance or housing subsidy or voucher program,
subject to the exemptions in Section 31.21 of this chapter; a housing provider:
(1) Shall consider, and may verify, any lawful source of income
or occupation in determining qualifications for rental or sale of a
dwelling.
(2) Shall not be required to rent or sell to any participant in a
housing subsidy program merely because the individual has the subsidy.
This subsection does not create a preference for persons with
housing subsidies over those without subsidies.
(3) Shall not refuse to accept or participate in a government
housing subsidy program, except as provided elsewhere in this section,
and must consider and evaluate individuals who participate in these
programs along with other individuals and applicants.
(4) May refuse to consider income derived from any criminal
activity.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
(5) May determine the ability of any potential buyer or renter to
pay a purchase price or pay rent by:
a. Verifying, in a commercially reasonable manner, the
source and amount of income of the potential buyer or renter,
including any rental or purchase payments or portions of
rental or purchase payments that will be made by other
individuals, organizations or voucher and rental assistance
payment programs on the same basis as payments to be made
directly by the potential buyer or renter.
b. Evaluating, in a commercially reasonable manner, the
prospective stability, security, and credit worthiness of the
potential buyer or renter or any source of income of the
potential buyer or renter, including any rental or purchase
payments or portions of rental or purchase payments that will
be made by other individuals, organizations or voucher and
rental assistance payment programs.
(6) May refuse to lease or sell a dwelling to a potential or current
renter or buyer who is relying on a Section 8 voucher or subsidy for
payment of part or all of the rent or sale price for a dwelling if and
when the Marion Housing Services Office or its designee determines
that:
a. The dwelling fails to meet Federal Housing Quality
Standards in connection with the Section 8 or subsidy program;
or
b. The rent for the dwelling exceeds the Fair Market Rent
authorized by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development or the Marion Housing Services Office in
connection with the Section 8 or subsidy program.
(7) Shall cooperate with the Marion Housing Services Office,
HUD and the buyer or renter to execute all documents necessary to
apply for participation in the housing subsidy or voucher program
and to enable payment of housing subsidies or rental assistance
payments.
G. To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make unavailable
or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of: (i) that
buyer or renter; or (ii) a person residing in or intending to reside in that
dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or (iii) any person
associated with that buyer or renter; or to discriminate against any person in
the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the
provisions of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
of a disability of: (x) that person; (y) a person residing in or intending to reside
in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or (z) any person
associated with that person. For purposes of this paragraph, discrimination
includes any one of the following:
(1) A refusal to permit, at the expense of the disabled person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the
case of a rental the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so,
condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to
restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before
the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; or
(2) A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to
afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. A
housing provider shall modify its policies, practices, or procedures to
permit an individual with a disability to use, own, live with or be
accompanied by an assistance animal when necessary to afford that
individual equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; when
considering a request from, or providing a reasonable
accommodation to, an individual with a disability that involves an
assistance animal, a housing provider shall not:
a. Ask or require an individual with a disability to post a
deposit, pay a fee or surcharge, or comply with other
requirements not generally applicable to other applicants,
tenants or owners, even if people who live with or are
accompanied by pets are required do so; or
b. Require documentation, such as proof that the animal
has been certified or licensed as an assistance animal; or
c. Require that a support animal have any training;
however, a housing provider may inquire whether an assistive
animal is either: (i) individually trained to do work or
perform or provide a service, function or a task for the benefit
of an individual with a disability; or (ii) despite the lack of
individual training, is able to work or perform or provide a
service, function or a task for the benefit of an individual with
a disability; or
d. Require the assistance animal to wear or carry any
special harness, collar, vest, emblem or other means of
identifying it as an assistive animal.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
An individual with a disability may be charged for damages caused
by his or her assistance animal if the housing provider normally
charges pet owners or handlers for damage caused by their pets.
(3) In connection with the design and/or construction of covered
multifamily dwellings for first occupancy on or after one year after
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, a failure
to design and/or construct those dwellings in such a manner that:
a. The public use and common use portions of such
dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by disabled
persons;
b. All the doors designed to allow passage into and
within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently
wide to allow passage by disabled persons in wheelchairs;
and
c. All premises within such dwellings contain the
following features of adaptive design: (i) an accessible route
into and through the dwelling; (ii) light switches, electrical
outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in
accessible locations; (iii) reinforcements in bathroom walls to
allow later installation of grab bars; and (iv) usable kitchens
and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can
maneuver about the space.
H. Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American
National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and
usability for physically handicapped people (commonly cited as “ANSI
A117.1”) suffices to satisfy the requirements of paragraph G(3)(c) of this
subsection.
I. As used in this section, the term “covered multifamily dwellings”
means:
(1) Buildings consisting of 4 or more units if such buildings have
one or more elevators; and
(2) Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of 4 or more
units.
J. Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made available to
an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or
safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
K. Any violation of paragraph G(3) of this subsection shall be deemed
to be a continuing violation of this chapter from the date a certificate of
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
occupancy is issued for the covered multifamily dwelling until the date the
violation is cured and the unfair or discriminatory practice is ceased.
3. Exemptions. The provisions of paragraphs A, B, D, E, F, and G of
subsection 2 of this section shall not apply to:
A. Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner provided that:
(1) The private individual owner does not own more than three
such single-family houses at any one time; and
(2) In the sale of any single-family house, the private individual
owner does not reside in, nor is the most recent resident of such
house prior to such sale; the exemption granted by this subsection
shall apply to only one such sale within a 24-month period; and
(3) The bona fide private individual owner does not own any
interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on the owner's behalf,
under express or voluntary agreement, title to, or any right to all or a
portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three
such single-family houses at one time; and
(4) There is no utilization in any manner of the sales or rental
facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker,
agent, salesperson, or of such facilities or services of any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent
of any such broker, agent, salesperson or person; and
(5) There is no publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of
any advertisement or written notice in violation of paragraph C of
subsection 2 of this Section 31.18. Nothing in this subsection
prohibits the utilization of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title
companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to
perfect or transfer the title.
B. Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently
of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such
living quarters as his residence.
C. The renting or leasing of a dwelling in a building which contains
dwellings for not more than two families living independently of each
other, if the owner resides in one of the dwellings.
D. The rental or leasing of fewer than four rooms within a single
dwelling by the occupant or owner of the dwelling, if the occupant or
owner resides in the dwelling.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
4. For purposes of the Fair Housing sections of this chapter, a person shall be
deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
A. The person has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein; or
B. The person has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent,
other than in the sale of the person's own personal residence in providing sales
or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions
involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
C. The person is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by five or more families.
5. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or
society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled
by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from
limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other
than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference
to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of age,
color, creed, disability, familial status, gender identity, lawful source of income,
marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation. Nor shall
anything in this section prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as
an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodging which it owns or
operates for other occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving
preference to its members.
6. Nothing in the Fair Housing sections of this chapter limits the applicability of
the City’s Housing Ordinance regarding the maximum number of occupants
permitted to occupy a dwelling. Nor does any provision in this chapter regarding
familial status or age apply with respect to housing for older persons.
A. As used in this subsection “housing for older persons” means
housing:
(1) Provided under any State or Federal program that the Secretary
of the Department of Housing and Urban Development determines is
specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons (as defined
in the State or Federal program); or
(2) Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or
older; or
(3) Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55
years of age or older per unit. In determining whether housing qualifies
as housing for older persons under this subsection, the Commission
shall develop regulations which require at least the following factors:
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
a. At least 80 percent of the units are occupied by at least
one person 55 years of age or older per unit; and
b. The publication of, and adherence to, policies and
procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or
manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or
older.
B. Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older
persons by reason of:
(1) Persons residing in such housing as of the date of enactment
of this chapter who do not meet the age requirements of subparagraphs
(2) and (3) of paragraph A of this subsection, provided that new
occupants of such housing meet the age requirements of said
subparagraphs.
(2) Unoccupied units, provided that such units are reserved for
occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of
subparagraphs (2) and (3) of paragraph A of this subsection.
7. Nothing in this section prohibits conduct against a person because such person
has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture
or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled
Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802) or Chapter 124 of the Iowa Code.
8. Additional Housing Exception. Sections 31.18 (2) and (4) do not prohibit a
person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real estate from taking
into consideration factors other than age, color, creed, disability, familial status,
gender identity, lawful source of income, marital status, national origin, race,
religion, sex, or sexual orientation in appraising real estate.
31.19 FAIR HOUSING – DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL
ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
1. In General. It is unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to discriminate
against any person in making available such a transaction, or in the terms or
conditions of such a transaction, because of age, color, creed, disability, familial
status, gender identity, lawful source of income, marital status, national origin,
race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation.
2. Definition. As used in this section, the term “residential real estate-related
transaction” means any of the following:
A. The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
(1) For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling; or
(2) Secured by residential real estate.
B. The selling, brokering or appraising of residential property.
3. Appraisal Exemption. Nothing in this section prohibits a person engaged in
the business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration
factors other than age, color, creed, disability, familial status, gender identity,
lawful source of income, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex, or
sexual orientation.
This section shall not be limited by Section 31.07(2).
31.20 FAIR HOUSING – DISCRIMINATION IN PROVISION OF
BROKERAGE SERVICES. It is unlawful to deny any person access to or membership
or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’ organization or other
service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or
to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership
or participation, on account of age, color, creed, disability, familial status, gender
identity, lawful source of income, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex, or
sexual orientation.
31.21 FAIR HOUSING – EXCEPTIONS FOR LAWFUL SOURCE OF INCOME.
The protection against lawful source of income discrimination shall not prohibit a person
from:
1. Refusing to consider income derived from any criminal activity; or
2. Determining the ability of any potential buyer or renter to pay a purchase
price or pay rent by:
A. Verifying, in a commercially reasonable manner, the source and
amount of income of the potential buyer or renter, including any rental or
purchase payments or portions of rental or purchase payments that will be
made by other individuals, organizations or voucher and rental assistance
payment programs on the same basis as payments to be made directly by
the potential buyer or renter
B. Evaluating, in a commercially reasonable manner, the prospective
stability, security and credit worthiness of the potential buyer or renter or
any source of income of the potential buyer or renter, including any rental
or purchase payments or portions of rental or purchase payments that will
be made by other individuals, organizations or voucher and rental
assistance payment programs.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
31.22 FAIR HOUSING – ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT;
PRELIMINARY MATTERS. An individual wishing to file a complaint with the
Commission must file within one year after an alleged discriminatory housing practice
has occurred or terminated. Alternatively, such an individual may elect, in lieu of an
administrative proceeding under the Fair Housing sections of this chapter, to have the
claims asserted in the complaint decided in a civil action with the District Court. As per
subsection 5 of this section, if the Commission perceives a need for prompt judicial
action, the Commission and complainant may file jointly.
1. Complaints and Answers.
A. An aggrieved person may, not later than one year after an alleged
discriminatory housing practice has occurred or terminated, file a complaint
with the commission alleging such discriminatory housing practice. The
Commission or a Commissioner may also file such a complaint.
B. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall contain such
information and be in such form as the Commission requires.
C. The Commission may also investigate housing practices to determine
whether a complaint should be brought under this section.
D. Upon the filing of such complaint:
(1) The Commission shall serve notice upon the aggrieved person
acknowledging such filing and advising the aggrieved person of the
time limits and choice of forums provided under the Fair Housing
sections of this chapter.
(2) The Commission shall, not later than 10 days after such filing or
the identification of an additional respondent under paragraph H of
this subsection, serve on the respondent a notice identifying the
alleged discriminatory housing practice and advising such
respondent of the procedural rights and obligations of respondents
under this section, together with a copy of the original complaint.
(3) Each respondent may file, not later than 10 days after receipt of
notice from the Commission, an answer to such complaint.
(4) The Commission shall make an investigation of the alleged
discriminatory housing practice and complete such investigation
within 100 days after the filing of the complaint, unless it is
impracticable to do so.
(5) The Commission shall commence proceedings with respect to
the complaint before the end of the 30th day after receipt of the
complaint.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
E. If the Commission is unable to complete the investigation within 100
days after the filing of the complaint, the Commission shall notify the
complainant and respondent in writing of the reasons for not doing so.
F. Within one year of the date of receipt of a complaint alleging a
discriminatory housing or real estate practice, the commission shall take final
administrative action with respect to that complaint unless it is impracticable
to do so. If the Commission is unable to make final disposition of the case
within the one-year period, the Commission shall notify the complainant and
respondent in writing of the reasons for not doing so.
G. Complaints and answers shall be under oath or affirmation, and may
be reasonable and fairly amended at any time.
H. A person who is not named as a respondent in a complaint, but who
is identified as a respondent in the course of investigation, may be joined as an
additional or substitute respondent upon written notice. Such notice, in
addition to meeting the requirements of paragraph A of this subsection 1,
shall explain the basis for the Commission’s belief that the person to whom
the notice is addressed is properly joined as a respondent.
I. A claim under this chapter shall not be maintained unless a complaint
is filed with the Commission within one year after the alleged
discriminatory or unfair practice occurred or was terminated. If the alleged
unlawful discriminatory practice or act is of a continuing nature, the date of
the occurrence of said alleged unlawful practice shall be deemed to be any
date subsequent to the commencement of the alleged unlawful practice up to
and including the date upon which the unlawful practice has ceased.
2. Investigation Report and Conciliation.
A. Beginning with the filing of a complaint, the Commission shall, to
the extent feasible, engage in conciliation with respect to such complaint.
B. A conciliation agreement arising out of such conciliation shall be an
agreement between the respondent and the complainant, and shall be subject
to approval by the Commission.
C. A conciliation agreement may provide for binding arbitration of the
dispute arising from the complaint. Any such arbitration that results from a
conciliation agreement may award appropriate relief, including monetary
relief.
D. Each conciliation agreement shall be made public unless the
complainant and respondent otherwise agree and the Commission determines
that disclosure is not required to further the purposes of this section.
E. At the end of each investigation under this section, the Commission
shall prepare a final investigative report containing:
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
(1) The names and dates of contacts and witnesses;
(2) A summary and the dates of correspondence and other
contacts with the aggrieved person and the respondent;
(3) A summary description of other pertinent records;
(4) A summary of witness statements; and
(5) Answers to interrogatories.
A final report under this paragraph may be amended if additional evidence
is later discovered.
3. Failure to Comply with Conciliation Agreement. Whenever the Commission
has probable cause to believe that a respondent has breached a conciliation
agreement, the Commission shall pursue all available judicial remedies provided
by law which, in the Commission’s opinion, will best and most effectively carry
out the conciliation agreement, and they may recommend that a civil action be
filed for the enforcement of such agreement. Probable cause, as used in the Fair
Housing sections of this chapter, is to be interpreted as reasonable cause under the
Federal Fair Housing Act and the regulations in 24 C.F.R. 103, which is a lower
standard and less difficult to achieve than the probable cause standard used in this
chapter. If the Commission determines that, based on the totality of factual
circumstances known at the time of review, reasonable cause exists to believe that
a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the
Commission shall find probable cause.
4. Prohibitions and Requirements with Respect to Disclosure of Information.
A. Nothing said or done in the course of conciliation under this section
may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under
the Fair Housing provisions of this chapter without the written consent of
the persons concerned.
B. Notwithstanding paragraph A above, the Commission shall make
available to the aggrieved person and the respondent, at any time, upon
request following completion of the Commission investigation, information
derived from an investigation and any final investigative report relating to
that investigation.
5. Prompt Judicial Action. If the Commission reasonably concludes at any
time following the filing of a complaint that prompt judicial action is necessary to
carry out the purposes of the Fair Housing sections of this chapter, the
Commission may commence a civil action in accordance with the Iowa Rules of
Civil Procedure and this chapter. Commencement of judicial action under this
subsection or under subsection 3 shall not stay any proceedings which may have
been commenced under the Fair Housing sections of this chapter.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
31.23 FAIR HOUSING – PROBABLE CAUSE DETERMINATION AND
EFFECT.
1. Investigative Determinations. After a complaint has been filed, the
Executive Director shall designate an investigator to make a prompt investigation
of the complaint. The investigator shall review all of the evidence and complete
the investigation. The investigator shall prepare a written report making a
recommendation of probable cause or no probable cause or other appropriate
action to the assigned Commissioner.
2. Commissioner’s Determination. The assigned Commissioner shall find that
there is either probable cause or no probable cause to believe that discrimination
exists regarding a complaint, or, under the appropriate circumstances, that the
complaint has been satisfactorily adjusted or successfully conciliated, or the
complaint should be administratively closed. The assigned commissioner will
promptly notify commission staff of the finding.
3. Both the complainant and the respondent shall be notified of the decision in
writing by certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the investigating
commissioner’s decision.
4. If the Commission determines that probable cause exists to believe that a
discriminatory housing or real estate practice has occurred or is about to occur, the
Commission shall immediately issue a probable cause determination unless the
Commission determines that the legality of a zoning or land use law or ordinance is
involved, in which case the Commission shall refer the matter promptly to the
office of the City Attorney of the City of Marion for appropriate action.
5. A probable cause determination must:
A. Consist of a short and plain statement of the facts on which the
Commission has found probable cause to believe that a discriminatory
housing or real estate practice has occurred or is about to occur;
B. Be based on the final investigative report; and
C. Need not be limited to the facts or grounds alleged in the complaint.
6. Not later than 20 days after the Commission issues a cause determination,
unless it is impracticable to do, the Commission shall send a copy of the
determination with information as to how to make an election under Section 31.24
to all of the following persons:
A. Each respondent; and
B. Each aggrieved person on whose behalf the complaint was filed.
7. The Commission shall not issue a determination under this section
regarding an alleged discriminatory housing or real estate practice after the
beginning of the trial of a civil action commenced by the aggrieved party under
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
Federal or State law seeking relief with respect to the discriminatory housing or real
estate practice.
8. Effect of Probable Cause Determination. A finding of probable cause
regarding a complaint alleging a discriminatory housing or real estate practice
commences the running of the period during which an aggrieved person on whose
behalf a complaint was filed, a complainant, or a respondent may, pursuant to
Section 31.24, elect to have the charges asserted in the complaint decided in a civil
action in district court. If an election is made, the Commission shall file a civil
action on behalf of the aggrieved person in district court. The Commission shall
be represented by the City Attorney. If no election is made, then the Commission
must schedule a hearing on the charges in the complaint.
9. Effect of No Probable Cause Determination. If the Commission determines
there is “no probable cause” regarding a complaint alleging a discriminatory
housing or real estate practice, the Commission must:
A. Issue a short and plain written statement of the facts upon which the
no probable cause determination was based;
B. Promptly dismiss the complaint;
C. Notify the aggrieved person(s) and the respondent(s) of the dismissal
(including the written statement of facts) by certified mail or personal
service; and
D. Make public disclosure of the dismissal. If the finding is not
reconsidered, the Commission may take no further action to process that
complaint except as may be necessary to carry out the Commission’s
administrative functions.
31.24 FAIR HOUSING – ENFORCEMENT BY COMMISSION.
1. Election of Judicial Determination. When a probable cause determination
has been issued, a complainant, a respondent, or an aggrieved person on whose
behalf the complaint was filed may elect to have the claims asserted in that
complaint decided in a civil action under Section 31.27 in lieu of a hearing under
subsection 6 of this section,. The election must be made not later than 20 days
after such service. The person making such election shall give notice of doing so
to the Commission and to all other complainants and respondents to whom the
complaint relates.
2. Administrative Law Judge Hearing in Absence of Election. If an election is
not made under subsection 1 of this section, with respect to a complaint, the
Commission shall provide an opportunity for a hearing on the record with respect
to the complaint issued under Section 31.22. The Commission shall delegate the
conduct of a hearing under this section to an administrative law judge appointed
by the Commission.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
3. Rights of Parties. At a hearing under this section, each party may appear in
person, be represented by counsel, present evidence, cross-examine witnesses and
obtain the issuance of subpoenas under Section 31.04(14). Any aggrieved person
may intervene as a party in the proceeding. The Iowa Rules of Evidence apply to
the presentation of evidence in such hearing as they would in a civil action in Linn
County District Court.
4. Expedited Discovery and Hearing.
A. Discovery in administrative proceedings under this section shall be
conducted as expeditiously and inexpensively as possible, consistent with
the need of all parties to obtain relevant evidence.
B. A hearing under this section shall be conducted as expeditiously and
inexpensively as possible, consistent with the needs and rights of the parties
to obtain a fair hearing and a complete record.
5. Resolution. Any resolution before a final order under this section shall
require the consent of the aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge is issued.
6. Hearings, Findings and Conclusions and Order.
A. The administrative law judge shall commence the hearing under this
section no later than 120 days following the probable cause determination,
unless it is impracticable to do so. If the administrative law judge is unable
to commence the hearing within 120 days after the determination, the
administrative law judge shall notify the Commission, the aggrieved person
on whose behalf the complaint was filed, and the respondent in writing of
the reasons for not doing so.
B. The administrative law judge shall make findings of fact and
conclusions of law within 60 days after the end of the hearing under this
section, unless it is impracticable to do so. If the administrative law judge
is unable to make findings of fact and conclusions of law within such
period, or any succeeding 60-day period thereafter, the administrative law
judge shall notify the Commission, the aggrieved person on whose behalf
the complaint was filed, and the respondent in writing of the reasons for not
doing so.
C. If the administrative law judge finds that a respondent has engaged
or is about to engage in a discriminatory housing practice, such
administrative law judge shall promptly issue an order for such relief as
may be appropriate, which may include actual damages suffered by the
aggrieved person and injunctive or other equitable relief. Such order may,
to vindicate the public interest, assess a civil penalty against the respondent
in an amount not to exceed those established by Code of Iowa Chapter
216.15A.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
D. No such order shall affect any contract, sale, encumbrance or lease
consummated before the issuance of such order and involving a bona fide
purchaser, encumbrance or tenant without actual notice of the complaint
filed under the Fair Housing sections of this chapter.
E. In the case of an order with respect to a discriminatory housing
practice that occurred in the course of a business subject to licensing or
regulation by a governmental agency, the Commission shall, not later than
30 days after the date of the issuance of such order (or, if such order is
judicially reviewed 30 days after such order is in substance affirmed upon
such review):
(1) Send copies of the findings of fact, conclusion of law, and the
order, to that governmental agency; and
(2) Recommend to that governmental agency appropriate
disciplinary action (including, where appropriate, the suspension or
revocation of the license of the respondent).
F. If the administrative law judge finds that the respondent has not
engaged or is not about to engage in a discriminatory housing practice, as
the case may be, such administrative law judge shall enter an order
dismissing the complaint. The Commission shall make public disclosure of
each such dismissal.
G. An administrative law judge may not continue administrative
proceedings under the Fair Housing sections of this chapter regarding any
alleged discriminatory housing practice after the beginning of the trial of a
civil action commenced by the aggrieved party under a Federal or State
law, seeking relief with respect to that discriminatory housing practice.
31.25 FAIR HOUSING – REVIEW BY COMMISSION; SERVICE OF FINAL
ORDER.
1. The Commission may review any finding, conclusion or order issued under
Section 31.24. Such review shall be completed not later than 30 days after the
finding, conclusion or order is so issued; otherwise the finding, conclusion or
order becomes final.
2. The Commission shall cause the findings of fact and conclusions of law
made with respect to any final order for relief, together with a copy of such order,
to be served on each aggrieved person and each respondent in the proceeding.
31.26 FAIR HOUSING – JUDICIAL REVIEW; REVIEW OF ORDER. Any party
aggrieved by a final order for relief under the Fair Housing sections of this chapter
granting or denying in whole or in part the relief sought may obtain review of such order
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
by filing a petition for review not later than 30 days after the order is issued in Linn
County District Court according to Section 31.15 of this chapter.
31.27 FAIR HOUSING – CIVIL ACTION ELECTED.
1. A complainant, a respondent, or an aggrieved person on whose behalf the
complaint was filed may elect to have the charges asserted in the complaint
decided in a civil action as provided herein.
A. The election must be made not later than 20 days after the date of
receipt by the electing person of service under Section 31.24(1), or, in the
case of the Commission, not later than 20 days after the date of such
service.
B. The person making the election shall give notice to the Commission
and to all other complainants and respondents to whom the election relates.
C. The election to have the charges of a complaint decided in a civil
action as provided here is available only if it is alleged that there has been a
violation of the Fair Housing sections of this chapter.
2. An aggrieved person may, as provided by Code of Iowa, Chapter 216.16A,
file a civil action in District Court not later than two years after the occurrence or
the termination of an alleged discriminatory housing or real estate practice or the
breach of a conciliation agreement entered into in Section 31.22 or whichever
occurs last, to obtain appropriate relief with respect to the discriminatory housing
or real estate practice or breach.
A. The two-year period does not include any time during which a public
hearing under Section 31.24 is pending with respect to a complaint or
charge based on the discriminatory housing or real estate practice. This
subsection does not apply to actions arising from a breach of a conciliation
agreement.
B. An aggrieved person may file an action under this section whether or
not a discriminatory housing or real estate complaint has been filed under
Section 31.22 and without regard to the status of any discriminatory
housing or real estate complaint filed under that section.
C. Except an aggrieved person shall not file an action under this
subsection with respect to an alleged discriminatory housing or real estate
practice that forms the basis of a charge issued by the Commission if the
Commission has begun a hearing on the record under the Fair Housing
sections of this chapter with respect to the charge.
D. If the Commission has obtained a conciliation agreement with the
consent of an aggrieved person, the aggrieved person shall not file an action
under this section with respect to the alleged discriminatory practice that
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
forms the basis for the complaint except to enforce the terms of the
agreement.
31.28 FAIR HOUSING – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS.
1. Additional civil proceedings are available in the area of housing as follows:
A. If timely election is made under Section 31.24, the parties are
entitled to all rights, protections and remedies provided by Iowa Code
Chapter 216.17A.
B. An aggrieved person may intervene in the action.
C. If the District Court finds that a discriminatory housing or real estate
practice has occurred or is about to occur, the District Court may grant any
relief that a court may grant in a civil action under Code of Iowa Chapter
216.17A.
D. If monetary relief is sought for the benefit of an aggrieved person
who does not intervene in the civil action, the District Court as provided by
Code of Iowa Chapter 216.17A shall not award the monetary relief if that
aggrieved person has not complied with discovery orders entered by the
District Court.
2. A Commission order under Section 31.13 and Section 31.22, and a
Commission order that has been substantially affirmed by judicial review, do not
affect a contract, sale, encumbrance, or lease that was consummated before the
commission issued the order and involved a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or
tenant who did not have actual notice of the charge issued under this section.
3. If the Commission issues an order with respect to a discriminatory housing
practice that occurred in the course of a business subject to a licensing or
regulation by a governmental agency, the Commission, not later than 30 days after
the date of issuance of the order, shall do all of the following:
A. Send copies of the findings and the order to the governmental
agency;
B. Recommend to the governmental agency appropriate disciplinary
action.
4. If the Commission issues an order against a respondent against whom
another order was issued within the preceding five years under Section 31.13 and
Section 31.22, the Commission shall send a copy of each order under that section
to the State Attorney General.
5. On application by a person alleging a discriminatory housing practice or by
a person against whom a discriminatory practice is alleged, the District Court must
appoint an attorney for the person.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
6. In an action under this section, if the District Court finds that a
discriminatory housing or real estate practice has occurred or is about to occur, the
District Court may, as provided by Code of Iowa, Chapter 216.17A, award or
issue to the plaintiff one or more of the following:
A. Actual and punitive damages;
B. Reasonable attorney’s fees;
C. Court costs;
D. Subject to subsection 7 of this section, any permanent or temporary
injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, including an order
enjoining the defendant from engaging in the practice or ordering appropriate
affirmative action.
7. Relief granted under this section does not affect a contract, sale,
encumbrance, or lease that was consummated before the granting of the relief and
involved a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant who did not have actual
notice of the filing of a complaint under Section 31.22 or a civil action under this
section.
8. In an action under this section, the District Court may, as provided by Code
of Iowa Chapter 216.17A, do any of the following:
A. Order preventive relief, including a permanent or temporary
injunction, restraining order, or other order against the person responsible
for a violation of housing rights as necessary to assure the full enjoyment of
the housing rights granted by this chapter;
B. Order other appropriate relief, including the awarding of monetary
damages, reasonable attorney's fees, and court costs;
C. To vindicate the public interest, assess a civil penalty against the
respondent in an amount not to exceed those established by Code of Iowa
Chapter 216.17A as follows:
(1) $55,000.00 for a first violation,
(2) $110,000.00 for a second or subsequent violation.
9. A person may intervene in an action under this section if the person is any
of the following:
A. An aggrieved person to the discriminatory housing or real estate
practice;
B. A party to a conciliation agreement concerning the discriminatory
housing or real estate practice.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
10. A court in a civil action brought under the Fair Housing sections of this
chapter or the Commission in an administrative hearing under Section 31.13 or
Section 31.22 may award reasonable attorney’s fees to the prevailing party.
31.29 FAIR HOUSING – ATTORNEY’S FEES. In any administrative proceeding
brought under the Fair Housing sections of this chapter, or any court proceeding arising
therefrom, or any civil action under the Fair Housing provisions of this chapter, the
administrative law judge or the court, as the case may be, in its discretion, may allow the
prevailing party, other than the Commission, a reasonable attorney’s fee and costs. The
Commission shall be liable for such fees and costs to the extent provided by U.S.C.
section 504 of Title 5 or by U.S.C. section 2412 of Title 28.
31.30 FAIR HOUSING – CONCILIATION AND PERSUASION. Section 31.22(2)
requires conciliation at the time a complaint is filed. In addition, immediately after a
finding of probable cause, or sooner, if the complainant and respondent consent, the staff
and the Executive Director shall endeavor to eliminate the illegal discriminatory practice
by conciliation and persuasion. If the complaint is successfully resolved to the
satisfaction of the Commission, complainant and respondent through conferences,
conciliation and persuasion, it shall be formalized in a binding written agreement signed
by a representative of the Commission, complainant and respondent and the Commission
shall furnish both the complainant and respondent with a copy of terms of the
conciliation.
31.31 FAIR HOUSING – FAILURE TO HONOR COMMITMENT. The
Commission may investigate a conciliated complaint at a later date to assure that the
respondent is complying with the terms of the conciliation. In any case where the
respondent has made commitments in the conciliation and the Commission finds that the
commitments have not been kept, it may open all of its files, previous complaints and
proceedings involving the respondent for public inspection and proceed with such further
steps as it finds appropriate, including initiation of a proceeding in Linn County District
Court to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
31.32 FAIR HOUSING – CONFIDENTIALITY.
1. In the event that a complaint is successfully conciliated or it is found that
no discrimination was practiced, the names of the parties to the complaint and all
proceedings with regard to such parties and the place or places of alleged
discrimination shall be and remain confidential unless otherwise agreed by mutual
consent of the parties; provided, however, that the terms of the conciliation may be
published. This section shall not prohibit disclosure made in connection with the
conduct of an investigation or any disclosure to the Iowa Civil Rights Commission
or a similar government agency conducting an investigation involving illegal
discriminatory practices.
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
2. The members of the commission and its staff shall not disclose the filing of
a complaint, the information gathered during the investigation, or the endeavor to
eliminate such illegal discriminatory practice by conciliation or persuasion except
when such disclosure is made in connection with the conduct of the investigation.
The identity of individuals interviewed shall remain confidential except as the
disclosure of their identity becomes necessary at the time of public hearing.
3. In the event a complaint is not successfully conciliated and a determination
has been made to proceed to public hearing, the Executive Director shall promptly
forward to the respondent the names and addresses of those persons who shall be
called as witnesses at such public hearing.
31.33 FAIR HOUSING – COOPERATION WITH STATE AND FEDERAL
AGENCIES ADMINISTERING FAIR HOUSING LAWS.
1. The Commission may cooperate with state and federal agencies charged
with the administration of State and Federal fair housing laws and, with the
consent of such agencies, utilize the services of such agencies and their employees
and in furtherance of such cooperative efforts, the Commission may enter into
written agreements with such State or Federal agencies.
2. Nothing in the Fair Housing sections of this chapter shall be construed to
afford the classes protected under this section fewer or lesser rights or remedies
than those afforded under the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1998 and
its implementing regulations. To the extent provisions in the Fair Housing
sections of this chapter afford greater or different rights and remedies than those
afforded by Federal law and State law, however, they shall be interpreted and
construed to expand those rights and remedies.
(Chapter 31 - Ord. 11-19 – Nov. 11 Supp.)
CHAPTER 31 CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
CHAPTER 35
POLICE DEPARTMENT
35.01 Department Established 35.06 Police Chief: Duties
35.02 Organization 35.07 Summoning Aid
35.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 35.08 Taking Weapons
35.04 Required Training 35.09 Police Service Dog
35.05 Peace Officers Appointed
35.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED. The police department of the City is
established to provide for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law and
ordinances within the corporate limits of the City.
35.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Police Chief and such other
law enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized
by resolution of the Council.
35.03 PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS. In no case shall any person be
selected or appointed as a law enforcement officer unless such person meets the
minimum qualification standards established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
35.04 REQUIRED TRAINING. All peace officers shall have received the minimum
training required by law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year
of employment. Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as
required by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11 [2])
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
35.05 PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED. The City Manager shall appoint the Police
Chief, subject to the approval of the Council, and the Police Chief shall select the other
members of the department pursuant to Chapter 400 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.13)
35.06 POLICE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Police Chief has the following powers and
duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
1. Control of Department. The general control of the Police Department is
vested in the Police Chief, who shall be responsible for the governing, efficiency
and good conduct of the Department, subject to the orders of the Mayor and
Council.
2. Rules. The Police Chief, in the exercise of duties, shall have the power to
prescribe, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations for the governing of the
members and employees of the Department. These rules and regulations shall not
be inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances or the laws of the State. The rules
and regulations shall be filed with the Clerk for distribution to the Council which
shall have the authority to disapprove the same in the whole or part. The Clerk
shall additionally advise the Marion Civil Service Commission of the filing of the
rules and regulations.
3. Manual. The Police Chief shall prepare a police manual or rules book
setting forth the duties of the members and employees of the Department. The
manual or rules book shall contain a general outline of the functions of the Police
Department along with the rules of conduct and governance of the Department.
The manual or rules book shall be kept on file at the Department and shall be filed
with the Clerk for distribution to the Council, which shall have the authority to
disapprove the same in whole or part. The Clerk shall additionally advise the
Marion Civil Service Commission of the filing of the manual.
4. Assisting Attorney. The Police Chief shall assist the City Attorney in
prosecuting any persons for the violation of any ordinance by gathering all the
facts and circumstances surrounding the case.
5. Report to the Council. The Police Chief when requested shall report to the
Mayor, City Manager and the Council upon the Police Chief’s own activities as
Police Chief.
6. Protect Persons and Property. The Police Chief shall have the power to
protect the rights of persons and property, preserve order at all public gatherings,
prevent, insofar as possible, and abolish nuisances, and protect persons against
every manner of disorder and offense.
7. Execute Lawful Orders. The Police Chief shall execute all lawful orders of
any board or commission established in the City.
8. Aiding City Officers. When requested, the Police Chief shall aid other
municipal officers in the execution of their official duties.
9. Reports of Motor Vehicle Accidents. The Police Chief shall report motor
vehicle accidents the department investigates in the regular course of duty to the
Department of Transportation, as required by law.
10. Records. The Police Chief shall keep a record of all arrests made in the
City by the Marion Police Department. The Police Chief shall record whether the
arrest was made under provisions of the laws of the State or ordinances of the
City. The record shall show the offense for which arrest was made, who made the
arrest, and the disposition made of the charge.
11. Attendance at Meetings. The Police Chief or a designee of the Police Chief
shall attend all regular meetings of the Council and special meetings of the
Council as requested.
35.07 SUMMONING AID. Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally
summon as many persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in
making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
35.08 TAKING WEAPONS. Any person who makes an arrest may take from the
person arrested all items which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested
person may have within such person’s control to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
35.09 POLICE SERVICE DOG.
1. As used in this section, “police service dog” means a dog used by a peace
officer or correctional officer in the performance of the officer’s duties, whether or
not the dog is on duty.
2. No person shall knowingly and willfully or maliciously torment, strike,
administer a nonpoisonous desensitizing substance to or otherwise interfere with a
police service dog.
3. No person shall willfully, wantonly, maliciously or mischievously harass,
torment, tease or frighten any police service dog or interfere with, meddle with or
hinder any such dog.
The provisions of this section do not apply to a peace officer or veterinarian who
terminates the life of such a dog for the purpose of relieving the dog of undue pain or
suffering, or to a person who justifiably acts in defense of self or another.
CHAPTER 36
FIRE DEPARTMENT
36.01 Establishment and Purpose 36.06 Worker’s Compensation and Liability Insurance
36.02 Organization 36.07 Liability Insurance
36.03 Department Appointments 36.08 Authority to Cite Violations
36.04 Fire Chief: Duties 36.09 Supplemental Paramedics
36.05 Calls Outside City Limits 36.10 Fees for Services
36.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE. A Fire Department is hereby
established to prevent and extinguish fires, to protect lives and property against fires, to
promote fire prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there
is no other established agency within the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
36.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other
officers and personnel as may be authorized by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
36.03 DEPARTMENT APPOINTMENTS.
1. Fire Chief. The City Manager shall appoint the Fire Chief, subject to
Council approval, pursuant to Chapter 400 of the Code of Iowa.
2. Full-time Firefighters. All full-time firefighters shall be appointed by the
Fire Chief pursuant to Chapter 400 of the Code of Iowa.
3. Volunteer Firefighters. All volunteer firefighters shall be appointed by the
Fire Chief.
36.04 FIRE CHIEF DUTIES.
1. Command. Command all operations of the Fire Department and be
responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles and equipment of the
Fire Department. In the absence of the Fire Chief, the next ranking officer or
senior firefighter on duty shall exercise all of the duties and responsibilities of the
Fire Chief.
2. Rules. Have the power, in the exercise of duties, to prescribe, promulgate
and enforce rules and regulations for the governance of the members and
employees of the Fire Department, which shall, however, not be inconsistent with
this Code of Ordinances or the laws of the State; and provide every firefighter of
the Fire Department with a copy of these rules and regulations. (The rules and
regulations shall be filed with the Clerk for distribution to the Council which shall
have the authority to disapprove the rules and regulations in whole or part. The
Clerk shall advise the Marion Civil Service Commission of the filing of the rules
and regulations.)
3. Control of Department. Be responsible for maintaining the efficiency,
discipline, training and control of the Fire Department. (The members of the Fire
Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.)
4. Records of Department. Be responsible for keeping and maintaining
records of the Fire Department personnel, operating costs and efficiency of each
element of fire-fighting equipment, depreciation and all equipment and apparatus,
the number of responses to alarms and their cause and location, and an analysis of
losses by value, type and location of buildings.
5. Reports. Make monthly written reports to the Mayor, City Manager and
Council concerning the general status, efficiency of the Fire Department, number
of alarms answered during the month, and additional information as may be
requested by the Mayor, City Manager and Council; compile for the year a factual
annual report based upon the records maintained by the Fire Department and
summarizing the activities of the Fire Department. (This report shall be filed with
the Mayor, City Manager and Council. This annual report shall also contain
recommendations for the improvement of the Fire Department.)
6. Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention and
the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
7. Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits and
development of fire emergency plans.
8. Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation as
necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation, investigate
the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other hazardous
condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the reasonable
performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from approaching a fire
scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel or individual that may
impede or interfere with the operation of the fire department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
9. Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect
ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-of-way,
or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent
accidents or interference with the fire fighting efforts of the fire department, to
control the scene until any required investigation is complete, or to preserve
evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
10. Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage in
excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) has occurred as a result of a fire,
or if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For
all other fires causing an estimated damage of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more or
emergency responses by the Fire Department, file a report with the Fire Marshal’s
Division within ten (10) days following the end of the month. The report shall
indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants
of the property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated total
loss to the property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation, and other facts,
statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)
11. Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any
building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of making
such investigation or inspection which under law or ordinance may be necessary to
be made and is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
12. Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
13. Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal, and as
provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by investigating,
preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.4)
36.05 CALLS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS. The Fire Department may answer calls to
fires and other emergencies within Linn County or adjacent counties but outside the
corporate limits of the City. The Fire Department may answer such calls so long as the
governmental unit where the emergency or fire exists has a reciprocity or Chapter 28E
agreement with the City, either formal or informal, or a past history of providing
assistance to the Marion Fire Department on fires or emergencies within the corporate
limits.
(Ord. 01-30 – Nov. 01 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
36.06 WORKER’S COMPENSATION AND LIABILITY INSURANCE. The
Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for worker’s compensation
coverage for volunteers injured in the performance of their duties as firefighters. All
volunteers shall be covered by the contract.
36.07 LIABILITY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure against
liability of the City or members of the Fire Department, including volunteers, for injuries,
death or property damage arising out of and resulting from the performance of
departmental duties. However, the City will not insure or be responsible for actions of a
volunteer going to or from the scene of a fire or other required or official activity in a
private motor vehicle. This exception does not apply where a volunteer goes to or from
the scene of a fire or other official departmental activity or function in a governmentally
owned Fire Department vehicle.
36.08 AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS. Fire officials acting under the
authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa may issue citations in accordance to
Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for violations of state and/or local fire safety
regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
36.09 SUPPLEMENTAL PARAMEDICS. Up to three (3) employees of other City
departments, who are certified paramedics with the State of Iowa and approved by the
Fire Department Medical Division, may be appointed as supplemental paramedics. The
Fire Chief, as provided in Section 36.03 of this chapter, shall make all appointments of
supplemental paramedics. Supplemental paramedics will operate under Medical Control,
procedures, guidelines and standing orders that are currently in place at the Fire
Department.
36.10 FEES FOR SERVICES. The Fire Department shall charge such fees for
services rendered as are approved by resolution of the City Council for response to:
structure fires; field or open space fires; vehicle fires; LNG or LPG gas leaks; victim
extraction; confined space or trench rescue; and for the clean up of hazardous materials.
Whenever the responsible party is a minor, the payment of said fees shall be the
responsibility of the minor’s parents or guardian.
(Ord. 09-02 – Feb. 09 Supp.)
CHAPTER 37
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
37.01 Purpose 37.05 Notifications
37.02 Definitions 37.06 Police Authority
37.03 Cleanup Required 37.07 Liability
37.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs
37.01 PURPOSE. In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety and
welfare from the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are
promulgated to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal and cleanup of
hazardous substance spills within the City limits.
37.02 DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify,
analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove or dispose of a hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
2. “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual, imminent
or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance onto the land,
into a water of the State or into the atmosphere which creates an immediate or
potential danger to the public health or safety or to the environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
3. “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not limited to, a
substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an irritant or that
generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other means. “Hazardous
substance” may include any hazardous waste identified or listed by the
administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the
Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under section 307 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any
hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous material designated
by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous Materials Transportation
Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
4. “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles,
stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the release
of which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers, and any other
person in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous condition occurs,
whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is operating under a lease,
contract, or other agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
37.03 CLEANUP REQUIRED. Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the
deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so that
the hazardous substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the
environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground
waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied by a cleanup, as
defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an acceptable, safe condition.
The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the responsible person. If the responsible person
does not cause the cleanup to begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and
circumstances of the incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give reasonable
notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice setting a deadline
for accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will proceed to procure cleanup
services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup if the
cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline. In the event that it is determined that
immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of the present danger to the public health,
safety and welfare, then no notice shall be required and the City may proceed to procure
the cleanup and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup. If
the bill for those services is not paid within thirty (30) days, the City Attorney shall
proceed to obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the
capacity of the City to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the Council and
immediately seek any State or Federal funds available for said cleanup.
37.04 LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS. The responsible person shall be strictly
liable for all of the following:
1. The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City as a result of the failure
of the responsible person to clean up a hazardous substance involved in a
hazardous condition.
2. The reasonable costs incurred by the City to evacuate people from the area
threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the person.
3. The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of, or loss
of City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous condition
caused by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury, destruction or
loss.
37.05 NOTIFICATIONS.
1. A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing of a
hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources and
the Police Department of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as
possible but not later than six (6) hours after the onset of the hazardous condition
or discovery of the hazardous condition. The Police Chief shall immediately
notify the Department of Natural Resources.
2. Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the
Police Department, which shall then notify the Department of Natural Resources.
37.06 POLICE AUTHORITY. If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law
enforcement officer or an authorized representative may:
1. Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a
hazardous condition, and
2. Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a hazardous
condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under this
section.
37.07 LIABILITY. The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages,
injuries, or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the
responsible person as defined in Section 37.02[4].
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
40.01 Assault 40.05 Failure to Disperse
40.02 Harassment 40.06 Public Nudity
40.03 Disorderly Conduct 40.07 Disorderly Houses
40.04 Unlawful Assembly
40.01 ASSAULT. No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
1. Pain or Injury. Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury to, or
which is intended to result in physical contact which will be insulting or offensive
to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1 [1])
2. Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act which is intended to place another in fear
of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting, or
offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1 [2])
However, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts, and such other
person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other activity, not in itself criminal,
and such act is a reasonably foreseeable incident of such sport or activity, and does not
create an unreasonable risk or serious injury or breach of the peace, the act is not an
assault. Provided, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts is employed
by a school district or accredited nonpublic school, or is an area education agency staff
member who provides services to a school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or
physical struggle, or other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the
employee or staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school
grounds or at an official school function regardless of the location, the act is not an
assault, whether the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between
students or other individuals if the degree and the force of the intervention is reasonably
necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02 HARASSMENT. No person shall commit harassment.
1. A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy or
alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
A. Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing or via
electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner
likely to cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Ord. 00-26 – Aug. 00 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
B. Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
C. Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
D. Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law
enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity,
knowing that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a
criminal act, knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
2. A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without
legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent to
threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section, unless the
context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in which two or
more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other. “Personal contact”
does not require a physical touching or oral communication, although it may
include these types of contacts.
40.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT. No person shall do any of the following:
1. Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in
or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in athletic
contests may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [1])
2. Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or
public building which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [2])
3. Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening
gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a
violent reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [3])
4. Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of authority,
disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt
the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [4])
5. False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate a
report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such report to
be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [5])
6. Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United
States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the
United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will provoke
or encourage another to commit a public offense.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [6])
7. Obstruct Use of Street. Without authority or justification, obstruct any
street, sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent to prevent or hinder
its lawful use by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4 [7])
8. Funeral or Memorial Service. A person shall not do any of the following
within five hundred feet of the building or other location where a funeral or
memorial service is being conducted, or within five hundred feet of a funeral
procession or burial:
A. Make loud and raucous noise which causes unreasonable distress to
the persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the
funeral procession.
B. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture which the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent
reaction by another.
C. Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession
or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial
service, funeral procession or burial.
D. This subsection applies to conduct within sixty minutes preceding,
during and within sixty minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral
procession or burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
(Ord. 06-21 – Nov. 06 Supp.)
40.04 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY. It is unlawful for three (3) or more persons to
assemble together, with them or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent
that they or any of them will commit a public offense. No person shall willingly join in
or remain part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe
it is such.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2)
40.05 FAILURE TO DISPERSE. A peace officer may order the participants in a riot
or unlawful assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly
to disperse. No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
40.06 PUBLIC NUDITY.
1. Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section:
A. “Nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitalia,
pubic hair or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing
of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of
the nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives
the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum
anal region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a
cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device
simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola.
B. “Public place” includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the
general public, and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to
the general public, including such places of entertainment, taverns,
restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls
limited to specific members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to
attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied.
2. Prohibition. No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a public place:
A. engage in sexual intercourse,
B. appear in a state of nudity, or
C. fondle the genitals of himself, herself or another person.
3. Exceptions. The prohibition set forth in subsections 2 (b) and (c) shall not
apply to:
A. Any child under ten (10) years of age; or
B. Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding.
40.07 DISORDERLY HOUSES.
1. As used in this section “disorderly house or property” means and includes
any land, building, house, structure, enclosure or place, including any adjacent
yard or bare ground, where riotous, noisy or disorderly conduct or loud or unusual
noises or loud profane or vulgar language or drunkenness, quarreling or fighting is
engaged in or permitted; or to which persons resort to for the purpose of
prostitution, lewdness or vagrancy; or where drug paraphernalia is possessed in
violation of Chapter 48 of the Code of Ordinances of Marion; or where runaway
minors or fugitives or persons with outstanding arrest warrants are harbored or
where stolen property is being hidden, received, stored, sold or distributed or a
place where intoxicating liquors or beer are illegally kept, sold, served, or given
away; or a place where a person who is of legal age sells, gives, or otherwise
supplies alcoholic liquor, wine or beer to a person under legal age, except a
licensee or permittee under Chapter 123 of the Iowa Code and except as allowed
in Section 123.47(2) of the Iowa Code.
2. No person shall keep, maintain, operate or be concerned in keeping,
maintaining or operating within the City, any disorderly house or property, illegal
gambling place, house of prostitution, place where illegal controlled substances
are kept, used, sold or given away, and no person shall frequent any such place or
be present therein or be employed therein.
(Ord. 12-12 – May 12 Supp.)
[The next page is 209]




CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances 41.07 Discharging Weapons
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public 41.08 Throwing and Shooting
Safety Entities 41.09 Bow and Arrow Hunting
41.03 Refusing to Assist Officer 41.10 Urinating and Defecating
41.04 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees 41.11 Fireworks Permit
41.05 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators 41.12 Switch-blade Knives
41.06 Antenna and Radio Wires 41.13 Possession and Use of Fireworks
41.01 DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES. No person shall distribute samples
of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless
the person delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes reasonable
precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or animals from the place where the
substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02 FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY
ENTITIES. No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
1. Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department, a law
enforcement authority or other public safety entity, knowing that the information is false,
or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing the act did not occur.
2. Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or she is not
reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or assistance.
3. Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who enters the
information on a citation.
41.03 REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER. Any person who is requested or ordered by any
magistrate or peace officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting
to make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render assistance as
required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause, refuse or neglect to render
assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
41.04 HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. No person shall
willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or employee from performing the
officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.05 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS. No person shall abandon
or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, with doors that may
become locked, outside of buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any
such refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on premises in the
person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.06 ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES. It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires,
antenna supports, radio wires or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground or public building without written consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
41.07 DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
1. It is unlawful for a person to discharge a rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol, gun or other
firearm of any kind within the City limits except by written consent of the Council or
Mayor. This section does not apply to peace officers acting in the course of their duties.
(Ord. 01-15 – Aug. 01 Supp.)
2. No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or otherwise have in his or her
possession in a public place, or in the passenger compartment of any vehicle, in a public
place or on a public street, an air or gas operated BB or pellet gun or pistol, or paint ball
gun or a replica of a firearm. This prohibition shall not apply when the air or gas operated
BB or pellet gun or pistol or paint ball gun or replica of a firearm is carried or transported
inside a trunk, cargo area or luggage compartment of a vehicle where the same will not be
readily accessible to any person riding in the vehicle.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell an air or gas operated BB or pellet gun or
pistol or paint ball gun or replica of a firearm to a person under eighteen years of age unless
he or she is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having the care and custody
of said under aged person.
(Ord. 09-12 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
41.08 THROWING AND SHOOTING. It is unlawful for a person to throw a stone, brick or
missile of any kind or to shoot a rubber gun, slingshot, air rifle, BB gun or other dangerous
instrument or toy on or into any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground or
public building, without written consent of the Council or Mayor.
(Ord. 01-15 – Aug. 01 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
41.09 BOW AND ARROW HUNTING. No person shall shoot any arrow within the City limits
except:
1. Properly licensed bow hunters within deer or turkey season upon private property
with the signed, written permission of the owner and provided no arrow is shot within 200
yards of any residence (except residence of the owner of the property). Prior to engaging
in any hunting activity, any person desiring to hunt deer or turkey with a bow and arrow
shall obtain a permit from the Marion Police Department. The permit application shall
require a showing of a valid State of Iowa hunting license, a state issued identification and
the signed, written permission of the property owner to engage in hunting. The written
permission from the landowner shall include the date and location that the applicant desires
to hunt. In addition, applicants may be required to produce their hunting equipment for
inspection and submit to a test of their shooting proficiency. All hunters shall clean up and
remove from the premises any residue from field dressing of any deer or turkey.
(Ord. 09-20 – Dec. 09 Supp.)
2. Upon a person’s own property at a target properly protected to prevent an arrow
from escaping the property.
3. At a target practice range.
(Ord. 04-18 – Feb. 05 Supp.)
41.10 URINATING AND DEFECATING. It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate
onto any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building,
including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway or window thereof,
or onto any public or private land.
41.11 FIREWORKS PERMIT. The City may, upon application in writing, grant a permit for
the display of fireworks by a City agency, fair associations, amusement parks and other
organizations or groups of individuals approved by City authorities when such fireworks display
will be handled by a competent operator. No permit shall be granted hereunder unless the operator
or sponsoring organization has filed with the City evidence of insurance in the following amounts:
1. Personal Injury: .............$250,000.00 per person.
2. Property Damage: .........$ 50,000.00.
3. Total Exposure: .............$1,000,000.00.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
41.12 SWITCH-BLADE KNIVES.
1. A “switch-blade” knife as herein referred to includes any instrument or weapon
having a blade which opens, projects or swings into any open position automatically:
A. By a force of a spring or other device; or
B. By hand pressure applied to a button or other device in the handle of the
instrument or weapon; or
C. By operation of inertia, gravity, or both; or
D. By any combination of two or more of the forces or methods set out above.
2. This section shall include, but is not limited to, what is commonly know as a switchblade
knife.
3. No person shall manufacture, sell, offer for sale, give or lend to any other person
or to the general public any type of switch-blade knife or other similar instrument.
4. No person shall have in his custody, care, control or possession, whether concealed
upon his person or not, any type of switch-blade knife or other similar instrument,
regardless of the length of the blade.
(Ord. 02-11 – May 02 Supp.)
41.13 POSSESSION AND USE OF FIREWORKS.
1. It is unlawful for any person to possess, store, use, ignite or explode any fireworks
not permitted by State law, within the City limits unless that person is the holder of a valid
permit or license therefore or an employee of such permittee or licensee.
2. In addition to the restrictions imposed by subsection 1, it is unlawful for any person
to use, ignite or explode any fireworks except for those items defined as a novelty in the
American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1 Chapter 3.2, within the City limits
except for on the following dates and times when it shall be lawful to use, ignite, or explode
any fireworks permitted by State law:
A. July 4th from 12:00 p.m. until 11:00 p.m.
B. December 31st from 6:00 p.m. until 12:30 a.m. on January 1st
(Ord. 17-29 – Feb. 18 Supp.)
[The next page is 215]
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
42.01 Trespassing 42.05 Fraud
42.02 Criminal Mischief 42.06 Theft
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.07 Fire Hydrants
42.04 Unauthorized Entry 42.08 Parades, Marches, and First Amendment Assemblies
42.01 TRESPASSING. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the property of
another. As used in this section, the term “property” includes any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle or other temporary or permanent structure whether publicly or privately
owned. The term “trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa Sec. 716.7 and 716.8)
1. Entering Property Without Permission. Entering upon or in property without the
express permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to
commit a public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place
thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2a])
2. Entering or Remaining on Property. Entering or remaining upon or in property
without justification after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove
or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by any peace
officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance
of the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2b])
3. Interfering with Lawful Use of Property. Entering upon or in property for the
purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by
others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2c])
4. Using Property Without Permission. Being upon or in property and wrongfully
using, removing therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein
anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner,
lessee, or person in lawful possession.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7 [2d])
None of the above shall be construed to prohibit entering upon the property of another for the sole
purpose of retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been thrown,
fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that the person retrieving the
property takes the most direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits
the property as quickly as is possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the
property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7(3))
42.02 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF. It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to
intentionally damage, deface, alter or destroy tangible property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03 DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES. It is unlawful for a person
intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract
from or of any law of the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement or
notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by order of any court,
during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY. No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon
any public building, premises or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said
building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open to the public, a
failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an unauthorized entry.
42.05 FRAUD. It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06 THEFT. It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
42.07 FIRE HYDRANTS. No person, unless specifically authorized by the City, shall open or
attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose whatsoever.
42.08 PARADES, MARCHES, AND FIRST AMENDMENT ASSEMBLIES.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this notice and permit approval process is to avoid
situations where more than one group seeks to use the same space at the same time and to
provide the Marion Police Department and other agencies the ability to provide appropriate
police protection, traffic control, and other support for participants and other individuals.
2. A person or group who wishes to conduct a parade, march, or other First
Amendment assembly on a public street, sidewalk, or other public way, or in a public park,
is not required to give notice or apply for permit approval before conducting the event
where:
A. The parade, march, or assembly will take place on public sidewalks and
crosswalks and will not prevent other pedestrians from using the sidewalks and
crosswalks and, when using crosswalks, will not block the view of normal and
lawful vehicular traffic in a manner that creates an immediate and unreasonable risk
of harm to drivers or pedestrians; or
B. The person or group reasonably anticipates that fewer than 50 persons will
participate in the parade, march, or assembly, and the same will not occur on a
public street; or
C. The parade, march, or assembly is for the purpose of an immediate and
spontaneous expression of views in response to a public event.
3. Except as provided in subsection 2 of this section, a person or group who wishes to
conduct a parade, march, or other First Amendment assembly on a public street, sidewalk,
or other public way, or in a public park, shall give notice and apply for a permit before
conducting the parade, march, or assembly.
A. If a parade or march is contemplated, then the route shall be shown in detail
as part of the notice and permit approval process.
B. The permit application shall include the name or names of the person or
group organizing the parade, march, or assembly, anticipated size of the parade,
march, or assembly, and the proposed date and location of the parade, march, or
assembly.
C. The Chief of Police/City Manager shall work with the organizer listed on
the permit application to modify the proposed plan's parade, march, or assembly
location or route as reasonably necessary based on considerations of public safety.
D. The Chief of Police/City Manager shall inform the person or group giving
notice of a parade, march, or assembly, in writing, of the reasons for any decision
to: (1) deny an application for approval of a permit; (2) revoke a permit prior to the
date of the planned event; or (3) approve a permit subject to time, place, or manner
restrictions that the applicant has advised the Chief of Police/City Manager are
objectionable to the applicant.
4. Reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions on Parades, Marches, and First
Amendment assemblies. The Chief of Police/City Manager may enforce reasonable time,
place, and manner restrictions on a parade, march, or First Amendment assembly by:
A. Establishing reasonable restrictions on a proposed parade, march or
assembly prior to its planned occurrence through the approval of a permit, where
the organizers of the event are required to provide notice;
B. Enforcing reasonable restrictions during the occurrence of a parade, march
or assembly for which a permit has been approved, which are in addition to the
restrictions set forth in the permit approval, where the additional restrictions are:
(1) ancillary to the restrictions set forth in the approved plan and are
designed to implement the substance and intent in the approval of the plan;
(2) enforced in response to the occurrence of actions or events unrelated
to the parade, march or assembly that were not anticipated at the time of the
approval of the permit and that were not caused by the permit holder,
counter-demonstrators, or the police;
(3) enforced to address a determination by the Chief of Police/City
Manager that during the pendency of a parade, march or assembly that there
exists an imminent likelihood of violence endangering persons or
threatening to cause significant property damage; or
(4) enforcing reasonable restrictions on a parade, march or assembly
during its occurrence where a plan was not approved for the assembly,
C. No time, place, or manner restrictions regarding a parade, march or
assembly shall be based on the content of the beliefs expressed or anticipated to be
expressed during the event, or on factors such as the attire or appearance of persons
participating or expected to participate in the event, nor may such restrictions favor
non-First Amendment activities over First Amendment activities.
5. The City shall not require, separate from or in addition to the requirements for
giving notice of or applying for a permit, that persons give notice to, or obtain a permit
from, the Chief of Police, or other municipal officials or agencies, as a prerequisite for
making or delivering an address, speech, or sermon regarding any political, social, or
religious subject in any public street, sidewalk, other public way, or park.
6. The City shall not require, separate from or in addition to the requirements for
giving notice of or applying for a permit, that persons give notice to, or obtain a permit
from the Chief of Police, or other municipal officials or agencies as a prerequisite for using
a stand or structure in connection with such an assembly; provided, that a parade, march,
or First Amendment assembly permit may contain limits on the nature, size, or number of
stands or structures to be used as required to maintain public safety. Individuals conducting
a parade, march, or assembly under subsection 3 of this section may use a stand or structure
so long as it does not prevent others from using the street, sidewalk, other public way, or
park.
7. The City shall not require, separate from or in addition to the requirements for
giving notice of or applying for a permit, that persons give notice to, or obtain a permit
from the Chief of Police, or other municipal officials or agency as a prerequisite for selling
demonstration-related merchandise within an area covered by an approved permit or within
a parade, march, or assembly covered by subsection 3 of this section; provided, that nothing
in this subsection shall be construed to authorize any person to sell merchandise in the area
covered by the permit contrary to the wishes of the permit holder.
8. Issuance Standards. The City Manager shall issue the permit as requested upon the
applicant's written agreement to comply with the terms of the permit unless the City
Manager finds that:
A. The time, route, and size of the parade, march, or assembly will disrupt to
an unreasonable extent the movement of other traffic. Before denying the permit
application, the City Manager/Chief of Police should work with the person or group
applying for a permit to provide ample alternative options to reach the assembly' s
target audience and suggesting alternative options.
B. The parade, demonstration, march, or rally will unreasonably interfere with
another parade, march, or assembly for which a permit has been issued. Before
denying the permit application, the City Manager/Chief of Police should work with
the person or group applying for a permit to provide ample alternative options to
reach the assembly's target audience and suggesting alternative options Mere
presence near, or audibleness of, counter-protesters is not interference.
C. An application for an event covered by this Chapter that is expected to
exceed sound, noise, or time limits shall be subject to Council approval as provided
for within Chapter 53 of the Marion Code of Ordinances.
9. Denial Standards. The City Manager shall deny an application for a permit as
requested and shall notify the applicant of the denial where:
A. The City Manager makes a finding contrary to the findings required to be
made for the issuance of the permit.
B. The information contained in the application is found to be false or
insufficient for purposes of assuring public safety.
C. The applicant refuses to abide by or comply with all conditions of the permit
that are reasonable and necessary for public safety.
10. Upon a denial by the City Manager of an application made pursuant to this section,
the applicant may appeal from the determination of the City Manager within five (5) days
thereafter to the Council by filing a written notice of appeal for hearing by the Council at
its next meeting. Upon such appeal, the Council may reverse, affirm, or modify in any
regard the determination of the City Manager. In the event an application is not filed within
the required time as specified in this section, the applicant may request a waiver of such
requirement by the Council at its next regular meeting, or at a special meeting which may
be called prior thereto by the Council to consider the matter, and the Council, if it finds
unusual circumstances and in the exercise of its sound discretion, may waive such
requirement.
11. The granting of a permit to hold a parade, march, or assembly creates a presumption
that the sponsoring organization agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Marion,
Iowa, its employees, representatives, and agents against all claims, liabilities, losses, or
damage for personal injury and/or property damage on account of the parade, march, or
assembly and/or deviation from normal City regulations in the area when such claims,
liabilities, losses, or damage shall be caused by or in any way result from or rising out of
any act, omission, or negligence of the permit holder, including the sponsoring
organization, or any of its officers, owners, directors, partners, or agents. Furthermore, the
granting of permit creates a presumption that the sponsoring organization agrees to
indemnify and hold harmless the City of Marion, Iowa, its employees, representatives, and
agents against any loss, injury, death, or damage to person or property and against all
claims, demands, fines, suits, actions, proceedings, orders, decrees, and judgments of any
kind or nature and from and against any and all costs and expenses including reasonable
attorney fees which at any time may be suffered or sustained by the permit holder or by
any person who may, at any time, be participating or engaging in the parade, march, or
assembly when such loss, injury, death, or damage shall be caused by or in any way result
from or rising out of any act, omission, or negligence of the permit holder, including the
sponsoring organization, or any of its officers, owners, directors, partners, or agents. No
permit holder, including the sponsoring organization, or any of its officers, owners,
directors, partners, or agents are subject to a presumption of indemnification or hold
harmless claims, liabilities, losses, damage, injury, death, demands, suits, actions,
proceedings, orders, decrees, and judgments of any kind for acts and omissions of others,
including those of counter-protesters or bystanders in response to the parade, march, or
assembly.
12. The City Manager or the City Manager's Designee shall be the authorized city
official to receive notice and consider permit approval under this Section.
(Ord. 17-21 – Nov. 17 Supp.)
CHAPTER 43
UPTOWN ARTWAY RULES
43.01 Purpose 43.08 Sound Amplifiers
43.02 Location 43.09 Sales and Services
43.03 Motorized Vehicles 43.10 Playing In
43.04 Littering 43.11 Smoking and the Use of Tobacco, Nicotine Products
43.05 Weapons and Dangerous Toys and Vaporizers Prohibited
43.06 Alcoholic Beverages 43.12 Scheduled Events
43.07 Fires
43.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules governing the use of the
Uptown Artway.
43.02 LOCATION. The Uptown Artway shall be located in area currently designated for the
Art in the Alley Project including property located between 7th and 8th Avenues and 10th and
11th Streets in the City of Marion, legally described as follows:
All of the north/south and east/west alleys in Block 13, Original Town, now the City of
Marion, Linn County, Iowa; and
The East 14.5 feet of Lot 7 and West 7.5 feet of Lot 8, Block 13, Original Town, now City
of Marion, Linn County Iowa; and
The West 22 feet of Lot 7, Block 13, Original Town, now City of Marion, Linn County,
Iowa; and
The East twenty three and one-half (23.5) feet of the West Forty-five and one-half (45.5)
of Lot 7, Block 13, Original Town, now City of Marion, Linn County, Iowa; and
Lot 5, except West 36 feet of North 5 feet and Except East 10 feet of West 46 of North 27
feet and West 20½ feet of Lot 6, Block 13, Original Town, now City of Marion, Linn
County, Iowa; and
Lots 3 & 4, Block 13, Original Town, now City of Marion, Linn County, Iowa.
43.03 MOTORIZED VEHICLES. Use of motorized bikes, scooters or vehicles is prohibited
within the Uptown Artway, except for official vehicles or with written permission.
43.04 LITTERING. No person shall litter the Uptown Artway with any form of waste material.
43.05 WEAPONS AND DANGEROUS TOYS. Use of firearms, BB guns, slingshots, javelins,
bow and arrow, rubber guns or other dangerous instruments or toys in the Uptown Artway is
prohibited. Likewise, throwing stones or other missiles on the Uptown Artway property is
prohibited.
43.06 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. Consumption of alcohol is prohibited in the Uptown
Artway from 2:00 a.m. until 6 a.m. except by special permit. Alcohol consumed in the Uptown
Artway shall be brought into the Uptown Artway in a closed container. Glass containers are
prohibited at all times. No one under the age of 21 shall consume alcohol in the Uptown Artway.
43.07 FIRES. Setting a fire is prohibited except in fireplaces and/or in designated areas.
43.08 SOUND AMPLIFIERS. Use of a musical instrument with sound amplifier or sound
equipment that includes amplifiers is prohibited in the Uptown Artway without prior approval
from the City.
43.09 SALES AND SERVICES. No services shall be rendered for a fee or merchandise sold or
made available or business of any kind transacted or entertainment given for a fee in the Uptown
Artway without prior approval from the City.
43.10 PLAYING IN. It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, skateboard or roller blade in
the Uptown Artway, except in the areas blocked off or otherwise designated by the City for such
purposes.
43.11 SMOKING AND THE USE OF TOBACCO, NICOTINE PRODUCTS AND
VAPORIZERS PROHIBITED. Smoking in the Uptown Artway is prohibited at all times in
accordance with Iowa Code 142D which prohibits smoking in any public place or outdoor
entertainment venue. Further, the use of any tobacco product, nicotine product, or electronic
vaporizer, by any person in the Uptown Artway is also prohibited at all times. The term "tobacco
product" as used in this section means any cigarette or tobacco product as defined in Chapter 453
of the Iowa Code. The term "nicotine product" as used in this section means any product containing
nicotine including look-a-like products where the original would include tobacco or nicotine
including products that are dissolvable, spit less, snus, or for chewing. The term "smoking" as used
in this section means inhaling or exhaling from any lighted or heated pipe, cigar, cigarette, or any
other lighted or heated tobacco, plant material, liquid, oils, nicotine or other chemicals that may
be inhaled by the user. The term "electronic vaporizer" as used in this section means any device,
including, but not limited to e-cigarettes, e-pens, e-hookah, e-cigars, and vape pens used to
vaporize plant material, liquids, oils, nicotine or other chemicals that may be inhaled by users. This
section does not apply to the use of prescription medications by the person to whom the
prescription was issued nor to the use of gum or patches designed as and marketed for smoking
cessation.
43.12 SCHEDULED EVENTS. Special events may be scheduled in the Uptown Artway,
subject to the following rules:
1. Definitions.
A. Public Event: any special event which is open to attendance by the general
public.
B. Private Event: any special event to which attendance are limited to a specific
group of people or invitees.
2. Reserving the Uptown Artway. The Uptown Artway may be reserved for public
events. Interested parties shall fill out an application and hold harmless agreement with the
City of Marion in order to schedule a special event in the Uptown Artway.
3. Fire Code Compliance. All Scheduled Events Must Comply with the Fire Code
Requirements for Outdoor Space/ Places of Assembly addressed in 2015 International Fire
Code Sections 403.12.1-403.12.3 as adopted by the Present Marion Code of Ordinances.
(Ch. 43 - Ord. 17-22 – Nov. 17 Supp.)
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02 Public Consumption or Intoxication
45.01 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. As used in this section, “legal age” means
twenty-one (21) years of age or more.
1. A person or persons under legal age shall not consume, purchase or attempt
to purchase or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in their
possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine or beer given or dispensed
to a person under legal age within a private home and with the knowledge, presence
and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal purposes or as
administered to the person by either a physician or dentist for medicinal purposes
and except to the extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic
beverages, wine, and beer during the regular course of the person’s employment by
a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee under State laws. A person under
legal age who has consumed alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer shall be presumed to
have had the same in his or her possession prior to its consumption. (Ord.
06-10 – May 06 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])
2. A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for the
purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage, wine or
beer from any licensee or permittee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
1. As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of
Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code
of Iowa.
B. “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine to
determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using
devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
C. “Peace Officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
D. “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a public
or private school which provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten
through grade twelve.
2. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon the
public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine
or beer in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor control license and
as permitted in Chapters 43 and 47 of this Code of Ordinances. A person shall not
possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine or beer on public school property or
while attending any public or private school-related function. A person shall not be
intoxicated or simulate intoxication in a public place.
(Ord. 17-23 – Nov. 17 Supp.)
3. When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication under
this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person may have a
chemical test administered at the person’s own expense. If a device approved by
the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of a person’s breath to
determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test
that need be offered the person arrested. In a prosecution for public intoxication,
evidence of the results of a chemical test performed under this subsection is
admissible upon proof of a proper foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in
a person’s blood, breath, or urine established by the results of a chemical test
performed within two hours after the person’s arrest on a charge of public
intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03 OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES. (See Section 62.08 of this
Code of Ordinances.)
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
46.01 Curfew 46.03 Contributing to Delinquency
46.02 Cigarettes and Tobacco
46.01 CURFEW. A curfew applicable to minors is established and shall be enforced as follows:
1. Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section:
A. “Curfew hours” shall mean the following:
(1) From eleven o’clock (11:00) p.m. on any day until six o’clock (6:00)
a.m. of the following day.
(2) From seven o’clock (7:00) p.m. on any day until six o’clock (6:00)
a.m. in any place of business holder in which the selling beer, wine, and/or
alcoholic liquor constitutes more than fifty percent (50%) of the annual
gross business transacted therein, unless actually engaged in a trade,
occupation or business other than the serving of alcoholic liquor or beer,
which requires said person’s presence within or upon said premises and the
person is at least 18 years of age.
(Ord. 18-36 – Feb. 19 Supp.)
B. “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
C. “Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for
a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of
amusement or entertainment.
D. “Guardian” means:
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
E. “Minor” means any person under sixteen (16) years of age.
F. “Operator” means any person operating, managing or conducting any
establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or
partnership and the officers of a corporation.
G. “Parent” means a person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of another person;
or
(2) At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a minor.
H. “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group
of the public has access and includes but is not limited to streets, highways and the
common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport
facilities, shops, alleys, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds and vacant lots.
I. “Remain” means:
(1) To linger or stay; or
(2) To fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
J. “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk
of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
2. Offenses.
A. A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.
B. A parent or guardian commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits or
by insufficient control allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.
C. The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
3. Defenses.
A. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 3 of this section that the
minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning
home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to
the Police Department about the minor’s presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City, a civic
organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop,
an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised
by adults and sponsored by the City, a civic organization or other
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly; or
(9) Married or previously married or if said minor had disabilities
of minority removed in accordance with lawful authority of the State.
B. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 2(C) of this section that
the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
4. Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public
place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based
on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection 3 of this section
is present.
46.02 CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO. It is unlawful for any person under eighteen
(18) years of age to smoke, use, possess, purchase or attempt to purchase any tobacco,
tobacco products or cigarettes. Possession of cigarettes or tobacco products by a person
under eighteen years of age shall not constitute a violation of this section if said person
possesses the cigarettes or tobacco products as part of the person’s employment and said
person is employed by a person who holds a valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code
of Iowa and lawfully offers for sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
(Ord. 00-27 – Aug. 00 Supp.)
46.03 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY. It is unlawful for any per-son to
encourage any child under eighteen (18) years of age to commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
[The next page is 251]
CHAPTER 47
PARK RULES
47.01 Purpose 47.10 Trees and Plants
47.02 Use of Roads Required 47.11 Golf
47.03 Park Hours 47.12 Rockets and Model Airplanes
47.04 Littering 47.13 Sound Amplifiers
47.05 Weapons and Dangerous Toys 47.14 Sales and Services
47.06 Hunting and Trapping 47.15 Playing In
47.07 Alcoholic Beverages 47.16 Smoking and the Use of Tobacco, Nicotine Products
47.08 Fires and Vaporizers Prohibited
47.09 Dead Wood
47.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules governing the use of the public
parks of the City.
47.02 USE OF ROADS REQUIRED. Use of motorized bikes, scooters or vehicles is restricted
to designated roads, roadways and parking areas, except official vehicles or with written
permission.
47.03 PARK HOURS. All parks are closed to public use from ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. to six
o’clock (6:00) a.m., and no person shall be present on park property during those hours unless
written permission from the Park Board has been granted or unless the use is limited to a particular
recreational facility which is posted for use after 10:00 p.m.
47.04 LITTERING. No person shall litter park grounds with any form of waste material.
47.05 WEAPONS AND DANGEROUS TOYS. Use of firearms, BB guns, slingshots, javelins,
bow and arrow, rubber guns or other dangerous instruments or toys in parks is prohibited.
Likewise, throwing stones or other missiles on park property is prohibited. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to the playing of disk “frisbee” golf on established disk golf courses.
47.06 HUNTING AND TRAPPING. Hunting and trapping on park property are prohibited.
47.07 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. Consumption of beer, wine or alcoholic beverages is
prohibited in any park from ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. to six o’clock (6:00) a.m. except by special
permit.
47.08 FIRES. Setting a fire is prohibited except in fireplaces and/or in designated areas.
47.09 DEAD WOOD. Removal of dead wood from park areas is prohibited without written
permission from the Parks Director.
47.10 TREES AND PLANTS. Cutting, digging or removal of any tree, bush or plant material
from any park is prohibited.
47.11 GOLF. No person shall play, practice or otherwise hit a golf ball in any manner in any
park area without special permission from the Park Board.
47.12 ROCKETS AND MODEL AIRPLANES. Use of liquid or solid fuel propelled rockets
or model airplanes, with or without cables, is prohibited in all park areas, except by written
permission of the Park Board or its authorized representative.
47.13 SOUND AMPLIFIERS. Use of a musical instrument with sound amplifier or sound
equipment that includes amplifiers is prohibited in all park areas without written permission of the
Park Board.
47.14 SALES AND SERVICES. No services shall be rendered for a fee or merchandise sold
or made available or business of any kind transacted or entertainment given for a fee in any park
without first obtaining written permission from the Park Board or its authorized representative.
47.15 PLAYING IN. It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, skateboard or roller blade in
a municipal park, except in the areas blocked off or otherwise designated by the City for such
purposes. (Ord. 02-27 – Feb. 03 Supp.)
47.16 SMOKING AND THE USE OF TOBACCO, NICOTINE PRODUCTS AND
VAPORIZERS PROHIBITED. Smoking and the use of any tobacco product, nicotine product,
or electronic vaporizer, by any person, in any publicly owned outdoor park or outdoor recreational
facility is prohibited at all times. The term “publicly owned outdoor park or outdoor recreational
facility” means any publicly owned outdoor park or facility including any park, playground,
athletic field or complex, skate park, aquatic area, shelter, trail and includes any associated
restroom or parking lot. The term “tobacco product” as used in this section means any cigarette
or tobacco product as defined in Chapter 453 of the Iowa Code. The term “nicotine product” as
used in this section means any product containing nicotine including look-a-like products where
the original would include tobacco or nicotine including products that are dissolvable, spit less,
snus, or for chewing. The term “smoking” as used in this section means inhaling or exhaling from
any lighted or heated pipe, cigar, cigarette, or any other lighted or heated tobacco, plant material,
liquid, oils, nicotine or other chemicals that may be inhaled by the user. The term “electronic
vaporizer” as used in this section means any device, including, but not limited to e-cigarettes, epens,
e-hookah, e-cigars, and vape pens used to vaporize plant material, liquids, oils, nicotine or
other chemicals that may be inhaled by users. This section does not apply to the use of prescription
medications by the person to whom the prescription was issued nor to the use of gum or patches
designed as and marketed for smoking cessation.
(Ord. 15-02 – May 12 Supp.)
CHAPTER 48
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
48.01 Purpose 48.05 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
48.02 Controlled Substance Defined 48.06 Manufacture, Delivery or Offering For Sale
48.03 Drug Paraphernalia Defined 48.07 Possession, Manufacture or Delivery of Drug
48.04 Determining Factors Paraphernalia by Minors
48.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with
intent to use, manufacture and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.
48.02 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED. The term “controlled substance”
as used in this chapter is defined as the term “controlled substance” is defined in the
Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or
is hereafter amended and shall also include simulated and counterfeit substances, Salvia,
Divinorum, Salvinorin A, as well as synthetic catinones, synthetic cannabinoids and their
analogues or homologues.
(Ord. 12-13 – May 12 Supp.)
48.03 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED. The term “drug paraphernalia” as
used in this chapter means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are
used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, containing, injecting,
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance
in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
It includes, but is not limited to:
1. Growing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
2. Processing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances.
3. Isomerization Devices. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance.
4. Testing Equipment. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed
for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances.
5. Scales. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
6. Diluents and Cutting Agents. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine
hydrochloride, inositol powder, dextrose, fentanyl or any other powder, chemical
or substance used to enhance or dilute the potency or amount of any controlled
substance.
7. Separators, Sifters and Filters. Separation, sifting or filtering apparatus
designed to assist in the manufacturing or refining of any controlled substance or
any component of a controlled substance.
8. Mixing Devices. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices
used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
9. Containers. Any container or other object used, intended for use, or
designed for use in storing, packaging or concealing controlled substance, to
include but not be limited to capsules, plastic bags and containers, envelopes,
clothing and clothing accessories, manufactured “false interior” objects, or any
other container or object where a controlled substance is found.
10. Injecting Devices. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used,
intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances
into the human body.
11. Ingesting-Inhaling Device. Objects used, intended for use, or designed for
use in ingesting, inhaling, snorting, or otherwise introducing any controlled
substance into the human body, such as:
A. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or
without screens, permanent screens, filter and bowls;
B. Water, chamber, carburetor and air driven pipes;
C. Smoking and carburetion masks;
D. Roach clips and similar objects, meaning objects used to hold
burning materials, such as marijuana cigarettes;
E. Spoons and stirrers or any other utensil used to hold or mix
controlled substances before, after or during their use;
F. Chilliums, bongs, ice pipes and chillers;
G. Rolling papers or cigar wrappers used to contain any controlled
substance;
H. Tubes, whether plastic, paper, metal or otherwise which are used in
snorting any controlled substance;
12. Huffing Device. Pressurized containers used, but not intended for such use,
to ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce products, chemicals, or aerosols into the
human body.
(Ord. 12-13 – May 12 Supp.)
48.04 DETERMINING FACTORS. In determining whether an object is drug
paraphernalia for the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be
considered in addition to all other logically relevant factors:
1. Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
2. Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object under any State or federal law relating to any controlled
substance.
3. Proximity To Violation. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to
a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the
Code of Iowa.
4. Proximity To Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled
substances.
5. Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object.
6. Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an
owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she
knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation
of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
7. Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances
Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding that the object
is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
8. Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use.
9. Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object
which explain or depict its use.
10. Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use.
11. Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
12. Licensed Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner, or anyone in control of
the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such
as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
13. Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
14. Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object
in the community.
15. Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use.
48.05 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. It is unlawful for any person
to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze,
pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
48.06 MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY OR OFFERING FOR SALE. It is unlawful
for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, manufacture with intent to
deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, intending that the drug paraphernalia will be
used, or knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will
be used, or knowing that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances
Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
48.07 POSSESSION, MANUFACTURE OR DELIVERY OF DRUG
PARAPHERNALIA BY MINORS. It is unlawful for any minor to use, or to possess
with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body
a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter
124 of the Code of Iowa. It is also unlawful for any minor to deliver, possess with intent
to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, intending that the
drug paraphernalia will be used or knowing, or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know, that it will be used or knowing that it is designed for use to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale,
or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the
Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
[The next page is 263]
CHAPTER 49A
CLANDESTINE LABORATORIES/GROW OPERATIONS
49A.01 Definitions 49A.03 Removal of Placard and/or Release From Impound
49A.02 Cleanup and Nuisance Abatement of 49A.04 Requirement to Notify
Dangerous Buildings and Vehicles Required 49A.05 Police Authority
49A.01 DEFINITIONS. As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
1. “Building or structure” shall include apartments, single-family homes, garages,
hotel/motel rooms, mobile homes, rooms for rent, duplex dwellings, or any other building
or structure.
2. “Clandestine laboratory/grow operation” means a location and operation, past or
present, including but not limited to buildings or vehicles equipped with hardware,
containers, lighting, heating devices, humidity control devices, and fertilizers, precursors
or related reagents and solvents needed to unlawfully prepare or manufacture controlled
substances as defined in Chapter 124 of the Iowa Code. The mere presence of precursor
materials in the original sealed containers and absent of additional evidence of illegal use
or intentions, is not evidence by itself of a clandestine laboratory/grow operation as
defined solely within Chapter 49A.
3. “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify, analyze,
disassemble, treat, remove, or otherwise disperse all substances and materials, including
but not limited to those found to be hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of
the Iowa Code and controlled substances defined in Chapter 124 of the Iowa Code,
including contamination caused by or as a by-product of the manufacturing or growing
process, or being caused by the chemicals or substances associated with the
manufacturing or growing process.
4. “Dangerous building” means any building or structure which has any or all of the
conditions or defects hereinafter described, provided that such conditions or defects exist
to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are
endangered.
5. “Dangerous vehicle” means any vehicle which has any or all of the conditions or
defects hereinafter described, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent
that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered.
6. “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes but is not limited too;
chemicals, chemical residues, mold, fungus, and/or other toxins and controlled substances
as defined in Chapter 124 of the Iowa Code.
49A.02 CLEAN UP AND NUISANCE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
AND VEHICLES REQUIRED.
1. Whenever any portion of a building, structure, or vehicle has been used as part of
a clandestine laboratory/grow operation as in the making, manufacturing or “cooking” of
methamphetamine or any other controlled substance as defined within Iowa Code
Chapter 124, as determined by the Marion Police Department, other law enforcement
agency and/or certified peace officer having jurisdiction within the Marion City limits,
the building(s), structure(s) or vehicle shall be deemed a nuisance in a state of emergency
per Section 50.09 “dangerous building” or a “dangerous vehicle” and shall be placard,
vacated, and remain abandoned and unsafe until the following conditions are met:
A. Any owner or landlord that has a building or structure meeting the above
criteria as defined in section 49A.02(1) shall provide certification, at the owner or
landlord's expense, from an American Board of Industrial Hygiene (ABIH)
Certified Industrial Hygienist that the known hazardous substance associated with
a clandestine laboratory/grow operation process (including but not limited too:
chemicals, chemical residues, mold, fungus, and/or other toxins) have been reduce
or eliminated to the point that it is again safe to occupy the structure prior to the
issuance of a new certificate of occupancy.
B. Any identified “dangerous vehicle” shall be vacated and impounded at the
owner's expense, leaving the contents of the vehicle intact except for items
collected as evidence, or items identified by law enforcement as being a
hazardous substance in need of immediate removal.
C. Any owner of a vehicle meeting the above criteria as defined in section
49A.02(1), shall provide certification, at the owner's expense, from an American
Board of Industrial Hygiene (ABIH) Certified Industrial Hygienist that the known
hazards associated with a clandestine laboratory/grow operation process
(including but not limited too: chemicals, chemical residues, mold, fungus, and/or
other toxins) have been reduce or eliminated to the point that it is again safe to
occupy the vehicle prior to the release of the vehicle from impound.
2. The amount of methamphetamine residue (for purposes of this code section,
methamphetamine residue includes chemicals used in the making of the drug known as
meth) present in the vehicle, building or structure shall be no more than 0.1 micrograms
per one hundred (100) square centimeters or less prior to the issuance of a new certificate
of occupancy.
A. Inspection and testing shall be done in each room of a single dwelling unit
and shall include basement, attic areas, attached garage and heat and cooling duct
systems.
B. Inspection and testing shall be done in the passenger compartment,
enclosed trunk area, and heat and cooling duct system of vehicles.
C. Inspection and testing of structures other than dwelling units and exterior
property areas shall be determined case by case based on the locations of
hazardous substance storage, use, or disposal.
D. Test sampling shall be performed in accordance with EPA Standard
Operating Procedures 2001 and 2011.
E. Clean up and disposal of properties, items, materials, or chemicals shall be
done in compliance with all applicable state and federal standards and procedures,
including personnel safety procedures.
3. Any time a garage that is attached to and/or shares a common access point to the
living quarters is used for a clandestine laboratory/grow operation, the making,
manufacturing, or cooking of methamphetamine or any other controlled substance as
defined within Iowa Code Chapter 124, the garage and living quarters will be deemed
abandoned and unsafe until such time as the requirements of 49A.02(1 )(A) are met.
4. Anytime a motel/hotel room is used for a clandestine laboratory/grow operation
the making, manufacturing, or cooking of methamphetamine or any other controlled
substance as defined within Iowa Code Chapter 124, that room will be considered
abandoned and unsafe and will not be allowed to be occupied until such time as the
requirements of 49A.02(1)(A) are met.
5. Anytime a clandestine laboratory/grow operation is found in a multi-unit building
or structure including a motel/hotel, inspection and testing shall take place in the adjacent
unit(s) surrounding the “dangerous building” that share a common wall or floor/ceiling.
Additionally, testing will take place in any/all unit(s) sharing a common heating or
cooling system with the “dangerous building”. Testing shall be completed within 60 days
of the posting of the original “dangerous building”.
A. Inspection and testing of adjacent units will be confined to rooms sharing
the common wall or floor/ceiling unless test results show the presence of a
“hazardous substance”. Inspection and testing will continue to expand to adjacent
rooms, buildings, or structures until such time that adjacent building(s) and
structure(s) are in compliance with 49A.02(1)(A).
B. If the inspection and test results indicate that an adjacent unit(s) meet the
definition of a “hazardous building” they too shall be placard for occupancy until
they can be brought into compliance.
6. A placard shall contain a nuisance abatement notice directed to the owner of the
dangerous building or dangerous vehicle to which it is attached. The notice shall be as
required by section 50.06 of the Code of Ordinances. Sections 50.09 through 50.13 of the
Code of Ordinances are applicable to nuisances under this chapter. The cost of inspection
and testing are a part of the costs of abatement and shall be charged to and collected from
the owner of the dangerous building or dangerous vehicle that is the subject of a nuisance
abatement notice.
49A.03 REMOVAL OF PLACARDING AND/OR RELEASE FROM IMPOUND.
1. All “dangerous buildings” as defined shall remain placard for no occupancy until
such time that test results are provided to the Marion Police Department showing
compliance with the standards as set forth in 49A.02(1)(A) and any applicable
subsections and all the costs of nuisance abatement have been paid.
2. All “dangerous vehicles” shall remain placard for no occupancy and shall remain
impounded at the owner's expense until such time that test results are provided to the
Marion Police Department showing compliance with the standards as set forth in
49A.02(1)(C) and any applicable subsections and all the costs of nuisance abatement
have been paid.
3. Placarding and the prohibition of entrance into a “dangerous building” or
“dangerous vehicle” does not apply to law enforcement, fire fighters, members of the
building department, members of the health department, or those actively involved in the
clean-up of the building(s), structure(s), or vehicle.
4. All dangerous vehicles meeting the criteria for disposal as an abandon vehicle as
described within Iowa Code Section 321.89, can and shall be disposed of following the
guidelines set forth within the Iowa Code.
49A.04 REQUIREMENT TO NOTIFY.
1. All property owners shall disclose the past presence of a clandestine lab or
clandestine growing operation prior to the sale, occupancy, or rental of any building(s),
structure(s), and vehicle that was deemed a “dangerous building” or “dangerous vehicle”,
unless initial testing prior to cleaning shows otherwise, for 3 years after being certified as
safe to occupy or in the case of methamphetamine manufacturing, below 0.1 micrograms
per one hundred (100) square centimeters.
2. The Police Department shall maintain a list, as a public record available for
inspection by the public, of the location of all building(s), structure(s), and vehicle(s) that
have been deemed a “dangerous building” or “dangerous vehicle”. Properties and
vehicles shall remain on this list for not less than 3 years after being certified as safe to
occupy or in the case of methamphetamine manufacturing, below 0.1 micrograms per one
hundred (100) square centimeters.
49A.05 POLICE AUTHORITY.
1. If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer or an
authorized representative may:
A. Placard a building(s) and/or structure(s) deemed to be a “dangerous
building” as defined.
B. Placard and impound a vehicle deemed to be a “dangerous vehicle” as
defined.
C. Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a
clandestine laboratory/grow operation.
D. Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a clandestine
laboratory/grow operation and limit access to cleanup personnel.
2. No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under this
section.
(Ch. 49A – Ord. 13-13 - Aug. 13 Supp.)
CHAPTER 49
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE PRECURSORS
49.01 Controlled Substance Precursors 49.03 Exception
49.02 Registration Required 49.04 Violations
49.01 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE PRECURSORS. The City of Marion declares
that any retail product, containing the following items, to be controlled substance
precursors:
1. Pseudoephedrine.
2. Ether.
3. Ephedrine.
49.02 REGISTRATION REQUIRED. All persons or businesses selling, transferring
or otherwise exchanging for consideration any substances containing the above described
controlled substance precursors shall require the purchaser or person receiving said
substance to provide their name, address and telephone number. The seller shall keep
said information in a log that shall be accessible to any law enforcement officer upon
request. Prior to completing a sale, the seller shall require the buyer to produce photo
identification verifying their identity. If a person wishing to buy a controlled substance
precursor refuses to provide the required information, the seller shall refuse to make the
sale.
49.03 EXCEPTION. This chapter shall not apply to individuals who purchase one
pre-packaged unit of a substance containing pseudoephedrine, ether or ephedrine. If the
person or business transferring the substance chooses, however, to request and require
registration of the purchaser of only one pre-packaged unit of a substance containing
pseudoephedrine, ether or ephedrine, said business or person shall be authorized to do so,
pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
49.04 VIOLATIONS.
1. Any person or business violating this chapter by not maintaining the
required log of information or failing to enter the required information on any
particular sale or knowingly entering falsified information shall be committing a
municipal infraction punishable as provided in Chapter 4 of this Code of
Ordinances or punishable by any other injunctive remedies that the court may
impose, pursuant to Iowa’s municipal infraction authority.
2. Any person providing false information for the log of the seller of a
controlled substance precursor shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished in the manner provided in Section 1.06 of this Code of Ordinances. Any
person avoiding registration by buying one pre-packaged unit of substances
containing pseudoephedrine, ether or ephedrine at more than one retailer, within a
period of 24 hours, or more than one pre-packaged unit of a substance containing
pseudoephedrine, ether or ephedrine at the same retailer in separate purchases of
one each time, within a period of 24 hours, shall be guilty of a simple
misdemeanor and shall be punished in the manner provided in Section 1.06 of this
Code of Ordinances.
(Ch. 49 – Ord. 04-09 - Aug. 04 Supp.)
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.08 Request for Hearing
50.02 Nuisances Defined 50.09 Abatement in Emergency
50.03 Other Conditions 50.10 Abatement by City
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited 50.11 Collection of Costs
50.05 Nuisance Abatement 50.12 Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement
50.06 Notice to Abate: Contents 50.13 Failure to Abate
50.07 Method of Service 50.14 Nuisance Advisory Board
50.01 DEFINITION OF NUISANCE. Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or
unreasonably offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially
to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02 NUISANCES DEFINED. Whatever is injurious to the senses, or an obstruction to the
free use of property so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property,
is a nuisance. Examples of nuisances are:
1. All diseased animals running at large.
2. All ponds or pools of stagnant water.
3. Carcasses of animals not disposed of within twenty-four hours after death as
provided by law.
4. Accumulations of refuse including junked, abandoned or inoperable vehicles.
5. The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by
sewage, creamery or industrial wastes, or other substances.
6. (Repealed by Ord. 11-05 – May 11 Supp.)
7. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable quantities.
8. The use of a common public drinking cup or roller towel.
9. The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs unless such samples are placed
in the hands of an adult person.
10. All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards not authorized by state law.
(Ord. 05-38 – Nov. 05 Supp.)
11. All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse,
gambling houses, houses of ill fame, and bawdy houses.
12. All places where intoxicating liquors are kept for sale, barter or distribution in
violation of law, and all liquors, bottles, kegs, pumps, bars and other property kept at and
used for maintaining such a place.
13. Any vehicle used for the transportation of intoxicating liquor, or for promiscuous
sexual intercourse or any other immoral purpose.
14. Any violation of Section 105.16 of the Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 02-21 – Aug. 02 Supp.)
15. All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks twelve hours after the snow
and ice has ceased being deposited thereon.
16. All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons from
having a clear view of traffic approaching an intersection from cross streets in sufficient
time to bring a motor vehicle driven at a reasonable speed to a full stop before the
intersection is reached.
17. All limbs of trees which are less than 8 feet above the surface of any public sidewalk
or street.
18. All wires which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface of the ground.
19. All buildings, walls, and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay
or otherwise to an extent exceeding one-half their original value, and which are so situated
as to endanger the safety of the public.
20. All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances stored in any
manner or in any amount other than that permitted by this code.
21. All use or display of fireworks except as permitted by law or this code.
22. All loud or unusual and unnecessary noises.
23. Obstruction and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of streets,
alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under such conditions as are permitted by this
code.
24. Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public
street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and
free use of the streets and sidewalks.
25. Failure to pay to the City of Marion, when due, any fee or fine required by the Code
of Ordinances.
26. Maintaining any violation of the Code of Ordinances.
27. Failure to install any improvement required by the subdivision ordinance, other
provisions of the Municipal Code, or any memorandum of agreement.
28. All noxious weeds and all weeds, vines, brush, dead or diseased trees, rank growth
or objectionable vegetation which constitutes a health, safety, fire hazard, is injurious to
the senses, and objection to the free use of property or interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property.
(Ord. 11-05 – May 11 Supp.)
29. All trees, including dead or diseased, fallen trees or limbs or leaning trees, which
constitutes a hazard of blocking or damning any stream over which there is a bridge, during
a heavy rain or a flooding event.
(Ord. 03-02 – Feb. 03 Supp.)
30. Maintaining a structure in a partially or otherwise incomplete condition after the
expiration of the building permit to erect said structure.
(Ord. 07-20 – Aug. 07 Supp.)
50.03 OTHER CONDITIONS. The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain
regulations prohibiting or restricting other conditions which are deemed to be nuisances:
1. Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51)
2. Dangerous Buildings (See Chapter 150)
3. Weeds (See Chapter 52)
4. Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)
5. Trees (See Chapter 152)
6. Property Maintenance (See Chapter 153)
7. Storm Water Management (See Chapter 156)
8. Housing Code (See Chapter 165)
50.04 NUISANCES PROHIBITED. The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited,
and a nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05 NUISANCE ABATEMENT. Whenever the Mayor, City Manager or other authorized
municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such officer shall cause to be served upon the
property owner a written notice to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time after notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06 NOTICE TO ABATE: CONTENTS. The notice to abate shall contain:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1. Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the nuisance.
2. Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
3. Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the
nuisance.
4. Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement.
5. Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not
abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time prescribed, the City
will abate it and assess the costs against such person.
50.07 METHOD OF SERVICE. The notice may be in the form of an ordinance, by personal
service, or sent by certified mail to the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.08 REQUEST FOR HEARING. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance, or any person
interested therein may have a hearing with the Nuisance Enforcement/Property Maintenance
Advisory Board as to whether a nuisance exists or on a request for an extension of time in which
to abate a nuisance. A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Nuisance
Enforcement/Property Maintenance Advisory Board either: within the time stated in the order to
abate, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists, and it must be abated as ordered.
The Nuisance Enforcement/Property Maintenance Advisory Board shall set a hearing date as soon
as practicable after receiving a written appeal. The applicant shall be advised in writing of the time
and place of such meeting at least (4) days prior to the date of the meeting. At such meeting, the
applicant shall be given an opportunity to be heard and show just cause why a nuisance does not
exist or why an extension of time is needed. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Nuisance
Enforcement/Property Maintenance Advisory Board shall render a written decision as to whether
or not a nuisance exists. If the Nuisance Enforcement/Property Maintenance Advisory Board finds
that a nuisance exists, it shall order the nuisance abated within an additional time which is
reasonable under the circumstances. The findings of the Nuisance Enforcement/Property
Maintenance Advisory Board shall be the final decision on the matter. Enforcement of any notice
or order issued under this code shall be stayed during the duration of an appeal of the order, which
is properly and timely filed.
(Ord. 04-23 – Feb. 05 Supp.)
50.09 ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may perform any action
which may be required under this chapter without prior notice. The City shall assess the costs as
provided in Section 50.11 after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of
Sections 50.05, 50.06 and 50.07 and hearing as provided in Section 50.08.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.10 ABATEMENT BY CITY. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects
or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping an accurate
account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk who
shall pay such expenses on behalf of the City. The person issuing the order to abate a nuisance
may enter into any building or place for the purpose of entering into property to remove or abate
any nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.11 COLLECTION OF COSTS. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense
incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and
if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one (1) month, the Clerk shall
certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the
same manner, as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.12 INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT. If the amount expended
to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00), the City may permit the
assessment to be paid in up to ten (10) annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with
the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited property under State law.
(Ord. 13-17 – Aug. 13 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
50.13 FAILURE TO ABATE. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or
refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified in the notice
to abate is in violation of this Code of Ordinances.
50.14 NUISANCE ADVISORY BOARD.
1. Organization. A Nuisance Enforcement/Property Maintenance Advisory Board is
hereby established, which shall consist of seven members. The word “Board” when used
in this section shall mean the Nuisance Enforcement/Property Maintenance Advisory
Board. Membership of the Board shall be as follows:
A. The seven members shall be, to the extent practical, a diverse cross section
representation of the general populous of the City, including not less than one
member nor more than two members who own or manage residential rental housing
in Marion and not less than one member nor more than two members who occupy
residential rental housing in Marion as a tenant, all of whom shall be residents of
the City.
B. Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the Council to serve respectively for the following terms from January 1: three for
one year, two for two years and two for three years. The successor to each member
so appointed shall serve a term of three years. (Ord.
12-26 – Nov. 12 Supp.)
C. Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council for
any unexpired term.
D. The Board shall elect a Chairperson and shall adopt rules of procedure in
accordance with the provisions of this section and the Code of Iowa.
E. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at
such other times as the Board may determine.
(Ord. 12-14 – Aug. 12 Supp.)
2. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this Board is to:
A. Promote public safety, general welfare and quality of life through fair and
consistent interpretation of the Code.
B. Provide a centralized point of nuisance code communications for all
interested groups and individuals.
C. Promote harmony and consistency in nuisance abatement procedures.
3. Powers. The Board shall have the following powers:
A. To provide direction and interpretation of nuisance definition and
parameters to City staff for the enforcement of this Code.
B. To conduct hearings and render decisions as requested per Section 50.08 of
this Code.
C. To hear testimony, issue subpoenas, conduct studies and review
documentation necessary for the determination of the Board.
D. To assist with review and development of new codes or amendments to
existing codes.
(Ord. 04-23 – Feb. 05 Supp.)
EDITOR’S NOTE
A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is included in the appendix of
this Code of Ordinances.
Caution is urged in the use of this administrative abatement procedure, particularly where
cost of abatement is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to whether or not a
nuisance does in fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings, we
recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with abatement
and assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in court under
Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.
(Ch. 50 - Ord. 18-15 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
[The next page is 281]
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
51.01 Definitions 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.06 Parking Unlicensed Vehicles
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance 51.07 Parking Unlicensed and Junk Vehicles
51.04 Exceptions
51.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Driveway” means an established hard surface or crushed rock base portion
of a residential lot leading from the street to an existing garage or to the side of the
house if there is no garage and does not include any area of a grassed yard.
2. “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-ferrous
metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste or
used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery and appliances or
parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap
ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded
household goods or hardware. Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a
rear yard is not considered junk.
3. “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle or motor vehicle including a camper,
located within the corporate limits of the City, whether licensed or unlicensed,
which has any of the following characteristics:
A. Has become a habitat of rats, mice, skunks, or any other vermin or
insects.
B. Lacks an engine or one or more wheels or other structural parts
which render it inoperable.
C. Is in defective or obsolete condition in any way which constitutes a
threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
4. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and
includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle, tractor,
buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof.
5. “Camper” means a vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured
or constructed as to permit its use as a conveyance upon a public street or highway
and so designed to allow it to sit in a bed of a pick-up truck. The term also
embraces travel trailers and fifth wheel travel trailers as defined by the Code of
Iowa.
6. “Unlicensed” means any vehicle or motor vehicle not displaying a valid
current license as required by the laws of the State of Iowa.
(Ord. 04-12 – Aug. 04 Supp.)
51.02 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any person
to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any private property within the corporate
limits of the City any junk or junk vehicle.
51.03 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE. It is hereby declared that any
junk or junk vehicle located upon private property, unless excepted by Section 51.04,
constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the
meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk or junk vehicle is kept upon
private property in violation hereof, the owner of or person occupying the property upon
which it is located shall be prima facie liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04 EXCEPTIONS. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
1. Structure. Any junk or a junk vehicle stored within a garage or other
enclosed structure.
2. Business Enterprise. A business enterprise lawfully involved in the repair,
maintenance, sales or salvage of vehicles provided they comply with the
requirements for location, screening and storage as prescribed by the zoning
regulations.
3. Vehicle Repair. A vehicle under active repair parked upon the driveway of
a residentially zoned property not having a garage, provided the owner has
notified the Police Department in writing of the owner’s intent to actively repair
the vehicle and the repairs are completed within thirty (30) days of the
notification.
51.05 NOTICE TO ABATE. Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located
upon private property in violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five (5) days
initiate abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.06 PARKING UNLICENSED VEHICLES. Unless excepted under the provisions
of Section 51.04, no owner of real estate, person in possession of real estate or owner of a
vehicle shall allow an unlicensed vehicle to be parked or stored in the required front, back
or side yard in any zoning district. All such vehicles must be parked upon an established
driveway or parking space on such property. No more than one such vehicle shall be
parked upon any property at any one time.
51.07 PARKING UNLICENSED AND JUNK VEHICLES.
1. No owner of real estate, person in possession of real estate or owner of a
vehicle shall allow an unlicensed vehicle or unlicensed motor vehicle to be parked
or stored in the front, back or side yard in any zoning district. All such unlicensed
vehicles must be parked upon an established driveway or parking space on such
property as defined within the Zoning Ordinance. Not more than one such vehicle
shall be parked upon any property at any one time.
2. No owner of real estate, person in possession of real estate or owner of a
vehicle shall allow a junk vehicle to be parked, stored or retained upon any
property unless said junk vehicle is kept within an enclosed building.
3. Notwithstanding subsections 1 and 2 above, commercial businesses
lawfully involved in the repair, maintenance, sales or salvage of vehicles shall be
allowed to park, store and maintain unlicensed and junk vehicles as part of their
business provided they comply with the requirements for location, screening and
storage prescribed for the zoning district in which they are located.
4. A junk vehicle under active repair may be parked upon the driveway of a
residentially zoned property not having a garage provided the owner has notified
the Police Department in writing of the owner’s intent to actively repair the
vehicle and the repairs are completed within 30 days of the notification and
provided that the vehicle is not a junk vehicle by virtue of the provisions of
51.01(3)(A).
(Ord. 04-12 – Aug. 04 Supp.)
CHAPTER 52
WEEDS
52.01 Purpose 52.06 Natural Areas
52.02 Definitions 52.07 Enforcement
52.03 Authority for Enforcement 52.08 Emergency Control Measures
52.04 Interference with Weed Official 52.09 Control of Weeds or Other Vegetation
52.05 Nuisances 52.10 Habitual Violators
52.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to designate responsibility for the
removal of weeds and cutting of grasses within the City, to define the same as nuisances
and to provide for their abatement in order to provide for the safety and preserve the
health and welfare of the citizens of the City.
52.02 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases,
words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
1. “Chemical control” means the application of a herbicide (weed killer) in
strict accordance with the directions on the product and the regulations of the
Code of Iowa, Chapter 206 (the Pesticide Act), and all additions thereto that may
be adopted.
2. “Conservation area” means an area that is planted with ground cover plants
of a size and texture compatible with the environment and maintained accordingly.
3. “Developed lot or area” means an improved or commercial lot.
4. “Ground cover” means plants with the growth and root capacity to cover
and stabilize an area of soil and to prevent erosion.
5. “Natural area” means an area allowed to retain native plant material in a
natural state and municipal water ways, water detention and retention basins
wherein plant materials help to maintain soil conservation and/or prevent erosion.
(Ord. 02-28 – Feb. 03 Supp.)
6. “Noxious weeds” means primary and secondary classes of weeds as defined
by the Code of Iowa, and all additions to this list as so declared by the State
Secretary of Agriculture.
7. “Parking” means that part of the street, avenue or highway in the City not
covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and curb line; on unpaved
streets, the parking is that part of the street, avenue, or highway lying between the
lot lines and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic.
8. “Right-of-way” means the entire width of a platted street or alley in use or
undeveloped.
9. “Soil erosion control” means a method of planting and cultivation, or lack
of same, designed to retain soil and to prevent soil movement caused by natural or
manmade causes.
10. “Undeveloped lot or area” means an unimproved lot or area.
11. “Unmowed or untended area” means an area allowed to grow without care
and supervision, where weeds and grasses are more than the allowed height.
12. “Weed Official” means the person designated by the City Manager to
enforce this chapter.
13. “Weeds” means any plants growing uncultivated and out of context with
the surrounding plant life when such plant has a seed head formed or forming and
with a height of eight (8) inches or more, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
52.03 AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT. The City Manager or person
designated by the City Manager is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and
shall have all the necessary authority to carry out the enforcement of this chapter. Said
designee shall be known as the Weed Official.
52.04 INTERFERENCE WITH WEED OFFICIAL. No persons shall interfere with
the Weed Official or any appointed assistant while engaged in the enforcement of this
chapter.
52.05 NUISANCES. Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, the following
provisions shall apply:
1. Each owner and each person in the possession or control of any land shall
cut or otherwise destroy, in whatever manner prescribed by the Weed Official, all
noxious weeds thereon and shall keep said lands free of such growth.
2. Each owner and each person in possession or control of any property shall
be responsible to keep said lot, along with parking adjacent thereto, alleys, public
ways or areas up to the centerline of said ways free of any noxious weeds and to
keep grasses and weeds on said lot mowed so that grass and weeds are less than 8
inches in height. However, grass and weeds located on undeveloped and unplatted
property located more than 100 feet from developed or platted property shall be
mowed so that grass and weeds are less than 18 inches in height.
3. Each owner and each person in the possession or control of any lands shall
not allow any plant growth of any sort to remain in such a manner as to render the
streets, alleys or public ways adjoining said land unsafe for public travel or in any
manner so as to impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic upon any public place or
way.
4. Where waterways or watercourses are found upon any developed or
undeveloped lot, the owner or person in possession or control shall keep the flat or
level part of the bank of said waterway free of any weeds and grasses more than
18 inches in height. Should such waterways or watercourses be found within the
right-of-way of a street or alley, the adjacent property owner or person in
possession or control shall be responsible to keep the flat or accessible portion of
creek bank free of any weeds or grasses more than 18 inches in height.
5. No owner or person in possession or control of any developed or
undeveloped lot shall allow plant growth or the accumulation of plant materials on
such lot to remain in such a state so as to constitute a fire hazard. In no instance
shall cut plant material accumulations be located within 150 feet of a building,
structure, recreation area (not including the width of any intervening street) or
within 125 feet of a street right-of-way.
52.06 NATURAL AREAS.
1. Designation. The Weed Official, upon application of the owner or person
in possession or control of any lot, may designate such lot or portion thereof or
any adjacent undeveloped public way as a natural or conservation area. Prior to
designating such area, the Weed Official shall consider the following factors:
grade or incline of said tract, the difficulty to control or maintain said tract,
whether said tract is being maintained as either a soil erosion control area or a
conservation area. Any person affected by the designation or lack thereof may
appeal said determination to the City Manager.
2. Natural or Conservation Areas. Natural or conservation areas need not be
mowed and shall be left in their natural state, except that noxious weeds shall be
removed or controlled.
3. Public Ways. Sidewalks or other public ways that lie adjacent to or extend
through a natural or conservation area must be open and free from any
obstructions to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
52.07 ENFORCEMENT. It shall be the duty of the Weed Official to inspect all areas
of complaint and in the case of a legitimate complaint to notify the last known owner or
person in possession (or control) of the area of violation of this chapter. Said notice shall
be by certified mail and allow five (5) days after mailing said notice as a period of time to
eliminate said violations. Return receipt with signature is not required for said notice.
The Weed Official shall charge an administrative fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for each legitimate complaint. Upon failure of the owner or person in
possession or control to act within the prescribed five-day time period, the City may
perform the required action and assess costs against the property for collection in the
same manner as a property tax. In the event such action is taken, the Weed Official may
obtain competitive quotes to have the required action performed. If no quotes are
obtained, the City may have the City personnel perform the required action at rates which
shall be established by resolution of the Council from time to time, which rates shall
constitute costs that may be assessed against the property as provided herein and shall be
an obligation owing to the City that may be collected by the City in any other lawful
manner. In addition to the foregoing remedy and other remedies by law, the Weed
Official may file misdemeanor charges against such individuals. (Ord. 04-19 –
Feb. 05 Supp.)
52.08 EMERGENCY CONTROL MEASURES. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter, whenever in the judgment of the Weed Official or the Fire
Chief an emergency exists creating a health, safety or fire hazard which may require
weed or grass control without prior notice, control measures shall be taken and costs
assessed against the property for collection in the same manner as property tax.
However, prior to such assessment, the City shall give the property owner notice by
certified mail and an opportunity for a hearing before the Council.
52.09 CONTROL OF WEEDS OR OTHER VEGETATION. The Clerk shall
annually on or before June 1 each year and August 1 of each year publish a Notice to
Property Owners generally setting forth the duty to control weeds and other vegetation
which might be a nuisance in violation of this Code of Ordinances. The Weed Official or
the City Manager may cause a Notice to Abate Nuisance to be served upon any property
owner who fails to comply with the published notice or any person who at any other time
has weeds or other vegetation in violation of this Code of Ordinances and shall submit
the cost to the Council for assessment as provided in Section 364.12 of the Code of Iowa.
In the event of an emergency as set forth in Section 364.12, the notice requirement may
be dispensed with. In abating a nuisance under this Code of Ordinances, the City
Manager or Weed Official is hereby authorized and directed to employ such persons and
rent any and all equipment necessary for the abatement of the nuisance and the costs
thereof shall be assessed.
52.10 HABITUAL VIOLATORS. If the owner or person in control of any land has
previously received a notice to abate nuisance relating to weeds within the preceding 24
months, then, the notice to abate nuisance may include notice that such owner or person
in control of said property will be considered to be an habitual violator of this chapter and
that if the nuisance is not abated within the allowed time, the City will consider the
property to be subject to having a contract let by the City for mowing property as needed
up to a weekly basis for the next following 24-month period of time and that the full cost
of said contract together with an administrative fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
will be assessed against the property.
CHAPTER 53
NOISE AND NOISE LIMITS
53.01 Definitions 53.03 Enforcement
53.02 Noise Prohibitions and Limited Sound Sources 53.04 Permits to Exceed Limits
53.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined.
1. “A-weighted sound level” means the sound pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read
is designated dBA.
2. “Commercial” or “commercial district” means any property which is zoned
for any commercial use as defined in the Zoning Ordinance.
3. “Construction equipment” means the implements used in an operation or
activity, or everything except personnel needed to build, to repair, or to erect.
4. “Decibel” means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to 20
times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured
to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square
meter).
5. “Exhaust system” means the device or combination of devices that collects
the exhaust from the engine or motor, delivers the exhaust to the atmosphere and
reduces the noise emissions. “Exhaust system” includes manifold or headers,
exhaust pipe, muffler, and tail pipe.
6. “Farm equipment” means the implements used in an operation or activity, or
everything except personnel needed for cultivation or production of crops of any
nature, or raising of any type of animal embraced within the term “livestock.”
7. “Gross vehicle weight rating” means the value specified by the manufacturer
as the recommended maximum weighted load of a single motor vehicle. When
trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination weight rating is the value
specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the
combined vehicle.
8. “Industrial” or “industrial district” means any property zoned for any
industrial use as defined in the Zoning Ordinance.
9. “Motor vehicle” means every vehicle which is self-propelled.
10. “Noise disturbance” for purposes of this chapter, means any transmission of
sound across a real property boundary from a source specifically limited by this
chapter, which exceeds the sound level limits set forth in Table 1 entitled Maximum
Permissible Sound Levels From Limited Sources by Receiving Land Use.
11. “Real property boundary” means an imaginary line along the ground surface,
and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person
from that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real property
divisions.
12. “Receiving land use” means, for purposes of this chapter, the use or
occupancy of the property which receives the transmission of sound.
13. “Residential” or “residential district” means any property on which is located
a building or structure used wholly or partially for living or sleeping purposes. This
definition does not include park custodial residences or school or college
dormitories.
14. “Sound level meter” means an instrument used to measure sound pressure.
15. “Sound level” means the weighted sound pressure level contained by the use
of the sound level meter and A-weighting network, such as a, b, or c as specified in
American National Standards Institute Specifications for Sound Level Meters, ANSI
S1.4-1971. If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting
shall apply.
16. “Sound pressure level” means twenty times the logarithm to the base 10 of
the ratio of the root mean squared sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20
micropascals.
17. “Sound pressure” means the instantaneous difference between the actual
pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as
produced by sound energy.
18. “Sound” means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces which cause
compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include
any characteristic of sound, including duration, density, and frequency.
19. “Used” or “occupied,” for purposes of this chapter, where either word
appears, shall be deemed to include the words “intended, designed, or arranged to
be used or occupied.”
TABLE 1
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels From Limited Sources
By Receiving Land Use
Zoning Category of
Receiving Land Use
Legal Time
Sound Level Limit
(dBA)
Residence District 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 60
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 50
Commercial District At all times 65
Industrial District At all times 75
53.02 NOISE PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITED SOUND SOURCES. The following
sound sources are limited by this chapter:
1. No person shall perform, create, cause or permit a radio, television set,
musical instrument or any other device to produce, reproduce or amplify sound to
create a noise which is audible at a distance of two hundred (200) feet from such
device when operated on or in a motor vehicle.
2. No person shall operate a motor vehicle radio or other equipment to emit
sound through a motor vehicle radio or other sound system if the sound emitted is
plainly audible for more than two hundred (200) feet from the vehicle.
3. Every motor vehicle must at all times be equipped with a muffler and exhaust
system in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive noise
or annoying smoke.
4. The following constitutes evidence of rebuttable presumption of a violation
of this section:
A. The use of a muffler cutout, bypass, non-original equipment exhaust
system without a muffler, or other similar device upon a motor vehicle upon
a street;
B. Equipment marked with either "off road use" or "not for street use";
C. Excessive revving and/or acceleration which can be heard at a
distance of at least 200 feet (200'); or
D. The operation of a vehicle making excessive noise so as to be audible
at a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet from the motor vehicle.
(Ord. 17-19 – Nov. 17 Supp.)
5. Animals and Birds. No person shall own, possess or harbor any animal or
bird which frequently or for continued duration emits sounds native to the species
which are a noise disturbance.
6. Radios, Televisions, Phonographs, Etc. No person shall operate, play or
permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical
instrument, sound amplifier or similar device which produces, reproduces or
amplifies sound at a sound level which creates a noise disturbance. Church or clock
carillons, bells or chimes, parades or processions (provided the conditions of the
permit are met), mobile radio or telephone signal devices and sanctioned racing
events are all excepted from the provisions of this subsection.
7. Lawn Equipment. No person shall use or operate or permit the use or
operation of a power lawn mower, power trimmer, leaf blower, leaf vacuum, garden
tiller or other gasoline or electric-powered device intended for mowing, trimming
or working on a lawn or garden between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and
seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. the following morning if such use or operation creates a
noise disturbance as defined in this chapter. No person shall use or operate or permit
the use or operation of a gasoline-powered lawn or garden equipment which does
not have a muffler if such use or operation creates a noise disturbance as defined by
this chapter. (Ord. 04-17 – Feb. 05 Supp.)
8. Chain Saws. No person shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of
a power chain saw between the hours of (10:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m.
the following morning if such use or operation creates a noise disturbance as defined
in this chapter.
9. Solid Waste Collection and/or Hauling Equipment. No person shall use,
operate or permit the use or operation of any solid waste collection and/or hauling
equipment between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00)
a.m. the following morning if such use or operation creates a noise disturbance as
defined in this chapter.
10. Official Vehicles. Governmental, Police Department and Fire Department
equipment, public utility company equipment, railroad company equipment and
emergency vehicles such as ambulances and helicopters are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
11. Construction Equipment. The operation of construction equipment between
the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. to ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. shall not be subject
to the limitations set out in Table 1 of this chapter. However, no person shall use or
operate or permit the use or operation of construction equipment between the hours
of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. the following morning if
such use or operation creates a noise disturbance as defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 04-14 – Nov. 04 Supp.)
12. Exempt Equipment. Persons operating the following equipment are exempt
from the provisions of this chapter: farm equipment, snow blowers and snow plows.
(Ord. 04-17 – Feb. 05 Supp.)
13. Portland Cement Concrete Joint Sawing Equipment. A contractor
performing duties in connection with an approved subdivision plan or a City of
Marion public improvement project may perform necessary joint sawing of
pavement upon approval of the City Engineer and shall be exempt from this chapter.
(Ord. 01-32 – Nov. 01 Supp.)
53.03 ENFORCEMENT.
1. The provisions of this chapter which prohibit the making, continuing, or
causing the making or continuance of a noise disturbance shall be enforced only
upon receipt of a complaint made or filed with City officials by a person disturbed
by such noise disturbance, with the exception of violations of Section 53.02(1), (2),
(3), and (4). Certification by an official charged with enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter that such complaint was made shall be sufficient to establish a
rebuttable presumption that a violation of this statute has occurred.
2. Peace officers may enforce violations of Section 53.02(1), (2), (3), or (4) of
this chapter without necessity of such complaint. The following scheduled fines are
fixed for violations of Section 53.02(1), (2), (3) or (4):
Each Offense $25.00
(Ord. 17-19 – Nov. 17 Supp.)
53.04 PERMITS TO EXCEED LIMITS. The Council, on written application, for
good cause shown, may grant a special permit to exceed the sound and/or time limits
established in Section 53.01 for specific activities generally or for limited times and/or
dates provided that the sound level does not exceed 75 dBA at the receiving land use.
(Ord. 02-22 – Aug. 02 Supp.)
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions 55.13 Animals in Parks and On Golf Courses
55.02 Animal Neglect 55.14 Rabies Vaccination
55.03 Livestock Neglect 55.15 Confinement of Female Animals in Heat
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.16 Owner’s Duty
55.05 At Large Prohibited 55.17 Confinement
55.06 Damage or Interference 55.18 At Large: Impoundment
55.07 Annoyance or Disturbance 55.19 Police Service Dogs
55.08 Vicious Animals 55.20 Certain Bothersome Animals
55.09 Seizure of Vicious or Dangerous Animals 55.21 Scheduled Offenses and Fines
55.10 Number of Animals 55.22 Operation Without a State Certificate or License
55.11 Unhealthful or Unsanitary Conditions 55.23 Dangerous Wild Animals
55.12 Tethering of Animals
55.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1. “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
2. “At large” means off the premises of the owner unless:
A. The animal is on a leash, cord, chain or similar restraint not more
than six (6) feet in length and under the control of the person holding said
leash, cord, chain or similar restraint, or
B. The animal is within a motor vehicle, or
C. The animal is housed within a veterinary hospital, licensed kennel,
pet shop or animal shelter.
3. “Bothersome animal” means bees or other stinging insects, cattle, goats,
horses, poultry, fowl, sheep or swine, except as may be permitted in an A-1 Rural
Restricted Zoning District or as a legal pre-existing nonconforming use.
(Ord. 02-32 – Feb. 03 Supp.)
4. “Cat” means any member of the feline species, male or female, neutered or
unneutered.
5. Dangerous wild animal” means, for the purposes of this chapter, all of the
following animals:
A. A member of the family canidae of the order carnivora, including
but not limited to wolves, coyotes, and jackals. However, a dangerous wild
animal does not include a domestic dog.
B. A member of the family hyaenidae of the order of carnivora,
including but not limited to hyenas.
C. A member of the family felidae of the order carnivora, including but
not limited to lions, tigers, cougars, leopards, cheetahs, ocelots, and servals.
However, a dangerous wild animal does not include a domestic cat.
D. A member of the family ursidae of the order carnivora, including
bears and pandas.
E. A member of the family rhinoceros tidae of the order perissodactyla,
which is a rhinoceros.
F. A member of the order proboscidea, which is any species of
elephant.
G. A member of the order of primates other than humans, and including
the following families: callitrichiadae, cebidae, cercopithecidae,
cheirogaleidae, daubentoniidae, galagonidae, hominidae, hylobatidae,
indridae, lemuridae, loridae, megaladapidae, or tarsiidae. A member
includes but is not limited to marmosets, tamarins, monkeys, lemurs,
galagos, bushbabies, great apes, gibbons, lesser apes, indris, sifakas, and
tarsiers.
H. A member of the order crocodilia, including but not limited to
alligators, caimans, crocodiles, and gharials.
I. A member of the order varanidae of the order squamata, which is
limited to water monitors and crocodile monitors.
J. A member of the order squamata which is any of the following:
(1) A member of the family varanidae, which is limited to water
monitors and crocodile monitors.
(2) A member of the family atractaspidae, including but not
limited to mole vipers and burrowing asps.
(3) A member of the family helodermatidae, including but not
limited to beaded lizards and gila monsters.
(4) A member of the family elapidae, voperidae, crotalidae,
atractaspidae, or hydrophidae which are venomous, including but not
limited to cobras, mambas, coral snakes, kraits, adders, vipers,
rattlesnakes, copperheads, pit vipers, keelbacks, cottonmouths, and
sea snakes.
(5) A member of the superfamily henophidia, which is limited to
reticulated pythons, anacondas, and African rock pythons.
K. An animal which is the offspring of an animal listed above and
another animal listed above or any other animal. It also includes animals
which are the offspring of each subsequent generation. However, the
offspring of a domestic dog and a wolf, or the offspring from each
subsequent generation in which at least one parent is a domestic dog are not
dangerous wild animals.
(Ord. 07-21 – Aug. 07 Supp.)
6. “Dog” means any member of the canine species, male or female, neutered
or unneutered.
7. “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine,
ovine or porcine species; farm deer, as defined in Section 481A.1 of the Code of
Iowa; ostriches, rheas, emus or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
8. “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an
animal.
9. “Vicious animal” means either of the following:
A. An animal which inflicts a bite or bites upon and/or attacks a human
being or domesticated animal without cause or justification.
B. Notwithstanding subparagraph A above, an animal running at large
which inflicts a bite or bites and/or attacks a human being or a domesticated
animal, with or without cause or justification, shall be presumed to be
vicious. This presumption may be rebutted with the burden of proof being
on the owner or possessor of said animal to establish by a preponderance of
the evidence that said animal is not a present danger to people or
domesticated animals. (Ord. 04-08 – Aug. 04
Supp.)
10. “Walker” means any person having control over or attempting to have
control over an animal when it is off the premises of its owner.
55.02 ANIMAL NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines, in
any place, an animal, excluding livestock, to fail to supply the animal during confinement
with a sufficient quantity of food or water, or to fail to provide a confined dog or cat with
adequate shelter, or to torture, deprive of
necessary sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by any means which causes
unjustified pain, distress or suffering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
55.03 LIVESTOCK NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or
confines livestock in any place to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with
customary animal husbandry practices or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance
or to injure or destroy livestock by any means which causes pain or suffering in a manner
inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.04 ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS. A person who has ownership or
custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except the person may deliver
the cat or dog to another person who will accept ownership and custody or the person
may deliver the cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
55.05 AT LARGE PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to
run at large within the corporate limits of the City.
55.06 DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE. It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to
allow or permit such animal to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage
to, or interference with, the premises.
55.07 ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE. It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to
allow or permit such dog to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or
persons by frequent and habitual howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise; or, by running
after or chasing persons, bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles.
55.08 VICIOUS ANIMALS. No person shall own, keep or harbor a vicious,
dangerous or bothersome animal within the City. Animals kept in the following
circumstances are excluded from this requirement: (Ord. 08-10 – Aug. 08 Supp.)
1. Public zoos, fully accredited educational or medical institutions; public
museums where such animals are kept as live specimens for public viewing; or
animals kept for the purpose of instruction or research.
2. Exhibitions to the public by a traveling circus, carnival, exhibit or show.
3. Dangerous animals in a licensed veterinary hospital for treatment.
4. Dangerous animals under the jurisdiction of and in the possession of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
5. Animals possessed under authority of a State-issued game breeder’s license
or scientific collector’s license.
6. Dangerous animals maintained by the Federal, State or County government
or its designee, pursuant to the enforcement of this chapter.
55.09 SEIZURE OF VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS. Any animal which
is suspected of being vicious or dangerous shall be seized and impounded.
Contemporaneously with such seizure, the owner of the animal shall be charged with the
appropriate violation of this chapter. In the event the animal cannot be seized without
exposing a person to danger or personal injury, the animal may be destroyed.
1. If the owner is ultimately found not guilty of violating this chapter, the
animal involved shall be returned to the owner, and the owner shall bear no costs
of the confinement.
2. If the owner is found or pleads guilty of violating the chapter, the animal
shall be returned to the owner, only upon full payment of the confinement
expenses and the owner shall also make provision to have the animal removed
from the corporate limits of the City, or the animal shall not be released. A
vicious or dangerous animal may be destroyed if appropriate conditions or
provisions cannot be met or made to allow release of said animal, after notice and
hearing to the owner or person harboring or maintaining the animal.
3. If after the conclusion of the court case, the owner does not redeem the
animal, it will be disposed of as deemed appropriate by the City Manager.
If an owner refuses entry upon property to view an animal suspected of being vicious or
dangerous, a law enforcement officer may request a search warrant from a magistrate.
Such request shall detail the reason why the warrant is necessary and why the officer has
reason to believe a violation of this chapter exists.
55.10 NUMBER OF ANIMALS. No person shall harbor or maintain such number of
animals to create unhealthful or unsanitary conditions for the humans or animals
occupying the premises or create any other conditions constituting a nuisance. If such
conditions exist, the City Manager is authorized to make an investigation and after notice
and hearing to the person harboring or maintaining the animals, the City Manager may
order such number of animals be moved from the residence or premises to remedy or
correct the unhealthful, unsanitary or other conditions constituting a nuisance. Upon the
failure of the person to follow the orders issued by the City Manager, appropriate action
may be pursued in the courts either to enforce the order of the City Manager and/or to
correct the conditions and/or to abate the nuisance.
55.11 UNHEALTHFUL OR UNSANITARY CONDITIONS.
1. An owner shall keep all structures, pens, coops or yards wherein animals
are confined clean, devoid of vermin and free of odors arising from feces.
2. No owner or walker of any animal shall permit the animal to discharge
feces upon any public or private property, other than the property of the owner of
the animal. The owner or walker shall be deemed to permit the animal’s discharge
of feces if the owner does not immediately thereafter take steps to remove and
clean up the feces from the property.
3. All feces removed as aforesaid shall be placed in an airtight container and
shall be stored in a sanitary manner in an appropriate refuse container until it is
removed pursuant to refuse collection procedures or otherwise disposed of in a
sanitary manner.
4. An owner may, as an alternative to subsection 3, collect the feces and turn
it under the surface of the owner’s soil in any manner that prevents odor or
collection of vermin.
55.12 TETHERING OF ANIMALS. No person shall stake or otherwise tie or fasten
an animal in a way that permits the animal to pass onto, over or across any public
sidewalk, street or alley or private property other than the property of the owner.
55.13 ANIMALS IN PARKS AND ON GOLF COURSES.
1. No animal shall be allowed within 100 feet of any pool, pavilion,
playground, food vendor or ball field in a City park, except properly trained
service animals or other service animals for the blind, deaf or otherwise disabled.
Police canines are exempt from this subsection. This subsection will not apply to
animals on a public sidewalk in or adjacent to the public right-of-way or on a
public trail in a public park. (Ord.
00-37 – Feb. 01 Supp.)
2. No animal shall be allowed in any other area of a City park unless it is
attached to a leash not more than six (6) feet in length and of sufficient strength to
restrain the animal when the leash is held by a person capable of restraining and
controlling the animal.
3. No animal shall be allowed on any golf course operated by the City.
4. No animal shall be allowed within the zoo area bounded by the security
fence.
55.14 RABIES VACCINATION.
1. It is unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor a cat or dog over six
(6) months of age which has not been currently vaccinated against rabies. Dogs
kept in a State or Federally licensed kennel and which are kept under constant
restraint are not subject to the provisions of this section.
2. Every cat or dog which is over six (6) months of age shall wear a collar
with a valid rabies vaccination tag attached to the collar when outside the owner’s
dwelling.
3. Cats and dogs shall be licensed by their owners through the procedure by
which the rabies vaccination tag and certificate are obtained. The rabies
vaccination tag and certificate shall be the license required by this chapter.
4. The owner of any dog or cat within the City which is subject to vaccination
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall have such dog or cat
vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in such way as to maintain
said dog or cat’s immunity from rabies.
5. The owner shall attach a permanent identification device to the cat or dog’s
collar which contains the address and/or telephone number of the cat or dog’s
owner or veterinarian unless the information is engraved on the rabies vaccination
tag. The owner shall notify the veterinarian who vaccinated the cat or dog for
rabies of any change of address within five (5) days of moving. When permanent
ownership of a cat or dog is transferred, the original owner must notify the
veterinarian who vaccinated said cat or dog for rabies of the transfer and provide
the new owner’s name, address and telephone number within five (5) days after
the transfer.
55.15 CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE ANIMALS IN HEAT. The owner of any
female animal in heat shall confine said animal inside the house or building on the
owner’s premises during the heat period. The owner may remove the animal in heat from
such premises for the purpose of defecating, urinating, breeding and/or appointments
with the veterinarian provided the animal is on a leash, cord, chain or similar restraint not
more than six (6) feet in length and is under control of the owner.
55.16 OWNER’S DUTY. It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat or other animal
which has bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or
attack to report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty of
physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the existence of any
animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.17 CONFINEMENT. If a local board of health receives information that an animal
has bitten a person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall
order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner fails to
confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be apprehended and
impounded by such board, and after ten (10) days the board may humanely destroy the
animal. If such animal is returned to its owner, the owner shall pay the cost of
impoundment. This section does not apply if a police service dog or horse used by a law
enforcement agency and acting in the performance of its duties has bitten a person.
(Ord. 01-31 – Nov. 01 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.18 AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT. Animals found at large in violation of this
chapter shall be seized and impounded at the impoundment facilities utilized by the City,
or at the discretion of the peace officer, the owner may be served a summons to appear
before a proper court to answer charges made thereunder.
55.19 POLICE SERVICE DOGS. Police service dogs of the Marion Police
Department and those of other law enforcement agencies operating within the City are
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
55.20 CERTAIN BOTHERSOME ANIMALS. No person shall keep within the city
such animals as bees, cattle, goats (except female pygmy goats), horses, poultry, fowl,
sheep or swine (except for Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), except as may be permitted in
an A-1 Rural Restricted Zoning District or as allowed in Chapter 55A.
(Ord. 14-02 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
55.21 SCHEDULED OFFENSES AND FINES. The following scheduled fines are
fixed for violations of the designated sections of this chapter:
1. For violation of Section 55.05 (running at large).
First Offense $25.00
Second Offense $50.00
Third Offense $75.00
Over third offense $100.00
2. For violation of Section 55.11 (sanitary conditions) - $30.00.
3. For violation of Section 55.13 (animals in parks and on golf courses) -
$30.00.
4. For violation of Section 55.14 (rabies vaccination) - $25.00.
5. For violation of Section 55.14 (rabies vaccination tags) - $25.00.
6. For violation of Section 55.15 (confinement of females) - $30.00.
(Ord. 01-20 – Aug. 01 Supp.)
55.22 OPERATION WITHOUT A STATE CERTIFICATE OR LICENSE.
Except as noted in Section 162.11 of the Iowa Code, a person shall not operate a pound
or shelter without a certificate of registration granted by the secretary of the Department
of Agriculture and Land Stewardship under Chapter 162 of the Iowa Code. Except as
noted in Section 162.11 of the Iowa Code, a person shall not operate as a pet shop,
commercial kennel, public auction, dealer, commercial breeder, boarding kennel, nor
research facility without a license or certificate of registration granted by the secretary of
the Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship under Chapter 162 of the Iowa
Code. Each day of operation in violation of this section is a separate offense.
(Ord. 03-16 – Aug. 03 Supp.)
55.23 DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS. No person shall own, keep or harbor a
dangerous wild animal within the City. Animals kept in circumstances allowed under
Chapter 717F of the Code of Iowa are excluded from this requirement.
(Ord. 07-21 – Aug. 07 Supp.)
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CHAPTER 55A
URBAN CHICKENS AND DUCKS
55A.01 Definitions 55A.08 Predators, Rodents, Insects and Parasites
55A.02 Permit Required 55A.09 Feed and Water
55A.03 Number and Type of Chickens Allowed 55.10A Waste Storage and Removal
55A.04 Zoning Districts Allowed 55A.11 Chickens at Large
55A.05 Non-commercial Use Only 55A.12 Unlawful Acts
55A.06 Enclosures 55A.13 Nuisances
55A.07 Odor and Noise Impacts 55A.14 Ducks
55A.01 DEFINITIONS.
1. “Applicant” shall mean the owner of the tract of land for which a permit is being
requested; or, the owner's representative in the case of a nursing, rest or convalescent home
2. “Chicken” shall mean a member of the subspecies Gallus Gallus Domesticus, a
domesticated fowl. Chicken includes duck when the Permitting Officer has issued a permit
therefore
3. “Duck” shall mean a member of the subspecies Anatidae Anseriformes, a fowl..
4. “Urban chicken” shall mean a chicken kept on a permitted tract of land pursuant to
a permit issued under this chapter.
5. “Permitting Officer” shall mean the person so designated by the City Manager.
6. “Tract of land” shall mean an expanse of land identified by address legally
described with definitive boundaries.
7. “Single family dwelling” shall mean any building that contains only one dwelling
unit used, intended, rented, leased, let or hired to be occupied for living purposes.
8. “Nursing,. rest or convalescent homes” shall mean any building that contains
multiple units intended to be occupied for short or long term care or recovery of individuals.
9. “Permitted tract of land” shall mean the tract of land as identified by the application
upon which a permit is granted for keeping chickens pursuant to this chapter.
10. “Permittee” shall mean an applicant who has been granted a permit to raise, harbor
or keep chickens pursuant to this chapter.
55A.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. Permit Required. No person shall raise, harbor or keep chickens or ducks within
the City of Marion without a valid permit obtained from the Permitting Officer under the
provisions of this chapter.
2. Application. In order to obtain a permit, an applicant must submit a completed
application on forms provided by the Permitting Officer, either on- line or in paper form,
and paying all fees required by this chapter.
3. Requirements. The requirements to the receipt of a permit include:
A. All requirements of this chapter are met.
B. All fees, as may be provided for from time to time by City Council
resolution, for the permit are paid in full.
C. All judgments in the City's favor and against the applicant have been paid
in full.
D. The tract of land to be permitted shall contain only one single family
dwelling occupied by the permittee or operate as a nursing, rest or convalescent
home.
E. The applicant has provided notice to the residents of all immediately
adjacent dwellings of the applicant's intent to obtain a permit.
F. The applicant has successfully completed an approved class in raising
chickens in an urban setting and has submitted a Certificate with the permit
application. The Permitting Officer shall maintain a current list of such approved
classes.
4. Issuance of Permit. If the Permitting Officer concludes, as a result of the
information contained in the application, that the requirements for a permit have been met,
then the Officer shall issue the permit.
5. Denial, Suspension, Revocation, Non- renewal. The Permitting Officer may deny,
suspend, revoke, or decline to renew any permit issued for any of the following grounds:
A. False statements on any application or other information or report required
by this section to be given by the applicant.
B. Failure to pay any application, penalty, re-inspection or reinstatement fee
required by this section or City Council resolution.
C. Failure to correct deficiencies noted in notices of violation in the time
specified in the notice.
D. Failure to comply with the provisions of an approved
mitigation/remediation plan by the Permitting Officer, or designee.
E. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter.
6. Notification. A decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a permit shall be in
writing, delivered by ordinary mail or in person to the address indicated on the application.
The notification shall specify reasons for the action.
7. Effect of Revocation, Etc. When an application for a permit is denied, or when a
permit is revoked, the applicant may not re-apply for a new permit for a period of one ( 1)
year from the date of the denial or revocation.
8. Appeals. No permit may be denied, suspended, revoked, or not renewed unless
notice and an opportunity to be heard is given the applicant or holder of the permit. In any
instance where the Permitting Officer has denied, revoked, suspended, or not renewed a
permit, the applicant or holder of an Urban Chicken permit may appeal the decision to the
City Manager, or designee other than the Permitting Officer within ten ( 10) business days
of receipt by the applicant or holder of the permit of the notice of the decision. The
applicant or holder of the permit will be given an opportunity for a hearing. The decision
of the officer hearing the appeal, or any decision by the Permitting Officer which is not
appealed in accordance to this chapter shall be deemed final action.
55A.03 NUMBER AND TYPE OF CHICKENS ALLOWED.
1. The maximum number of chickens allowed is six (6) per tract of land regardless of
how many dwelling units are on the tract.
2. Only female chickens (hens) are allowed.
3. Chickens must have wings appropriately clipped to prevent them from flying.
55A.04 ZONING DISTRICTS ALLOWED. Permits will be granted only for tracts of land
located in residential or planned development residential districts as identified on the Official
Zoning Map on file with the City of Marion or operate as a nursing, rest or convalescent homes
and which do not have restrictive covenants that prohibit chickens or ducks.
55A.05 NON-COMMERCIAL USE ONLY. A permit shall not allow the permittee to engage
in chicken breeding or fertilizer production for commercial purposes.
55A.06 ENCLOSURES.
1. Chickens must be kept in an enclosure or fenced area at all times. Chickens shall
be secured within a henhouse or chicken tractor during non- daylight hours.
2. Enclosures must be kept in a clean, dry, odor-free, neat and sanitary condition at all
times.
3. Henhouses, chicken tractors and chicken pens must provide adequate ventilation
and adequate sun and shade and must be impermeable to rodents, wild birds and predators,
including dogs and cats.
4. Henhouses and Chicken Tractors.
A. Henhouses and chicken tractors shall be designed to provide safe and
healthy living conditions for the chickens with a minimum of four (4) square feet
per bird while minimizing adverse impacts to other residents in the neighborhood.
(1) A henhouse or chicken tractor shall be enclosed on all sides and shall
have a roof and doors. Access doors must be able to be shut and locked at
night. Opening windows and vents must be covered with predator and bird
proof wire of less than one ( 1) inch openings.
(2) The materials used in making a henhouse or chicken tractor shall be
uniform for each element of the structure such that the walls are made of
the same material, the roof has the same shingles or other covering, and any
windows or openings are constructed using the same materials. The use of
scrap, waste board, sheet metal, or similar materials is prohibited.
Henhouses and chicken tractors shall be well maintained.
B. Henhouses, chicken tractors and chicken pens shall only be located in the
rear or side yard as defined by Section 176.07 Definitions, of the Marion Code of
Ordinances. At no time may said structures be located in the corner side yard or the
front yard of any property.
C. Henhouses, chicken tractors and chicken pens must be located at least ten
(10) feet from the property line and at least twenty-five ( 25) feet from any adjacent
residential dwelling, church, school or place of business.
5. Any enclosed chicken pen shall consist of sturdy wire fencing. The pen must be
covered with wire, aviary netting, or solid roofing.
6. Upon ceasing to maintain chickens or ducks on the property, all enclosures related
to them shall be removed from the premises within thirty (30) days.
55A.07 ODOR AND NOISE IMPACTS.
1. Odors from chickens, chicken manure or other chicken related substances shall not
be perceptible beyond the boundaries of the permitted tract of land.
2. Noise from chickens shall not be loud enough beyond the boundaries of the
permitted tract of land at the property boundaries to disturb persons of reasonable
sensitivity.
55A.08 PREDATORS, RODENTS, INSECTS AND PARASITES. The Permittee shall take
necessary action to reduce the attraction of predators and rodents and the potential infestation of
insects and parasites. Chickens found to be infested with insects and parasites that may result in
unhealthy conditions to human habitation may be removed by a Marion Animal Control Officer.
55A.09 FEED AND WATER. Chickens shall be provided with access to feed and clean water
at all times. The feed and water shall be unavailable to rodents, wild birds and predators.
55A.10 WASTE STORAGE AND REMOVAL. All stored manure shall be covered by a fully
enclosed structure with a roof or lid over the entire structure. No more than three (3) cubic feet of
manure shall be stored on the permitted tract of land. All other manure not used for composting or
fertilizing shall be removed. The henhouse, chicken tractor, chicken pen and surrounding area must
be kept free from trash and accumulated droppings. Uneaten feed shall he removed in a . timely
manner.
55A.11 CHICKENS AT LARGE.
1. The Permittee shall not allow the Permittee's chickens to roam off the permitted
tract of land. No dog or cat or other domesticated animal which kills a chicken off the
permitted tract of land will, for that reason alone, not be considered a dangerous or
aggressive animal or the City's responsibility to enforce its animal control provisions.
2. The Permittee shall place and keep leg bands on all of his chickens showing the
permit number.
55A.12 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep chickens in violation of any provision
of this chapter or any other provision of the Code of Ordinances.
2. It shall be unlawful for any owner, renter or leaseholder of property to allow
chickens to be kept on the property in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
3. No person shall keep chickens inside a single family dwelling unit, multi-family
dwelling unit(s), nursing, rest or convalescent homes or rental unit
4. No person shall slaughter any chickens within the City of Marion.
5. No person shall keep a rooster.
6. No person shall keep chickens on a vacant or uninhabited tract of land.
55A.13 NUISANCES. Any violation of the terms of this chapter that constitutes a health hazard
or that interferes with the use or enjoyment of neighboring property is a nuisance and may be
abated under the general nuisance abatement provisions of Code of Ordinances Chapter 50.
55A.14 DUCKS. The Permitting Officer may also issue permits for ducks subject to the same
terms and conditions that apply to chickens under this chapter or so many as the Permitting Officer
deems reasonably applicable.
(Ch. 55A – Ord. 16-03 - May 16 Supp.)
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
60.01 Title 60.05 Traffic Accidents: Reports
60.02 Definitions 60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic
60.01 TITLE. Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and
cited as the “Marion Traffic Code.”
60.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined
by State law, such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and
other words and phrases used herein, have the following meanings:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
1. “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway when fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage thereon for a distance
of three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
2. “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
3. “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic
or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
4. “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where forty
percent (40%) or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of three
hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings
in use for business.
5. “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway
for a distance of two hundred (200) feet in either direction from a school house.
6. “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
7. “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
8. “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle, even
momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic
control sign or signal.
9. “Suburban district” means all other parts of the city not included in the
business, school or residence districts.
10. “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not
inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of
regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
11. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or alley.
60.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. Provisions of this chapter and
State law relating to motor vehicles and law of the road are enforced by the Police
Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
60.04 POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC. A peace officer, and, in the absence of a
peace officer, any officer of the fire department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized
to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event
of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])
60.05 TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: REPORTS. The driver of a vehicle involved in an
accident within the limits of the City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa
Department of Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of Section
321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06 PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY. A peace officer is authorized to stop a
vehicle to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic violation, to inspect the condition
of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills
of lading or other manifest of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the
registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such
vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require exhibition
of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07 OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS. No person shall willfully fail or refuse
to comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with
authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
61.01 Traffic Control Devices 61.05 Traffic Lanes
61.02 Installation 61.06 Necessity of Signs
61.03 Compliance 61.07 Standards
61.04 Crosswalks
61.01 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. The Council shall have the power to
establish by resolution, and cause to be placed and maintained, appropriate traffic control
devices to indicate parking spaces and zones, areas for angle parking, no parking zones,
limited parking zones, reserved parking zones, loading zones, safety zones, school zones,
hospital zones, quiet zones, traffic zones other than the above, truck routes, school stops,
stop intersections, yield right-of-way intersections, one-way streets, streets to be laned for
traffic and play streets. The Council shall also have the power to designate and indicate
by resolution intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by traffic signals;
intersections at which left turns, right turns and U-turns shall be prohibited; and
intersections at which markers, buttons or other indications shall be placed to indicate the
course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or turning at such intersections.
61.02 INSTALLATION. The Council shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic
control devices to carry out the provisions of the Traffic Code of the City under State law
or to regulate, guide or warn traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.254 & 321.255)
61.03 COMPLIANCE. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any
official traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this Traffic
Code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under Section 321.231 of the Code
of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
61.04 CROSSWALKS. The Council is hereby authorized to designate and maintain
crosswalks by appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic
conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and at
such other places as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.05 TRAFFIC LANES. Where traffic lanes have been marked on street pavements
at such places as traffic conditions require, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any
vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane
except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning
movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.06 NECESSITY OF SIGNS. No provision of this Traffic Code for which signs are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in a viewable position and sufficiently legible to
an ordinarily observant person.
61.07 STANDARDS. Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established
by The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.10 Reckless Driving
62.02 Play Streets Designated 62.11 Careless Driving
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks 62.12 Operation of Golf Carts
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle 62.13 Use of Driver’s License or Nonoperator’s Identification
62.05 Quiet Zones Card by Underage Person to Obtain Alcohol.
62.06 Funeral Processions 62.14 Use of Driver’s License or Nonoperator’s Identification
62.07 Tampering with Vehicle Card by Underage Person to Obtain Cigarettes or
62.08 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles Tobacco Products
62.09 Obstructing View at Intersections 62.15 Engine Braking
62.01 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS. Any person who willfully fails or refuses
to comply with any lawful order of a peace officer or direction of a fire department
officer during a fire, or who fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following
Iowa statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in
violation of this section. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by reference
and are as follows:
1. Section 321.20B – Proof of security against liability.
2. Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited.
3. Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
4. Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
5. Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
6. Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
7. Section 321.174 – Operators licensed.
8. Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired license.
9. Section 321.180 – Instruction permits.
10. Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged fourteen
through seventeen.
11. Section 321.193 – Restricted licenses.
12. Section 321.194 – Special minor’s licenses.
13. Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s identification
card.
14. Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s identification
card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
15. Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
16. Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
17. Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
18. Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
19. Section 321.223 – License inspected.
20. Section 321.224 – Record kept.
21. Section 321.232 – Radar jamming devices; penalty.
22. Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles.
23. Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
24. Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
25. Section 321.262 – Damage to vehicle.
26. Section 321.263 – Information and aid.
27. Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
28. Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
29. Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
30. Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
31. Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
32. Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
33. Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
34. Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
35. Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
36. Section 321.302 – Overtaking on the right.
37. Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
38. Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
39. Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
40. Section 321.308 – Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance requirements.
41. Section 321.309 – Towing; convoys; drawbars.
42. Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
43. Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
44. Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
45. Section 321.314 – When signal required.
46. Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
47. Section 321.316 – Stopping.
48. Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
49. Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
50. Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
51. Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
52. Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
53. Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
54. Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
55. Section 321.329 – Duty of driver – pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
56. Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
57. Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
58. Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.
59. Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
60. Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal of train.
61. Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
62. Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
63. Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
64. Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
65. Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
66. Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
67. Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
68. Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous material.
69. Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
70. Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
71. Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
72. Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
73. Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
74. Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
75. Section 321.372 – School buses.
76. Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
77. Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
78. Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
79. Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
80. Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
81. Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
82. Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
83. Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
84. Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
85. Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
86. Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
87. Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
88. Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
89. Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
90. Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
91. Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
92. Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
93. Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
94. Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
95. Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
96. Section 321.406 – Cowl lamps.
97. Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
98. Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
99. Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
100. Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
101. Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
102. Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
103. Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
104. Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
105. Section 321.422 – Red light in front.
106. Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
107. Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch and control requirements.
108. Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
109. Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
110. Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, and bells prohibited.
111. Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
112. Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
113. Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
114. Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
115. Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
116. Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
117. Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
118. Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
119. Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
120. Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses – use required.
121. Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
122. Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety regulations.
123. Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation.
124. Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
125. Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
126. Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles; permits.
127. Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
128. Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
129. Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
130. Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
131. Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
132. Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight.
133. Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
134. Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity - reregistration.
135. Section 321.91 — Penalty for abandonment.
136. Section 321.99 — Fraudulent use of registration.
137. Section 321.216C — Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s identification
card by underage person to obtain cigarettes or tobacco products.
138. Section 321.344B — Immediate safety threat – penalty.
139. Section 321.381A — Operation of low-speed vehicles.
(Ord. 00-28 – Aug. 00 Supp.)
140. Section 321.257 — Official traffic control signal.
(Ord. 00-30 – Aug. 00 Supp.)
141. Section 321.306 — Roadways laned for traffic.
(Ord. 00-31 – Aug. 00 Supp.)
62.02 PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED. Whenever authorized signs are erected
indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon
any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest
care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
62.03 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or
within any sidewalk area except at a driveway.
62.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLE. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the
streets of the City unless all passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place
intended for their accommodation. No person shall ride on the running board of a motor
vehicle or in any other place not customarily used for carrying passengers or cargo. No
person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line skates, sled or toy vehicle
shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05 QUIET ZONES. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone,
no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS. Upon the immediate approach of a funeral
procession, the driver of every other vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle,
shall yield the right-of-way. An operator of a motor vehicle which is part of a funeral
procession shall not be charged with violating traffic rules and regulations relating to
traffic signals and devices while participating in the procession unless the operation is
reckless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.324A)
62.07 TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE. It is unlawful for any person, either
individually or in association with one or more other persons, willfully to injure or
tamper with any vehicle or break or remove any part or parts of or from a vehicle without
the consent of the owner.
62.08 OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
1. Drivers. A driver of a motor vehicle upon a public street or highway shall
not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an open or unsealed bottle,
can, jar, or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284)
2. Passengers. A passenger in a motor vehicle upon a public street or highway
shall not possess in the passenger area of the motor vehicle an open or unsealed
bottle, can, jar or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.284A)
As used in this section “passenger area” means the area of a motor vehicle designed to
seat the driver and passengers while the motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is
readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in their seating positions, including
the glove compartment. An open or unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage
may be transported in the trunk of the motor vehicle. An unsealed receptacle containing
an alcoholic beverage may be transported behind the last upright seat of the motor vehicle
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk.
62.09 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS. It is unlawful to allow any
tree, hedge, billboard or other object to obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing
persons from having a clear view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross
streets. Any such obstruction shall be deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard
penalty may be abated in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.10 RECKLESS DRIVING. No person shall drive any vehicle in such manner as to
indicate a willful or a wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.277)
62.11 CARELESS DRIVING. No person shall intentionally operate a motor vehicle
on a street or highway in any one of the following ways:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.277A)
1. Creating or causing unnecessary tire squealing, skidding or sliding upon
acceleration or stopping.
2. Simulating a temporary race.
3. Causing any wheel or wheels to unnecessarily lose contact with the ground.
4. Causing the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway.
62.12 OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS. Golf carts may be operated on City streets
by persons possessing a valid driver’s license and persons with disabilities identification
device, provided that a special permit is obtained from the City Manager. The
application for a permit shall set forth that the applicant meets the requirements of this
section, the proposed routes of the applicant and a compelling need for issuance of the
permit. The City Manager may impose restrictions and conditions in addition to those set
forth in this section and may deny an application when a compelling need for the permit
is not demonstrated. Appeals from the denial of a permit or any additional conditions or
restrictions may be made to the Council within thirty (30) days. A golf cart shall not be
operated upon a City street which is a primary road extension through the City but shall
be allowed to cross a primary road extension. The golf cart shall be equipped with
adequate brakes, a slow-moving vehicle sign and a bicycle safety flag and shall be
operated on the streets only from sunrise to sunset. Golf carts operated on City streets
need not be registered under Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa.
62.13 USE OF DRIVER'S LICENSE OR NONOPERATOR'S
IDENTIFICATION CARD BY UNDERAGE PERSON TO OBTAIN ALCOHOL.
A person who is under the age of twenty-one, who alters or displays or has in the person's
possession a fictitious or fraudulently altered driver's license or nonoperator's
identification card and who uses the license to violate or attempt to violate section
123.47, commits a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars. The
court shall forward a copy of the conviction to the department.
(Ord. 01-24 – Aug. 01 Supp.)
62.14 USE OF DRIVER'S LICENSE OR NONOPERATOR'S
IDENTIFICATION CARD BY UNDERAGE PERSON TO OBTAIN
CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS. A person who is under the age of
eighteen, who alters or displays or has in the person's possession a fictitious or
fraudulently altered driver's license or nonoperator's identification card and who uses the
license or card to violate or attempt to violate section 453A.2, subsection 2, commits a
simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars. The court shall
forward a copy of the conviction to the department.
(Ord. 01-24 – Aug. 01 Supp.)
62.15 ENGINE BRAKING. It is unlawful for any person in any part of the City to
make, or cause to be made, loud or disturbing noises with any mechanical devices
operated by compressed air and used for the purpose of assisting braking on any vehicle,
commonly referred to as engine braking. This provision does not apply to emergency fire
department vehicles.
(Ord. 07-09 – Aug. 07 Supp.)
[The next page is 369]
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
63.01 Speed Regulations
63.01 SPEED REGULATIONS.
A. GENERAL. Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a
careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having
due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any other conditions then
existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any street at a speed greater than will permit
said driver to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having
the right to assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
B. STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS. The following speed limits are established in
Section 321.285 of the Code of Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless
specifically designated otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.
1. Business District — Twenty (20) miles per hour.
2. Residence or School District — Twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
3. Suburban District — Forty-five (45) miles per hour.
C. PARKS, CEMETERIES AND PARKING LOTS. A speed in excess of fifteen
(15) miles per hour in any public park, cemetery or parking lot, unless specifically
designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
D. SPECIAL SPEED RESTRICTIONS. In accordance with requirements of the
Iowa State Department of Transportation, or whenever the Council shall determine upon
the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section
63.01 (B) is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at
any intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street system, the Council shall
determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable
and safe at such location. The following special speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
1. Special 15 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per
hour is unlawful in any mobile home park that has elected to have the Marion Traffic
Code enforced within the mobile home park.
2. Special 20 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. On 10th Street from 5th Avenue to 7th Avenue.
3. Special 25 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles
per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. On 31st Street from 10th Avenue to the north City limits.
B. (Repealed by Ord. 07-28 – Nov. 07 Supp.)
C. On Third Avenue from 31st Street to 35th Street.
D. On 6th Avenue from 7th Street to 15th Street.
(Ord. 12-29 – Feb. 13 Supp.)
4. Special 30 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. On 10th Street from 10th Avenue to the north City limits, except that
area from Boyson Road to Arica Avenue that shall be twenty-five (25) mph
when children are present.
(Ord. 10-33 – Feb. 11 Supp.)
B. (Repealed by Ord. 14-10 – Aug. 14 Supp.)
C. On West Eighth Avenue from the western edge of the bridge across
Indian Creek to Lindale Drive.
D. On Lindale Drive from West Eighth Avenue to Blairs Ferry Road.
E. On 35th Street from 10th Avenue to McGowan Boulevard.
(Ord. 10-11 – May 10 Supp.)
F. On South 22nd Street from Grand Avenue to the south City limits.
G. On Indian Creek Road from 10th Street to 650 feet north of 29th
Avenue except for that area from 29th Avenue to a point 550 feet north which
shall be a twenty-five mile per hour school zone when children are present.
H. On South 11th Street from 1st Avenue to Meadowview Drive.
I. On 29th Avenue from Indian Creek Road to Highland Drive, except
that the area from Indian Creek Road to Brookvalley Court shall be 25 MPH
when children are present.
(Ord. 09-18 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
J. (Repealed by Ord. 09-18 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
K. (Repealed by Ord. 09-18 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
L. On Winslow Road from Berrys Run Bridge to Cakebread Court.
(Ord. 06-29 – Nov. 06 Supp.)
M. On 44th Street from Business Highway 151 north to Mission Avenue.
(Ord. 07-28 – Nov. 07 Supp.)
N. On 31st Street from 10th Avenue to Highway 100.
(Ord. 13-04 – Feb. 13 Supp.)
5. Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of thirty-five (35) miles
per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. On Marion Boulevard from the west City limits to where it becomes
Seventh Avenue.
B. (Repealed by Ord. 16-18 – Feb. 17 Supp.)
C. On Seventh Avenue/Business 151 from 15th Street to a point 500 feet
west of the east line of 44th Street.
D. (Repealed by Ord. 18-10 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
E. On Blairs Ferry Road from Lindale Drive to the northwest City limits.
F. On Boyson Road from 10th Street to the west City limits.
G. On Indian Creek Road from 650 feet north of 29th Avenue to the north
City limits.
H. On East Post Road from Highway 100 to Meadowview Drive.
(Ord. 10-13 – May 10 Supp.)
I. On Winslow Road from Cakebread Court to the north City limits.
(Ord. 10-14 – May 10 Supp.)
J. On Munier Road within the incorporated limits of the City.
K. On Lucore Road within the incorporated limits of the City.
L. On 44th Street from Highway 151 to the south City limits.
(Ord. 05-21 – Nov. 05 Supp.)
M. On South 62nd Street south of Highway 151 within the incorporated
limits of the City.
N. On 29th Avenue from Alburnett Road to Indian Creek Road, except
that the area from 2nd Street to Indian Creek Road shall be 25 MPH when
children are present.
(Ord. 09-18 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
O. On Linn Aire Drive from Highway 151/13 to 62nd Street.
(Ord. 05-20 – Nov. 05 Supp.)
P. On 29th Avenue from Highland Drive to Highway 13.
(Ord. 09-18 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
Q. On 44th Street from Mission Avenue north to Tower Terrace Road.
(Ord. 07-28 – Nov. 07 Supp.)
R. On Echo Hill Road from Alburnett Road to Winslow Road, except
that the area from Culver Lane to the centerline of Section 24, T84N, R7W
shall be 25 MPH when children are present.
(Ord. 09-16 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
S. On 35th Street from McGowan Boulevard to Tower Terrace Road.
(Ord. 10-11 – May 10 Supp.)
T. On Winslow Road from Indian Creek Road to Berrys Run Bridge.
(Ord. 10-14 – May 10 Supp.)
U. On Connection Avenue from 10th Street to Winslow Road.
(Ord. 11-11 – Aug. 11 Supp.)
V. On Tower Terrace Road from the west City limits to the east City
limits, except that area from 10th Street to 1000 feet east which shall be
twenty-five (25) MPH when children are present.
(Ord. 16-17 – Feb. 17 Supp.)
W. On 35th Street from Business 151 to Munier Road.
(Ord. 14-09 – Aug. 14 Supp.)
X. On Blairs Ferry Road from Marion Boulevard to Lindale Drive.
(Ord. 14-10 – Aug. 14 Supp.)
Y. On Alburnett Road from Boyson Road to the southern terminus of Alburnett
Road.
(Ord. 14-17 – Nov. 14 Supp.)
Z. On East Robins Road within the incorporated limits of the City.
(Ord. 16-04 – May 16 Supp.)
AA. On Seventh Avenue from Marion Boulevard to 250 feet west of Sixth Street
as 35 mph.
(Ord. 16-18 – Feb. 17 Supp.)
AB. On 35th Avenue from 35th Street to Highway 13.
(Ord. 17-26 – Nov. 17 Supp.)
AC. On Alburnett Road from northern City limits to the southern terminus of
Alburnett Road, except that the portion lying 400 feet south of Oakridge School
Drive to 400’ north of Echo Hill Road which shall be twenty-five (25) mph when
children are present.
(Ord. 18-10 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
6. Special 45 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of forty-five (45) miles per hour
is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. On Business Highway 151 from 500 feet west of the east line of 44th Street
to Highway 13.
B. (Repealed by Ord. 09-18 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
C. (Repealed by Ord. 16-04 – May 16 Supp.)
D. On East Post Road from Highway 100 to the south City limits.
(Ord. 10-12 – May 10 Supp.)
E. On North 10th Street from 800 feet north of Williams Drive to 150 feet north
of Shamrock Drive.
(Ord. 07-27 – Nov. 07 Supp.)
F. (Repealed by Ord. 17-06 – May 17 Supp.)
G. (Repealed by Ord. 18-10 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
H. (Repealed by Ord. 18-10 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
7. Special 50 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of fifty (50) miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets/primary roads or parts thereof.
A. On Business Highway 151 beginning 120 feet east of 62nd Street and
extending westerly 1,350 feet to the intersection of Iowa Highway 13 and Business
Highway 151.
B. On Iowa Highway 13 beginning 110 feet north of Kacena Avenue and
extending southerly to the intersection of Iowa Highway 13 and Business Highway
151.
C. On Iowa Highway 13 beginning 1,665 feet south of Linn Aire Avenue and
extending northerly to the intersection of Iowa Highway 13 and Business Highway
151.
(Ord. 06-28 – Nov. 06 Supp.)
8. Special 55 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of fifty-five (55) miles per hour
is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. On Business Highway 151 anywhere in the corporate City limits of Marion
that has not been heretofore established as a lower mile per hour speed zone.
B. On Iowa Highway 13 anywhere in the corporate City limits of Marion that
has not been heretofore established as a lower mile per hour speed zone.
(Ord. 06-28 – Nov. 06 Supp.)
E. MINIMUM SPEED. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to
impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is
necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
F. OPERATION OF LOW-SPEED VEHICLES. A low-speed vehicle shall not be
operated on a street with a posted speed limit greater than thirty-five miles per hour. This section
shall not prohibit a low-speed vehicle from crossing a street with a posted speed limit greater than
thirty-five miles per hour.
(Ord. 01-35 & 01-39 – Nov. 01 Supp.)
[The next page is 379]
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.03 Left Turn for Parking
64.02 U-turns
64.01 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at
an intersection shall do so as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
1. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as
practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2. Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the
roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection to the right of the
centerline of the roadway being entered.
3. Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall
be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the
intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made
by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon leaving the
intersection.
The Council may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to
intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions require, that a different
course from that specified above be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and
when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at
an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs.
64.02 U-TURNS. The driver of a vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction, unless such movement can be made in safety and without
otherwise interfering with other traffic. No driver of a vehicle shall make a U-turn at any
intersection where the traffic is regulated by signals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
64.03 LEFT TURN FOR PARKING. No person shall make a left hand turn, crossing
the centerline of the street, for the purpose of parking on said street.
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
65.01 Stop or Yield 65.04 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.02 School Stops 65.05 Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks
65.03 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk 65.06 Yielding the Right-of-Way to School Crossing Guards
65.01 STOP OR YIELD. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as directed by
traffic control devices posted in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
65.02 SCHOOL STOPS. At any school crossing zone, every driver of a vehicle
approaching said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point ten (10) feet from
the approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and
thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed
through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
65.03 STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK. The driver of a vehicle emerging
from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately
prior to driving onto the sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area
only when able to do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-ofway
to any vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.04 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED. Notwithstanding any traffic
control signal indication to proceed, no driver shall enter an intersection or a marked
crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle.
65.05 YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS. Where traffic control
signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way,
slowing down or stopping, if need be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway
within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
65.06 YIELDING THE RIGHT-OF-WAY TO SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS.
1. The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, by stopping, whenever a
school crossing guard is present within any marked crosswalk or within any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection and shall not proceed until the school crossing
guard has taken down his or her handheld stop sign and has exited the traveled
portion of the right-of-way.
2. Any school crossing guard who observes a violation of subsection 1 above,
may prepare a written report on a form provided by the Marion Police Department
indicating that a violation has occurred. The school crossing guard or a school official
may deliver the report not more than seventy-two hours after the violation occurred to
a peace officer of the City of Marion. The report shall state the time and location at
which the violation occurred and shall include the registration plate number and a
description of the vehicle involved in the violation.
3. Not more than seven calendar days after receiving a report of a violation of
subsection 1 above, the peace officer shall initiate an investigation of the reported
violation and contact the owner of the motor vehicle involved in the reported
violation and request that the owner supply information identifying the driver in
accordance with Section 321.484 of the Iowa Code.
A. If from the investigation, the peace officer is able to identify the driver
and has reasonable cause to believe a violation of subsection 1 above, has
occurred, the peace officer shall prepare a uniform traffic citation for the
violation and shall serve it personally or by certified mail to the driver of the
vehicle.
B. If, from the investigation, the peace officer has reasonable cause to
believe that a violation of subsection 1 above occurred, but is unable to
identify the driver, the peace officer shall serve a uniform traffic citation for
the violation to the owner of the motor vehicle. Notwithstanding Section
321.484 of the Iowa Code, in a proceeding where the peace officer who
conducted the investigation was not able to identify the driver of the motor
vehicle, proof that the motor vehicle described in the uniform traffic citation
was used to commit the violation of subsection 1 above, together with proof
that the defendant named in the citation was the owner of the motor vehicle at
the time of the violation occurred, constitutes a permissible inference that the
owner was the driver who committed the violation.
C. For the purpose of this section “owner” has the same meaning as the
same term is defined in Section 321.372A of the Iowa Code. For the purpose
of this section “school crossing guard” means any person hired by or
volunteering for a school district to assist pupils of said school district in
safely crossing any street.
(Ord. 09-01 – Feb. 09 Supp.)
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
66.01 Temporary Embargo 66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.05 Truck Route
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
66.01 TEMPORARY EMBARGO. If the Council declares an embargo when it appears
by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets will
be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified
by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such signs
erected in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472)
66.02 PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT. The Council may, upon
application and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special permit in writing
authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size
or weight or load exceeding the maximum specified by State law or the City over those
streets or bridges named in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for
which the City is responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E.1)
66.03 LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS. When signs are erected giving
notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the
amounts specified on such signs at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets for
which said signs are erected in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code. The
following streets have the weight limits stated below.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 475)
1. (Repealed by Ord. 10-34 – Feb. 11 Supp.)
2. (Repealed by Ord. 10-34 – Feb. 11 Supp.)
66.04 LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES. Where it has been determined that any City
bridge has a capacity less than the maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the
street serving the bridge, the Council may cause to be posed and maintained signs, in
accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code, on said bridge and at suitable distances
ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limit, and no person
shall drive a vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, upon said bridge in excess of such
posted limit. The following bridges have the weight limits stated below:
1. Winslow Road bridge over Indian Creek
A. Type 4: 28-ton gross load
B. Type 5: 40-ton gross load
C. Type 6: 40-ton gross load
(Ord. 17-12 – Aug. 17 Supp.)
66.05 TRUCK ROUTE. When truck routes have been designated in accordance with
Chapter 61, any motor vehicle exceeding established weight limits shall comply with the
following:
1. Use of Established Routes. Every such motor vehicle having no fixed
terminal within the City or making no scheduled or definite stops within the City
for the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over or upon those streets within
the City designated as truck routes and none other.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
2. Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any such motor vehicle, when loaded or empty,
having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite stop within the City for the
purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over or upon the designated routes to
the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or
unload and return, by the most direct route to its point of departure from said
designated route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
3. Employer’s Responsibility. The owner, or any other person, employing or
otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly permit
the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking 67.04 Solicitation Prohibited
67.01 WALKING IN STREET. Pedestrians shall at all times, when walking on or
along a street, walk on the left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02 HITCHHIKING. No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the
purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03 PEDESTRIAN CROSSING. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point
other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
67.04 SOLICITATION PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any person to solicit
money or other things of value or to solicit the sale of goods or services upon the traveled
portion of a public right-of-way or from any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic
on a public street, whether in exchange for cleaning the vehicle’s windows, or for
blocking, occupying or reserving a public parking space, or directing the occupant to a
public parking space, or for charitable purposes; provided, however, that this section shall
not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs or fuel requested by
the operator or passengers of such vehicle. (Ord. 05-17 – Nov. 05
Supp.)
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED. When appropriate signs are in place, as
provided for in Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code, vehicular traffic, other than permitted
cross traffic, shall move only in the direction indicated on such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [4])
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
69.01 Parking Limited or Controlled 69.07 Persons With Disabilities Parking
69.02 Park Adjacent to Curb 69.08 Truck Parking Limited
69.03 Park Adjacent to Curb — One-way Street 69.09 Fire Lanes
69.04 Angle Parking — Manner 69.10 Snow Routes
69.05 Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal 69.11 Snow Route Parking and Winter Storm Emergency Parking Ban
69.06 Parking Prohibited 69.12 Parking on Private Property
69.01 PARKING LIMITED OR CONTROLLED. Parking of vehicles shall be
controlled or limited where so indicated by designated traffic control devices in accordance
with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code. No person shall stop, park or stand a vehicle in
violation of any such posted parking regulations unless in compliance with the directions
of a peace officer.
69.02 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a
roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches
of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle
parking and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB — ONE-WAY STREET. No person shall stand
or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way street other than parallel with the edge
of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand
wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except
as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.04 ANGLE PARKING — MANNER. Upon those streets or portions of streets
which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle
other than at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as
indicated by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle, or the load thereon, when
parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into the roadway more than a
distance of sixteen (16) feet when measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.05 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL. No person shall park a
vehicle upon public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours, unless otherwise limited
under the provisions of Section 69.01 of this chapter, or for any of the following principal
purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
2. Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
3. Advertising. Displaying advertising.
4. Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly
established market place or when so authorized or licensed under the Code of
Ordinances.
69.06 PARKING PROHIBITED. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of
a peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [5])
2. Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
3. Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [1])
4. Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [2])
5. Intersection. Within, or within ten (10) feet of an intersection of any street
or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [3])
6. Fire Hydrant. Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [4])
7. Stop Sign or Signal. Within ten (10) feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [6])
8. Railroad Crossing. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [8])
9. Fire Station. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [9])
10. Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [10])
11. Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [11])
12. Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when
standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when
other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be painted with a
yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358 [13])
13. Theaters, Hotels, and Auditoriums. A space of not to exceed fifty (50) feet
is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theater, auditorium, hotel
having more than twenty-five (25) sleeping rooms, or other buildings where large
assemblages of people are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as
such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on
or discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is
necessary for such purpose.
(Ord. 16-08 – Aug. 16 Supp.)
14. Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand
or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance
to any abutting property. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a
vehicle parked in any alley which is eighteen (18) feet wide or less; provided said
vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
15. Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or private
property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
16. Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line. That area of the public way not covered
by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line, where curb has been
installed. This subsection does not prohibit the parking of vehicles on the parking when
the curb has been cut and the parking paved.
17. In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any part of
the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the markings
designating such space.
(Ord. 02-09 – May 02 Supp.)
18. Municipal Parking Lot. In a municipal parking lot at any place where an
official sign prohibits stopping or standing in the traveled lanes therein.
(Ord. 08-26 – Feb. 09 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])
69.07 PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING. The following regulations shall
apply to the establishment and use of persons with disabilities parking spaces:
1. Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be established
and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa and Iowa
Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish any on-street
persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining Council approval.
2. Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of a
persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code of
Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
A. Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit;
B. Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with disabilities
parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or being
transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa;
C. Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section
321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
3. “Film-It” Program.
A. The Police Department, with guidance from the Handicapped Parking
Review Committee, is authorized and directed to establish a program
whereby volunteers are utilized to survey streets and parking lots in the City
for the purpose of photographing motor vehicles parked in violation of this
section.
B. This program shall include but not be limited to: (i) the issuance of
identification cards to such volunteers with names and pictures affixed
thereto to be used in the event that identification from any such volunteer is
required; (ii) schedules to allow for the placement of volunteers in various
areas of the City on different days on a rotating basis so as not to leave areas
unpatrolled or duplicated; and (iii) a system of providing violator information
to the Police Department which will then issue parking citations based upon
such information.
C. The Police Department, with guidance from the Handicapped Parking
Review Committee, shall promulgate and issue such rules and regulations as
shall be deemed necessary to implement the provisions of this program.
D. The provisions of this section shall be in addition to all other
enforcement provisions of this Code.
4. Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a
wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
A. A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must
comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A (1) of the Code of Iowa
when utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
B. A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone which is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A (1) of the Code of
Iowa.
(Ord. 00-29 – Aug. 00 Supp.)
69.08 TRUCK PARKING LIMITED. No person shall park a motor home, motor
truck, trailer, semi-trailer, truck tractor, boat or boat trailer or other motor vehicle with
trailer attached in violation of the following regulations. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to pickup, light delivery or panel delivery trucks.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Business District. Excepting only when such vehicles are actually engaged
in the delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo, no person shall park or leave
unattended such vehicle on any streets within the business district. When actually
receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo such vehicle shall be stopped or parked
in a manner which will not interfere with other traffic.
2. Livestock. No such vehicle containing livestock, carcasses of dead animals
or parts or products of dead animals shall be parked on any street, alley or highway
for a period of time of more than thirty (30) minutes.
3. No person shall park any motor home, motor truck, trailer, semi-trailer, truck
tractor, boat or boat trailer or other motor vehicle with trailer attached which exceeds
72 inches in width and/or 18 feet in length on any street or alley between sunrise
and sunset for a longer period than 60 minutes, or between sunset and sunrise for a
longer period than 30 minutes, except for loading or unloading purposes, or while
in the actual process of being loaded or unloaded or making necessary minor repairs.
Persons demonstrating a special need for a longer period of parking for a limited
time may request a temporary waiver of this section from the Chief of Police or his
designee.
(Ord. 08-22 – Nov. 08 Supp.)
69.09 FIRE LANES. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a fire lane as
provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236)
1. Fire Lanes Established. The Fire Chief may designate fire lanes on any
private road or driveway where deemed necessary to assure access to property or
premises by authorized emergency vehicles.
2. Signs and Markings. Wherever a fire lane has been designated, the Fire Chief
shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be placed identifying such fire lanes
and the parking prohibition established by this section.
3. Exception. The provisions of this section do not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles.
69.10 SNOW ROUTES. The Council may, by resolution, designate certain streets in
the City as snow routes. When conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a
designated snow route during a declared snow route parking emergency, it is unlawful for
the driver, owner, or lessee of a vehicle to park the vehicle upon a designated snow route
or otherwise impede or block traffic. When conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic
surface of any street during a declared winter storm emergency, it is unlawful for the driver,
owner, or lessee of a vehicle to park the vehicle upon any street not exempted from this
section or otherwise impede or block traffic.
(Ord. 08-21 – Nov. 08 Supp.)
69.11 SNOW ROUTE PARKING AND WINTER STORM EMERGENCY
PARKING BAN.
1. Snow Route Parking Emergency.
A. When predictions or occurrences of freezing rain, icing conditions, or
snow indicate the need, the City Manager or designee, shall proclaim a snow
route parking emergency is in effect, and the news media shall be contacted
to publicize the proclamation and the parking rules under the emergency.
The Snow Route Emergency shall remain in effect until winter maintenance
operations have ceased or when normal pavement conditions have been
restored.
(Ord. 11-24 – Nov. 11 Supp.)
B. No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any
designated snow route, City-owned off-street parking area or any other street
designated by emergency “no parking” signs during any snow route
emergency parking ban proclaimed by the City Manager unless or until the
snow has been removed or plowed from the street or parking area. A snow
route emergency parking ban shall begin at the time stated in the snow
emergency announcement and shall continue until announcement of its
termination.
C. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply within the area bounded by
Sixth Avenue on the south, Ninth Street on the west, Eighth Avenue on the
north and Thirteenth Street on the east except during the hours from 10:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m. unless otherwise designated by emergency “no parking”
signs.
2. Winter Storm Emergency.
A. When predictions or occurrences of 4 inches of snow indicate the
need, the City Manager or designee, shall proclaim a winter storm emergency
and shall inform the news media to publicize the proclamation and the
parking rules under the emergency.
(Ord. 11-24 – Nov. 11 Supp.)
B. No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any
City street during any winter storm emergency parking ban proclaimed by
the City Manager unless or until the snow has been removed or plowed from
the street or parking area. A winter storm emergency parking ban shall begin
at the time stated in the winter storm emergency announcement and shall
continue until announcement of its termination.
C. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to vehicles that have an
approved winter storm emergency parking sticker affixed thereto. The
Director of the Public Works Department may issue winter storm emergency
parking stickers in situations where he finds that alternative parking is not
reasonably available.
(Ord. 08-21 – Nov. 08 Supp.)
69.12 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY. No person shall park a vehicle on
privately owned property or an area adjacent thereto developed as an off-street parking
facility, without the consent of the owner, lessee, or person in charge of the privately owned
property or facility. Upon complaint of the owner, lessee or person in charge of such
property or facility, a violation of this section shall place the vehicle in the status of an
illegally parked vehicle. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee or person in
charge of the privately owned property or facility to post signs giving reasonable notice of
the prohibited parking by stating No Parking --- Private Lot --- Violators Will Be Towed at
the Owner’s Expense. Before towing any such vehicle, the owner, lessee, or person in
charge of the property or facility shall agree in writing to release and hold harmless the
City, its agents, officers and employees against any and all damages or claims for damages
arising out of the towing of the vehicle.
(Ord. 05-09 – Nov. 05 Supp.)
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
70.01 Arrest or Citation 70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations 70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
70.01 ARREST OR CITATION. Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to
believe that a person has violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
1. Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person
before a local magistrate, or
2. Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a
combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner of
Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-approved
computer device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6, 321.485)
70.02 SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS. For violations of the Traffic Code which are
designated by Section 805.8 of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled
fine for each of those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6, 805.8)
70.03 PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE. Admitted violations of parking
restrictions imposed by this Code of Ordinances may be charged upon a simple notice of a
fine in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) for all violations except as otherwise provided
herein. If such fine is not paid within thirty (30) days, it shall be increased to fifteen dollars
($15.00). For violations of the following parking restrictions the simple notice of a fine shall
be:
1. Blocking a public or private driveway - $15.00;
2. Parked over 48 continuous hours - $20.00;
3. Snow route parking - $25.00;
4. Parking during a declared winter storm emergency - $25.00
5. Improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit or improper use of a
persons with disabilities parking space - $200.00
(Ord. 13-21 – Nov. 13 Supp.)
Failure to pay the simple notice of a fine shall be grounds for the filing of a complaint in
District Court. (Ord. 08-21 – Nov. 08 Supp.)
70.04 PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED. When a vehicle is
parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and the driver is not present, the
notice of fine or citation as herein provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a
conspicuous place.
70.05 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING. In any
proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie presumption that the
registered owner was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where,
and for the time during which, such violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that:
1. Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information was
parked in violation of the Traffic Code, and
2. Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
70.06 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES. A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove,
or cause to be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or
highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
1. Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by
reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide
for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
2. Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so
illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
3. Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on
parking during snow removal operations.
4. Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a
continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. A diligent effort shall
first be made to locate the owner. If the owner is found the owner shall be given
an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
5. Interferes With Use of Property. When a vehicle is parked upon any
publicly owned property in a manner that interferes with the normal or customary
use of the public property.
6. Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver of
any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
75.01 Purpose 75.04 Places of Operation
75.02 Definitions 75.05 Negligence
75.03 General Regulations 75.06 Accident Reports
75.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized flotation-tire vehicle
with not less than three (3) low pressure tires, but not more than six (6) low
pressure tires, that is limited in engine displacement to less than one thousand
(1000) cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to less than one thousand (1000)
pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and
handlebars for steering control. Two-wheeled, off-road motorcycles and off-road
utility vehicles, both as defined in Section 321I.1 of the Code of Iowa, shall also
be considered all-terrain vehicles.
(Ord. 07-30 – Feb. 08 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1[1])
2. “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle weighing less than one thousand
(1,000) pounds which uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread, or
any combination of runners, skis or tread, and is designed for travel on snow or
ice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1 [18])
75.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS. No person shall operate an ATV or snowmobile
within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of the Code of Iowa or
rules established by the Natural Resource Commission of the Department of Natural
Resources governing their registration, numbering, equipment and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G)
75.04 PLACES OF OPERATION. The operators of ATV’s and snow-mobiles shall
comply with the following restrictions as to where ATV’s and snowmobiles may be
operated within the City:
1. Streets. ATV’s and snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets which
have not been plowed during the snow season and on such other streets as may be
designated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
2. Exceptions. ATV’s and snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited
streets only under the following circumstances:
A. Emergencies. ATV’s and snowmobiles may be operated on any
street in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations
where snow upon the roadway renders travel by conventional motor
vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
B. Direct Crossing. ATV’s and snowmobiles may make a direct
crossing of a prohibited street provided:
(1) The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety
degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
(2) The ATV or snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before
crossing the street;
(3) The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic
which constitutes an immediate hazard; and
(4) In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
3. Railroad Right-of-way. ATV’s and snowmobiles shall not be operated on
an operating railroad right-of-way. An ATV or snowmobile may be driven
directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and
notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved
portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[8])
4. Trails. ATV’s shall not be operated on snowmobile trails and snowmobiles
shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails except where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f and g])
5. Parks and Other City Land. ATV’s and snowmobiles shall not be operated
in any park, playground or upon any other City-owned property without the
express permission of the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City
land without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.
6. Sidewalk or Parking. ATV’s and snowmobiles shall not be operated upon
the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and
the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for
purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is
authorized by this chapter.
75.05 NEGLIGENCE. The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile shall be
liable for any injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or
snowmobile.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18)
75.06 ACCIDENT REPORTS. Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an
accident resulting in injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to two
hundred dollars ($200.00) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator
shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident report within
forty-eight (48) hours, in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10)
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
76.01 Scope of Regulations 76.09 Riding on Sidewalks
76.02 Traffic Code Applies 76.10 Towing
76.03 Double Riding Restricted 76.11 Improper Riding
76.04 Two Abreast Limit 76.12 Parking
76.05 Bicycle Paths 76.13 Equipment Requirements
76.06 Speed 76.14 Special Penalty
76.07 Emerging from Alley or Driveway 76.15 Exemptions
76.08 Carrying Articles
76.01 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS. These regulations shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.02 TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by the traffic code of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as
to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Whenever such person
dismounts from a bicycle the person shall be subject to all regulations applicable to
pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.03 DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED. A person propelling a bicycle shall not
ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be
used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234 [3 and 4])
76.04 TWO ABREAST LIMIT. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not
ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles. All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right
and shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.05 BICYCLE PATHS. Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided
adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.06 SPEED. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.07 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY. The operator of a bicycle
emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians
approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.08 CARRYING ARTICLES. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon
the handle bars.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.09 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS. The following shall apply to riding bicycles on
sidewalks:
1. Business District. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within
the Business District, as defined in Section 60.02(1) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
2. Other Locations. When signs are erected on any sidewalk or roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person shall disobey
the signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
3. Yield Right-of-way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give
audible signal before overtaking and passing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.10 TOWING. It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow
any other vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is manufactured for such
use.
76.11 IMPROPER RIDING. No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless
manner such as zigzagging, stunting, speeding or otherwise so as to disregard the safety
of the operator or others.
76.12 PARKING. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against
a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian
traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.13 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS. Every person riding a bicycle shall be
responsible for providing and using equipment as provided herein:
1. Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped
with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at
least three hundred (300) feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a
red light visible from a distance of three hundred (300) feet to the rear except that
a red reflector on the rear, of a type which shall be visible from all distances from
fifty (50) feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear
light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
2. Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will
enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
76.14 SPECIAL PENALTY. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may,
in lieu of the scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for violations of
the Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by the City for not
less than five (5) days for the first offense, ten (10) days for a second offense and thirty
(30) days for a third offense.
76.15 EXEMPTIONS. The provisions of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to
bicycles do not apply to the operation of any bicycle by an officer of the Marion Police
Department while on duty.
CHAPTER 77
BICYCLE LICENSING
77.01 License Required 77.06 Transfer of Ownership
77.02 License Fee; Validity 77.07 Lost or Damaged Sticker
77.03 Inspection of Bicycles 77.08 Impoundment of Unlicensed Bicycles
77.04 Issuance of License 77.09 Requirements Imposed on Rental Agencies
77.05 Attachment of License Tag
77.01 LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on any public
area, path, right-of-way, street or sidewalk within the City unless such bicycle has been
licensed and a license tag is attached thereto as provided in this chapter.
77.02 LICENSE FEE; VALIDITY. The fee for a bicycle license is one dollar ($1.00)
and the license shall be valid for the duration of the existence of the bicycle.
77.03 INSPECTION OF BICYCLES. The Police Chief shall inspect all bicycles
except that owners of new bicycles purchased within ninety (90) days of license
applications may apply for a license without an inspection upon providing proof of
purchase from a dealer or sales receipt. All other bicycles shall be inspected. License
applications shall be refused if it is determined that the bicycle is in unsafe mechanical
condition. Bicycles that are subject to inspection shall be inspected for the following:
A. Loose handlebars;
B. Defective hand grips;
C. Loose seat;
D. Wheel loose at the hub;
E. Defective or improperly adjusted spokes;
F. Warped rim that rubs against fork;
G. Worn or shaky steering post;
H. Worn-out pedal treads;
I. Defective pedals;
J. Drive chain that is too loose or too tight;
K. Defective coaster brakes and/or hand brakes;
L. Defective chain guard (if present);
M. Defective fenders (if present);
N. Any other items which the inspector deems necessary.
77.04 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
1. The Police Chief, upon receiving proper application therefor, is authorized
to issue a bicycle license. which shall be effective immediately.
2. The Police Chief shall not issue a license for any bicycle when the Police
Chief knows or has reasonable ground to believe that the applicant is not the
owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle.
3. The Police Chief shall keep a record of the number of each license, the date
issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued, the number on the
frame of the bicycle for which issued, and a record of all bicycle license fees
collected.
77.05 ATTACHMENT OF LICENSE TAG. The Police Chief, upon issuing a
bicycle license, shall also issue a license tag bearing the license number assigned to the
bicycle and the name of the City. The Police Chief shall direct that such license be firmly
attached to the frame of the bicycle for which issued. No person shall remove a license
tag from a bicycle during the period for which issued.
77.06 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. Upon transfer of ownership of a bicycle, the
license sticker shall remain on the bicycle. The new owner shall be required to report the
transfer to the Police Department. The transfer shall indicate the new owner’s name,
address, and date of sale and shall contain the signature of the buyer.
77.07 LOST OR DAMAGED STICKER. If any license sticker is damaged to the
extent that the number is unidentifiable or is missing from a bicycle, it may be reissued
for the cost of $1.00 after inspection.
77.08 IMPOUNDMENT OF UNLICENSED BICYCLES. Bicycles which bear no
City of Marion license, but whose owner resides within the City, parked or left standing
in public places, may be impounded until such time as the owner purchases a license.
77.09 REQUIREMENTS IMPOSED ON RENTAL AGENCIES. A rental agency
shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is licensed and a license tag
is attached thereto as provided in this chapter.




CHAPTER 81
RAILROAD REGULATIONS
(Repealed by Ord. 07-09 – Aug. 07 Supp.)
CHAPTER 82
SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS
82.01 Scheduled Violations 82.03 Scheduled Fines
82.02 Scheduled Violations Listed
82.01 SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS. Violations of the Code of Ordinances specified
in Section 82.02 are scheduled violations subject to the scheduled fines set forth in Section
82.03. The description of offenses used in Section 82.02 are for convenience only and
shall not be construed to define any offense or to include or exclude any offense other than
those specifically or excluded by reference to the Code of Ordinances.
82.02 SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS LISTED. Violations of the following sections of
the Code of Ordinances are scheduled violations:
1. 41.09 - Bow Hunting
2. 41.13 - Fireworks
3. 45.02 - Consumption of Alcohol in Public
4. 47.03 – Park Rules
5. 53.02 – Noise Limits
6. 53.02 (4) – Loud Car Stereo
7. 69.08 – Truck Parking Regulations
8. 115.08 – Cemetery/Curfew
9. 122.02 – Peddlers
10. 62.15 – Engine Braking
(Ord. 07-26 – Nov. 07 Supp.)
11. 105.07 – Littering
(Ord. 11-05 – May 11 Supp.)
12. 82.02 – Smoking and the use of Tobacco, Nicotine, or Vaporizers in a park.
(Ord. 15-02 – May 15 Supp.)
82.03 SCHEDULED FINES. In the case of scheduled violations, the defendant, before
the time specified in the citation and complaint for appearance before the court, may sign
the admission of violation on the citation and complaint and deliver or mail a copy of the
citation and complaint, together with fifty dollars ($50.00), the minimum fine for the
violations listed in Section 82.02, plus court costs and surcharges, if any, to the scheduled
violations office in the county. The admission constitutes a conviction.
(Ch. 82 - Ord. 06-02 – May 06 Supp.)


CHAPTER 91
ILLICIT DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM
91.01 Purpose 91.06 Suspension of Access to the City’s Storm Sewer System
91.02 Illicit Discharges Prohibited 91.07 Watercourse Protection
91.03 Illicit Connections Prohibited 91.08 Enforcement
91.04 Industrial Discharges 91.09 Appeal
91.05 Illicit Discharge Detection and Reporting; Cost Recovery
91.01 PURPOSE.
1. The U.S. EPA’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(“NPDES”) permit program (program) administered by the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources (“IDNR”) requires that cities meeting certain demographic and
environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES permit for the
discharge of storm water from a Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)
(MS4 Permit). The City of Marion, Iowa, is subject to the program and is required
to obtain, and has obtained, an MS4 Permit; the City’s MS4 Permit is on file at the
office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection during regular office
hours.
2. As a condition of the City’s MS4 Permit, the City is obliged to adopt and
enforce an Illicit Discharge To Storm Sewer System Ordinance.
3. No state or federal funds have been made available to assist the City in
administering and enforcing the program. Accordingly, the City shall fund its
operations under this chapter entirely by charges imposed on the owners of
properties which are made subject to the program by virtue of state and federal
law, and/or other sources of funding established by a separate ordinance.
4. Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings specified in the
program.
91.02 ILLICIT DISCHARGES PROHIBITED.
1. For purposes of this chapter, a “responsible party” is one or more persons
that control or are in possession of or own property. Responsible parties shall be
jointly and severally responsible for compliance with this chapter and jointly and
severally liable for any illicit discharge from the property controlled, possessed or
owned. For purposes of this chapter, “property” includes, but is not limited to,
real estate, fixtures, facilities and premises of any kind located upon, under or
above the real estate.
2. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to relieve a responsible party
subject to an IDNR-issued industrial discharge permit or any other federal, state or
City permit, statute, ordinance or rule from any obligation imposed by such
permit, statute, ordinance or rule if any such obligation is greater than any
obligation imposed by this chapter.
3. Any discharge into the City’s storm sewer system prohibited by the City’s
MS4 Permit, the terms of which are hereby incorporated by reference, shall be
deemed an illicit discharge in violation of this chapter. The term “illicit
discharge” is defined in EPA’s Phase II storm water regulations as “any discharge
to a municipal separate storm sewer that is not composed entirely of storm water,
except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit and discharges resulting from
fire-fighting activities”.
4. Sediment pollution originating from excessive erosion rates on a
construction site not otherwise subject to the City’s Construction Site Erosion and
Sediment Control (COSESCO) ordinance or sediment pollution entering a
municipal storm sewer that causes a water quality violation as determined by the
DNR shall be deemed an illicit discharge in violation of this chapter.
91.03 ILLICIT CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
1. For purposes of this chapter, an “illicit connection” to the City’s storm
sewer system is any physical connection or other topographical or other condition,
natural or artificial, which is not specifically authorized by ordinance or written
rule of the City, which causes or facilitates, directly or indirectly, an illicit
discharge.
2. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illicit
connection shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
3. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law
or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
91.04 INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES.
1. Any responsible party subject to an industrial NPDES discharge permit
issued by the IDNR shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
2. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable
to the enforcement officer, prior to discharges to the storm sewer system,
authorized by said permit.
91.05 ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND REPORTING; COST
RECOVERY.
1. All detection activities permitted under this chapter shall be conducted by
the City Engineer, hereinbefore and after referred to as the “enforcement officer.”
2. The City shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect consequences to
persons or property of an illicit discharge, or circumstances which may cause an
illicit discharge, undetected by the City.
3. Every responsible party has an absolute duty to monitor conditions on
property owned or controlled by them, to prevent all illicit discharges, and to
report to the enforcement officer illicit discharges which the responsible party
knows or should have known to have occurred. Failure to comply with any
provision of this chapter is a violation of this chapter.
A. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any
responsible party has information of any known or suspected illicit
discharge, the responsible party shall immediately take all necessary steps
to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such discharge at the
responsible party’s sole cost.
B. If the illicit discharge consists of hazardous materials, the
responsible party shall also immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
C. If the illicit discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
D. A report of an illicit discharge shall be made in person or by phone,
facsimile, or email to the enforcement officer immediately but no later than
the end of the first business day after the day of discovery of the illicit
discharge; notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed or emailed to the enforcement officer within
twenty-four hours of the personal or phone notice.
4. Any person or entity shall also report to the City any illicit discharge or
circumstances which such person or entity reasonably believes pose a risk of an
illicit discharge.
5. Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous subsections, or otherwise
coming into possession of information indicating an actual or imminent illicit
discharge, the enforcement officer shall conduct an inspection of the site as soon
as reasonably possible and thereafter shall provide to the responsible party, and
any third party reporter, a written report of the conditions which may cause or
which have already caused an illicit discharge. The responsible party shall
immediately commence corrective action or remediation and shall complete such
corrective action or remediation within twenty-one (21) days after discovery. If it
is not possible to eliminate an illicit discharge within 21 days after discovery, the
responsible party shall submit to the City the reasons why the discharge cannot be
eliminated within 21 days of discovery and a plan which contains a timeline of
activities which will result in the elimination of the discharge. This statement and
plan shall be submitted within 21 days of discovery of the illicit discharge. If the
City and DNR do not approve the plan, the responsible party will then be required
to eliminate the discharge no later than a date specified by the City and DNR.
6. The enforcement officer shall be permitted to enter and inspect property
subject to regulation under this section as often as is necessary to determine
compliance with this section. If a responsible party has security measures that
require identification and clearance before entry to its property or premises, the
responsible party shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access by the
enforcement officer. By way of specification but not limitation:
A. A responsible party shall allow the enforcement officer ready access
to all parts of the property for purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records related to a suspected, actual, or
imminent illicit discharge, and for the performance of any additional duties
as defined by state and federal law.
B. The enforcement officer shall have the right to set up on any
property such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the enforcement
officer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling related to a suspected, actual
or imminent illicit discharge.
C. The enforcement officer shall have the right to require any
responsible party at responsible party’s sole expense to install monitoring
equipment and deliver monitoring data or reports to the enforcement officer
as the enforcement officer directs. The sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the responsible party at responsible party’s sole expense. All
devices shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
property to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
responsible party at the written or oral order of the enforcement officer and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the responsible party.
E. An unreasonable delay in allowing the enforcement officer access to
a property is a violation of this chapter.
F. If the enforcement officer has been refused access to any part of the
property from which an illicit connection and/or illicit discharge to a
municipal storm sewer is occurring, suspected or imminent, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause or believes that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample, as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program, designed to verify compliance with this
chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the enforcement officer
may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
7. If it is determined that an illicit discharge is imminent or has occurred, the
actual administrative costs incurred by the City in the enforcement of this chapter
shall be recovered from the responsible party. The enforcement officer shall
submit an invoice to the responsible party reflecting the actual costs, wages, and
expenses incurred by the City for the enforcement activities undertaken. Failure to
pay charges invoiced under this chapter within thirty days of billing shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
91.06 SUSPENSION OF ACCESS TO THE CITY’S STORM SEWER SYSTEM.
1. Emergency Suspension. The enforcement officer may, without prior
notice, suspend storm sewer system access to a property when such emergency
suspension is necessary to stop an ongoing or imminent illicit discharge. If the
responsible party fails to immediately comply with an emergency suspension
order, the enforcement officer shall take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize the illicit discharge. All costs of such action shall be
recovered from the responsible party for the property identified as the source of
the illicit discharge.
2. Non-Emergency Suspension. If the enforcement officer detects or is
informed of circumstances which could cause an illicit discharge but such illicit
discharge is not ongoing or imminent, and if the suspension of storm sewer system
access would reasonably be expected to prevent or reduce the potential illicit
discharge, the enforcement officer shall notify the responsible party of the
proposed suspension of storm sewer system access and the time and date of such
suspension. Notice to one responsible party for the property shall be sufficient
notice to all. Remediation of the circumstances shall avoid a violation of this
chapter provided that no illicit discharge occurs. In the alternative, the responsible
party may request a meeting with the enforcement officer for the purpose of
presenting information which the responsible party believes will show that
remediation is unnecessary, and if the enforcement officer finds such information
is satisfactory the enforcement officer may rescind or modify the notice of
suspension. If the enforcement officer finds such information unsatisfactory the
enforcement officer shall issue a final written order of suspension including the
date and time of suspension and such order may be appealed as provided
hereinafter. Any physical action to reinstate storm sewer system access to
property subject to such order, prior to obtaining a court order of relief, shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter. An order of suspension shall not preclude
charging the responsible party with a municipal infraction as provided hereinafter
or taking any other enforcement action permitted by statute or ordinance.
91.07 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION. Every person owning property through
which a watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of
the watercourse within the property below the elevation of the 100 year flood free of
trash, debris, grass clippings or other organic wastes and other obstacles that would
pollute, contaminate, or significantly alter the quality of water flowing through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned
structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a
hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
91.08 ENFORCEMENT.
1. Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil action
including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement action,
administrative or judicial, the City shall be entitled to recover its attorneys’ fees
and costs from a person who is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to
have violated this chapter.
2. Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced as a
municipal infraction pursuant to the City’s municipal infraction chapter.
3. Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by the
enforcement officer upon the advice and consent of the City Attorney.
91.09 APPEAL.
1. Administrative decisions by City staff and enforcement actions of the
enforcement officer may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council pursuant
to the following rules:
A. The appeal must be filed in writing with the City Clerk within five
business days of the decision or enforcement action.
B. The written appeal shall specify in detail the action appealed from,
the errors allegedly made by the enforcement officer giving rise to the
appeal, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the applicant
intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all
witnesses the applicant intends to call, copies of all documents the applicant
intends to introduce at the hearing, and the relief requested.
C. The enforcement officer shall specify in writing the reasons for the
enforcement action, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the
enforcement officer intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names
and addresses of all witnesses the enforcement officer intends to call, and
copies of all documents the enforcement officer intends to introduce at the
hearing.
D. The City Clerk shall notify the applicant and the enforcement officer
by ordinary mail, and shall give public notice in accordance with Chapter
21, Iowa Code, of the date, time and place for the regular or special meeting
of the City Council at which the hearing on the appeal shall occur. The
hearing shall be scheduled for a date not less than four nor more than
twenty days after the filing of the appeal. The rules of evidence and
procedure, and the standard of proof to be applied, shall be the same as
provided by Chapter 17A, Code of Iowa. The applicant may be represented
by counsel at the applicant’s expense. The enforcement officer may be
represented by the City Attorney or by an attorney designated by the City
Council at City expense.
2. The decision of the City Council shall be rendered in writing and may be
appealed to the Iowa District Court.
(Ch. 91 - Ord. 05-27 – Nov. 05 Supp.)
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
95.01 Purpose 95.05 Service Outside the City
95.02 Definitions 95.06 Right of Entry
95.03 Prohibited Acts 95.07 Use of Easements
95.04 Sewer Connection Required 95.08 Special Penalties
95.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining
to Sanitary Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and
disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public health, safety
and welfare.
95.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically
indicates otherwise, the following terms are defined:
1. “Articles of Agreement” means an agreement dated May 23, 1979, between
the City of Marion and the City of Cedar Rapids, Iowa, to provide upgraded water
pollution control facilities in the region.
2. “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees C., expressed in
milligrams per liter or parts per million.
3. “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building
wall.
4. “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the building
wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment portion of an
on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the drainage of one
building site.
5. “City Engineer” means the City Engineer of the City of Marion or any
authorized deputy agent or representative.
6. “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and
sewage.
7. “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged into the
public sewer system.
8. “Director” means the Director of the Sewage Treatment Facility.
9. “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and
sale of produce.
10. “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
11. “Manhole” means a structure that is suitably built to permit access from the
surface for inspection control and maintenance of a sewer.
12. “Milligrams per liter” means a unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 g. of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water.
13. “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or groundwater.
14. “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment
and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment, and
disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other facilities serving
the equivalent of fifteen persons (1500 gpd) or less.
15. “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution.
16. “Pretreatment” means any treatment of wastewater or sewage before
introduction into a public sewer.
17. “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
18. “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and
industrial waste.
19. “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
20. “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
21. “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.
22. “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
23. “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
24. “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees levied
against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of said
customers by said sewer system.
25. “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour
concentration that flows during normal operation.
26. “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.
27. “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
28. “TKN (Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen” means the concentration of ammonia and
organic nitrogen expressed in milligrams per liter.
29. “Unpolluted water” means water of quality equal or better than the
applicable standards in effect under the State or Federal Act or water that would
not cause violation of receiving water quality standards under the applicable act
and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater
treatment facilities provided.
30. “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
95.03 PROHIBITED ACTS. No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
1. Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
2. Surface Run-off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump,
exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
3. Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by
authority of the Public Services Department.
4. Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public
or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
5. Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except as
provided in these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
6. Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in
any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance
with subsequent provisions of these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
7. Combined Sewers. The construction of and use of combined sewers are
prohibited.
95.04 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED. The owners of any houses, buildings,
or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes,
situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is
now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary, are hereby required to
install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a building sewer
connecting such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, and to maintain the same
all in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to
be completed within ninety (90) days after date of official notice from the City to do so
provided that said public sewer is located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the
property line of such owner and is of such design as to receive and convey by gravity such
sewage as may be conveyed to it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of
official notice to connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [3f])
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
95.05 SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY. The owners of property outside the
corporate limits of the City so situated that it may be served by the City sewer system
may apply to the Council for permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms
and conditions stipulated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
95.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the
provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters. The representatives shall have no authority
to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic,
paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source
of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
95.07 USE OF EASEMENTS. The duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties
through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of
any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
95.08 SPECIAL PENALTIES. The following special penalty provisions shall apply
to violations of these Sanitary Sewer chapters:
1. Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of
these chapters except subsections 1, 3 and 4 of Section 95.03, shall be served by
the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
2. Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation of
this Code of Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
3. Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these
chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
96.01 Permit 96.07 Inspection Required
96.02 Permit Fee 96.08 Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.03 Connection Charge 96.09 Abatement of Violations
96.04 Pipe Layer or Plumber Required 96.10 Public Sewer Extensions
96.05 Connection Requirements 96.11 Mobile Home Park Sewer Extensions
96.06 Sewer Tap
96.01 PERMIT. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the City. The application for the permit shall set forth the
location and description of the property to be connected with the sewer system and the
purpose for which the sewer is to be used, and shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent. The permit shall require the
owner to complete construction and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer
within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit, except that when a property owner
makes sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond the owner’s control or peculiar
hardship, such time period is inequitable or unfair, an extension of time within which to
comply with the provisions herein may be granted. Any sewer connection permit may be
revoked at any time for a violation of these chapters.
96.02 PERMIT FEE. The person who makes the application shall pay a nonrefundable
fee therefor. The fee for said inspection shall be established by Council resolution to reflect
the current costs of issuing the permit and supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work
for both new and replacement lines. Whenever a person performs any work without a
permit and thereafter makes application for a permit, the permit fee shall be increased by
$25.00.
(Ord. 08-14 – Aug. 08 Supp.)
96.03 CONNECTION CHARGE. If the property described in the permit application
has not been previously assessed for the cost of construction of the sewer to which
connection is made, a connection charge may be collected before the permit is issued. The
connection charge shall be as determined by the City Engineer, taking into consideration
the cost of the sewer line providing service, the benefits to the user and any special
circumstances existing which reasonably affect the determination of an equitable charge to
the user.
96.04 PIPE LAYER OR PLUMBER REQUIRED. All installations of building
sewers and connection to the public sewer shall be made by a plumber or pipe layer licensed
by the Metro Area Board.
96.05 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS. The installation of the building sewer and
its connection to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Marion
Plumbing Code, the laws of the State and other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
96.06 SEWER TAP. Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at the “Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly
located “Y” branch is available, a “Y” saddle shall be installed at the location specified by
the City Engineer. The public sewer shall be tapped with a tapping machine and a saddle
appropriate to the type of public sewer shall be glued and attached with stainless steel
clamps to the sewer. At no time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a
manhole unless special written permission is received from the City Engineer and in
accordance with the City Engineer’s direction if such connection is approved.
96.07 INSPECTION REQUIRED. No building sewer shall be covered, concealed or
put into use until it has been tested, inspected and accepted as prescribed in the Uniform
Plumbing Code.
96.08 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY. All costs and expenses incident
to the installation, connection and maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
96.09 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS. Building sewers, whether located upon the
private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which are constructed or
maintained in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter shall be deemed a
nuisance and the same shall be abated by the City in the manner provided for the abatement
of nuisances.
96.10 PUBLIC SEWER EXTENSIONS. The construction of sewers which are to be
connected to and become a part of the public sewer system shall be done in conformity
with the current SUDAS for sewer construction on file in the office of the City Engineer.
Plans and the appropriate State Department of Natural Resources schedules shall be
submitted to and approved by the City Engineer and the Council prior to commencement
of work. The City Engineer will then issue a "Construction Permit". For all other user types
a "Construction Permit" must be obtained from the Iowa Department of Natural Resources
and as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
1. The construction of sewer extensions shall be conducted in the presence of the City
Engineer. The fee for said inspection shall be established by Council resolution to reflect
the current costs of inspection. Public construction projects of the City shall be exempt
from the inspection charge.
2. The Council must by resolution accept a constructed extension before sewage may
be discharged into the existing sewage system. The sanitary sewer extension will not be
accepted by the Council unless the City has already by previous resolution accepted the
dedication or conveyance of a public right-of-way or easement upon which the sewer
extension is located and also unless the City Engineer has caused the following tests to be
conducted:
A. Soils tests to prove the backfill of the sewer trenches beneath the public right-ofway
is at least 90% as dense as those obtained by subjecting the adjacent undisturbed earth
to a Modified Proctor Density Test (A. A. S. H. 0. Test T-180).
B. Pressure tests to prove that infiltrations will not exceed 200 gallons per day per mile
of pipe times its internal diameter in inches.
C. Internal inspection to determine that the sewer is structurally sound, clean, and free
of any obstructions to sewage flow or future maintenance.
D. Grade Light Tests of sufficient accuracy to prove that the sewer alignment and
gradients deviate no more than one inch from the reference points furnished by the
Engineer and are in accordance with the approved plans.
3. Failure of any of these tests shall cause the acceptance to be withheld until
the owner has corrected the fault, as proved by subsequent testing, at the owner’s
expense.
4. Acceptance by the Council will be by resolution after the above is completed
and a two year maintenance bond or other security satisfactory to the City is placed
on file.
(Ord. 02-10 – Aug. 02 Supp.)
96.11 MOBILE HOME PARK SEWER EXTENSIONS.
1. Prior to construction a plan of improvement must be prepared by a registered Civil
Engineer and submitted for review and approval by the City Engineer. The design of the
system shall be in accordance with the requirements of the latest edition of the SUDAS as
approved by the City Council and in accordance with the requirements of the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources. IDNR sanitary sewer permit forms must be submitted
with the plan of improvements.
2. A notice approving the plan of improvements along with two (2) stamped copies of
the same will be supplied to the owner authorizing construction. All construction must be
done in accordance with the approved plans. and the latest edition of SUDAS as approved
by the City CounciL No changes to the plans may be made in the field without written
authorization of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
3. Upon completion of the installation, all testing as required by the specifications must
be conducted on the lines. A copy of all testing results shall be certified by a registered
Civil Engineer and submitted to the City Engineer for review. Any line segments failing
the testing requirements shall be repaired and/or corrected and re-tested. The costs
associated with this testing will be the responsibility of the owner/developer.
4. The Engineering Department will oversee the testing of lines. The owner/developer
will be charged fifty cents per lineal foot for the cost of conducting the inspections,
including personnel, equipment, and mileage.
5. A letter certified by a registered Civil Engineer shall be submitted stating that
materials used on the project and the installation methods were all substantially in
accordance with the plans and specifications. If field changes were made to the plans, an
as-built drawing shall be submitted.
6. Upon proof of successful testing of the installation, the City Engineer will allow the
discharge of sewage into the system at the time of acceptance of the sewer. No sewage
may be discharged into an installation until said notice has been issued. The notice may
be granted on a segment by segment basis at the discretion of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 02-21 – Aug. 02 Supp.)
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
97.01 Storm Water 97.03 Restricted Discharges
97.02 Prohibited Discharges 97.04 Restricted Discharges – Powers
97.01 STORM WATER. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary
sewer. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the City
Engineer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on
approval of the City Engineer, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
97.02 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel
oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2. Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
3. Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of
such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited
to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or
ground by garbage grinders.
97.03 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes without a
treatment agreement permit issued in accordance with the Articles of Agreement.
1. High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
one hundred twenty (120) degrees F (48 degrees C).
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
2. Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) milligrams per liter.
3. Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one
hundred fifty (150) degrees F (0 and 65 degrees C).
4. Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to such
a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (½) inch in any
dimension.
5. Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
6. Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes
exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established for such materials.
7. Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or
odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established to meet the requirements of State, Federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
8. Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable
State or Federal regulations.
9. Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
10. Unusual Wastes. Materials which exert or cause:
A. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
B. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
C. Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
D. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
11. Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for
their maintenance and repair.
12. Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials or substances which
react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases, develop
color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable
concentration or create any other condition deleterious to structures and treatment
processes.
13. Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed,
or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
14. Other. Any water or wastes excluding sanitary wastes having:
A. Average daily flow greater than 25,000 gallons/day (excluding
sanitary wastes).
B. Five-day BOD greater than 42 pounds/day or
C. Suspended solids greater than 52 pounds/day or
D. Total Kjeldahl nitrogen greater than six pounds/day.
All wastewater treatment agreements will be subject to the permit classes as outlined in
the Cedar Rapids Municipal Code. All terms of the permit will be established by
resolution of the Council according to the Articles of Agreement.
97.04 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES – POWERS. If any waters or wastes are
discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain
the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 97.03 and which may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Director may:
1. Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public
sewage system;
2. Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
3. Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or
4. Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
Chapter 99.
CHAPTER 98 ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
98.01 When Prohibited 98.05 Discharge Restrictions
98.02 When Required 98.06 Maintenance of System
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.04 Permit Required 98.08 Disposal of Septage
98.01 WHEN PROHIBITED. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is
unlawful to construct or maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system
or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02 WHEN REQUIRED. When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions of Section 95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are
employed shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.03 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS. The type, capacity, location and
layout of a private on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall comply with
the specifications and requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567,
Chapter 69, and with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of
the County Board of Health.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3 & 4])
98.04 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of
Health.
98.05 DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS. It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater
from an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES
permit) to any ditch, stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the
surface of the ground.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.06 MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM. The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment
and disposal system shall operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all
times and at no expense to the City.
98.07 SYSTEMS ABANDONED. At such time as a public sewer becomes available
to a property served by an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided
in Section 95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
CHAPTER 98 ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
with these Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.08 DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE. No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site
treatment system at any location except an approved disposal site.
CHAPTER 99
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
99.01 Sewer Service Charges Required 99.03 Payment of Bills
99.02 Rate 99.04 Lien for Nonpayment
99.01 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED. Every customer shall pay to the City
sewer service fees as hereinafter provided.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.02 RATE. Each customer shall pay a sewer service charge and a user charge as follows:
1. Service Charge. The service charge for each user of the City sewer system or
dwelling connected thereto shall be $2.00 per billing account per month until subsequently
changed as provided by law. In addition, $2.00 per dwelling unit per month shall be billed
to be set aside for sanitary sewer repair and maintenance.
2. Domestic User Charge. The user charge whose average waste contribution is less
than 60,000 gallons per month and BOD of less than 250 mg/L, and suspended solids less
than 250 mg/L, and oil and grease less than 100 mg/L and whose discharge contains no
waste referred to in Section 97.03, is classified as a domestic user. The domestic user
charge shall be $3.80 per 100 cubic feet of water used for all customers.
A. For all customers with one-inch (1") or smaller water meters, this user
charge shall only be for the first 60,000 gallons of water used per month.
3. Industrial (Wet and Dry) User Charge. Any user whose average contribution
exceeds 60,000 gallons per month, or contains more than 250 mg/L of BOD, and/or
contains more than 250 mg/L of suspended solids, and/or more than 100 mg/L of oil and
grease or who discharges waste referred to in Section 97.03, is classified as a Class I (Wet
and Dry) Industry.
Monthly Consumption: Inside City Limits
$3.80 per 100 cubic feet plus surcharge for use over the normal domestic
waste as follows:
BOD $0.85/lb. if over 250 mg/L
SS $0.105/lb. if over 250 mg/L
TKN $0.27/lb. if over 200 mg/L
(Based on monthly averages as tested by the City or their representative.)
(Ord. 19-19 – Aug. 19 Supp.)
4. Periodic Review. The user charge and service charge shall be periodically reviewed
but not less than annually by the City Manager and appropriate staff to determine the
sufficiency of the revenues to pay all City expenses with respect to the operation of the
sewer system.
(Ord. 13-02 – May 13 Supp.)
99.03 PAYMENT OF BILLS. All sewer service charges are due and payable under the same
terms and conditions as payment for water service as established by the Water Utility Board of
Trustees. To the extent that the sewer service charges are billed as part of a combined service
account, utility services may be discounted if the account becomes delinquent.
99.04 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant
thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sewer service charges to the premises. Sewer
service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served
and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CHAPTER 100A
OTHER CONNECTION OR ACCESS CHARGES
100A.01 General Provisions 100A.10 Tower Terrace Road District – Phase IV
100A.02 Definitions 100A.11 Winslow Road District
100A.03 Connection Charge Required 100A.12 29th Avenue District
100A.04 Connection Avenue District 100A.13 Irish Drive District
100A.05 Tower Terrace Road District 100A.14 2015 Winslow Road Realignment District
100A.06 29th Avenue Road District 100A.15 Tower Terrace Road District – Phase V
100A.07 31st Street District 100A.16 2184 Echo Hill Road District
100A.08 Tower Terrace Road District – Phase III 100A.17 35th Avenue District-Briargate
100A.09 Winslow Road District – Hunters Field Third
100A.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS. The purpose of this chapter is to establish
access or connection charges for certain properties within the City to recover the costs
of designing and constructing various facilities, not covered by Chapter 100, from
property owners who connect to such facilities subsequent to their construction. In the
event the Council determines the necessity of constructing a major facility and
determines that the utilization of an access or connection charge is the most equitable
manner in which to recover the City’s costs associated therewith, the Council shall first
hold a public hearing on the proposed adoption of an ordinance to establish a benefited
district and an access or connection charge.
100A.02 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:
1. “Benefited district” means that area of the City established by agreement
between the City and owner to which service can feasibly be provided by a major
facility of a given design and capacity.
2. “Connection” means the act of connecting private property to public
property by use of the platting process.
3. “Major facility or facilities” means and includes storm or sanitary sewer
mains, storm or sanitary sewer trunk lines or storm or sanitary sewer interceptors
eight (8) inches in diameter or larger, and storm or sanitary sewer force mains,
pumping stations, detention basins or streets.
100A.03 CONNECTION CHARGE REQUIRED. After the effective date of the
ordinance establishing a benefited district and an access or connection charge, no owner
of property within the district, whose property is eligible for connection to a major
facility, shall make such connection until the required access or connection charge has
been paid. The access or connection charge required by this chapter is in addition to,
and not in lieu of, any other fees required under any other provisions of this Code of
Ordinances. In the event a property owner makes a connection to a major facility
without having paid the required access or connection charge, the City shall disconnect
the connection until the required charge has been paid.
CHAPTER 100A OTHER CONNECTION OR ACCESS CHARGES
100A.04 CONNECTION AVENUE DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited district to be known as the
Connection Avenue District. Said district encompasses the property lying
within the following boundaries:
Parcel B Plat of Survey #895, as recorded in Book 4581, page 157,
in the records of the Linn County Recorders Office, which is a part
of the Lots 15 and 17, of the Irregular Survey of the Southwest
Fractional Quarter of Section 19, Township 84 North, Range 6 West
of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Linn County, Iowa, and Turning
Stone Addition to the City of Marion, Iowa, and to all property
covered by the Norman Gunnison Family Trust Agreement
approved September 12, 2008.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district are
as follows: $169.60 per lineal frontage foot at the time of final platting.
(Ch. 100A - Ord. 12-18 – Aug. 12 Supp.)
100A.05 TOWER TERRACE ROAD DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited district to be known as the Tower
Terrace Phase Il Road District. Said district encompasses the property lying
within the following boundaries:
Stonefield 2nd Addition to the City of Marion, Linn County, Iowa.
Plat of Survey #1626
Plat of Survey #1476 except Stonefield 6th Addition to the City of
Marion, Linn County, Iowa.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district are
as follows: $56.55 per lineal foot.
(Ord. 18-23 – Nov. 18 Supp.)
100A.06 29TH AVENUE ROAD DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited district to be known as the 29th
Avenue District. Said district encompasses the property lying within the
following boundaries:
Parcel B of Amended Plat of Survey #998, Linn County, Iowa.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district are
as follows: $131.59 per lineal foot with interest as provided in a Memorandum
of Agreement dated 1-30-2012.
3. In addition, at such time as 75% of the real property served by this
improvement has been final platted, the OWNER shall be responsible for paying
to the CITY the outstanding balance. This agreement shall be a covenant
running with the land and shall be binding upon the heirs, successors and assigns
of the OWNER.
(Ord. 12-22 – Nov. 12 Supp.)
CHAPTER 100A OTHER CONNECTION OR ACCESS CHARGES
100A.07 31ST STREET DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited district to be known as the 31st Street
District. Said district encompasses the property lying within the following boundaries:
From 1st Avenue to Highway 100.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district are as
follows: $41.30 per lineal foot with interest as provided in a Memorandum of Agreement
dated October 1, 2009.
(Ord. 13-05 – May 13 Supp.)
100A.08 TOWER TERRACE ROAD DISTRICT - PHASE III.
1. There is hereby established a benefited district (parts A and B) to be known as the
Tower Terrace Phase III Road District. Said district encompasses the properties listed
below with the fee as shown:
A. SE NW EX GILL'S 6TH & EX RD, and
NE SW LYG N OF GILLS' 4TH & 5TH-EX RD, and
SW NE-EX SHADY OAKS SUBDIV & EX SHADY OAKS 2ND.
The schedule of fees for connecting the above properties in said benefited district
is $127.51 per lineal foot.
B. P.O.S. #1476 PARCEL EX STONEFIELD 6th.
The schedule of fees for connecting the above property in said benefited district is
$129.96 per lineal foot.
(Ord. 13-12 – Aug. 13 Supp.)
100A.09 WINSLOW ROAD DISTRICT – HUNTERS FIELD THIRD.
1. There is hereby established a benefited district to be known as the Winslow Road
District – Hunters Field Third. Said district encompasses the properties listed below with
the fee as shown:
All lots lying within Hunters Field Third Addition to the City of Marion, Linn
County, Iowa.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting the above properties in said benefited district
is $112.33 per lineal foot.
(Ord. 13-23 – Nov. 13 Supp.)
100A.10 TOWER TERRACE ROAD DISTRICT - PHASE IV.
1. There is hereby established a benefited district to be known as the Tower Terrace
Phase IV Road District. Said district encompasses the properties listed below with the fee
as shown:
A. Morris Wood Enterprises Property as described at Volume 8724, Page 561
in the records in the office of the Linn County, Iowa Recorder, and
CHAPTER 100A OTHER CONNECTION OR ACCESS CHARGES
B. Morris Wood Enterprises Property as described at Volume 8890, Page 204
in the records in the office of the Linn County, Iowa Recorder, and
C. Morris Wood Enterprises Property as described at Volume 8821, Page 659
in the records in the office of the Linn County, Iowa Recorder.
The schedule of fees for connecting the above properties in said benefited district
is $149.33 per lineal foot.
D. Vaughn Farms Co., Inc. Property as described at Volume 8890, Page 447
in the records in the office of the Linn County, Iowa Recorder.
The schedule of fees for connecting the above property in said benefited district is
$149.33 per lineal foot.
(Ord. 14-03 – May 14 Supp.)
100A.11 WINSLOW ROAD DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited district to be known as the Winslow Road
District. Said district encompasses the property lying within the following boundaries:
Adjacent to Hunters Ridge Golf Club 16th Addition.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district are as
follows: $213.65 per lineal foot with interest as provided in a Memorandum of Agreement
dated December 4, 2014.
(Ord. 15-07 – May 15 Supp.)
100A.12 29TH AVENUE DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited district to be known as the 29th Avenue
District. Said district encompasses the property lying within the following two boundaries:
A. The South 1025' E ½ SE ¼ Section 29-84-6, Linn County, Iowa, except the
East 682.5 feet, Subject to the Public Highway and
The Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 29, Township 84 North,
Range 6 West of the 5th PM, except Plat of Survey No. 1459, City of Marion, Linn
County, Iowa, subject to easements, covenants, restrictions of record and all public
roads and highways; and
Plat of Survey No. 1459 Parcel A, except Golden Gate Condo and except the
Commons at English Glen 2nd Addition, City of Marion, Linn County, Iowa, subject
to easements, covenants, restrictions of record and all public roads and highways.
B. The Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 29, Township
84 North, Range 6 West of the 5th PM, except Plat of Survey No. 1459, City of
Marion, Linn County, Iowa, subject to easements, covenants, restrictions of record
and all public roads and highways; and
Plat of Survey No. 1459 Parcel A, except Golden Gate Condo and except the
Commons at English Glen 2nd Addition, City of Marion, Linn County, Iowa, subject
to easements, covenants, restrictions of record and all public roads and highways.
CHAPTER 100A OTHER CONNECTION OR ACCESS CHARGES
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district as described
in paragraph 1A above are as follows: $139.92 per lineal foot.
The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district as described in
paragraph 1B above are as follows: $131.37 per lineal foot.
(Ord. 15-23 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
100A.13 IRISH DRIVE DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited district to be known as the Irish Drive
District. Said district encompasses the property lying within the following three
boundaries:
A. The property covered by the development agreement approved by
Resolution 23762 adopted by the Marion City Council on the 10th day of April,
2014.
B. The property covered by the development agreement approved by
Resolution 23765 adopted by the Marion City Council on the 10th day of April,
2014.
C. The property covered by the development agreement approved by
Resolution 23768 adopted by the Marion City Council on the 10th day of April,
2014.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district as described
in paragraph 1A above is: $173,473.74 with an access fee of $134.14 per lineal foot.
The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district as described in
paragraph 1B above is: $189,696.44 with an access fee of $146.69 per lineal foot.
The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district as described in
paragraph 1C above is: $316,598.90 with an access fee of $159.88 per lineal foot.
(Ord. 15-25 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
CHAPTER 100A OTHER CONNECTION OR ACCESS CHARGES
100A.14 2015 WINSLOW ROAD REALIGNMENT DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited district (parts A, B and C) to be known as
the Winslow Road Realignment District. Said district encompasses the properties listed
below with the fee as shown:
A. THE SOUTH 36 ACRES SW 1/4 NW 1/4 FRACTIONAL, SW 1/4, SW 1/4
FRACTIONAL, NW 1/4 SW 1/4 FRACTIONAL, EXCEPT THE SE DIAGONAL
1/2 SOUTH 40 FEET, EAST 40 FEET, AND SOUTH 586.35 FEET LYING
WESTERLY OF THE ROAD, SE 1/4 SW 1/4, EXCEPT THE ROAD, SECTION
30, TOWNSHIP 84, RANGE 6 AND THE NORTH 120 FEET W 718 FEET NW
1/4 NW 1/4 FRACTIONAL, EXCEPT THE ROAD, SECTION 31, TOWNSHIP
84, RANGE 6 (the Linn Mar Community School District Campus)
The schedule of fees for connecting the portion of the above property in said
benefitted district locally known as 3555 N 10th St, Marion, Linn County, Iowa
(Excelsior Middle School) is $285,331.16, due at the time of connection.
(Ord. 18-01 – May 18 Supp.)
B. BRIDGE CREEK FOURTH ADDITION IN THE CITY OF MARION,
LINN COUNTY, IOWA
AND
THAT PART OF THE NE 1/4 NW 1/4 LYING SOUTHLY OF BRIDGE CREEK
3RD ADDITION, EXCEPTING BRIDGE CREEK 4TH ADDITION AND
EXCEPTING THE ROAD
AND
THAT PART OF THE SE 1/4 NW 1/4 LYING NORTHERLY OF THE ROAD,
EXCEPT BRIDGE CREEK 4TH AND EXCEPTING PLAT OF SURVEY #2038,
SECTION 30, TOWNSHIP 84, RANGE 6, LINN COUNTY, IOWA
The schedule of fees for connecting the above property in said benefited district is
$74.83 per lineal foot at the time of final platting.
C. THAT PART OF THE SE 1/4 NW 1/4 LYING SOUTHERLY OF THE
ROAD, EXCEPTING PLAT OF SURVEY #2037 SECTION 30, TOWNSHIP 84,
RANGE 6, LINN COUNTY, IOWA
The schedule of fees for connecting the above property in said benefited district is
$54.10 per lineal foot at the time of final platting.
(Ord. 17-24 – Nov. 17 Supp.)
100A.15 TOWER TERRACE ROAD DISTRICT - PHASE V.
1. There is hereby established a benefited district (parts A and B) to be known as the
Tower Terrace Phase V Road District. Said district encompasses the properties listed below
with the fee as shown:
A. THE SOUTH 36 ACRES SW 1/4 NW 1/4 FRACTIONAL, SW 1/4, SW 1/4
FRACTIONAL, NW 1/4 SW 1/4 FRACTIONAL, EXCEPT THE SE DIAGONAL
1/2 SOUTH 40 FEET, EAST 40 FEET, AND SOUTH 586.35 FEET LYING
CHAPTER 100A OTHER CONNECTION OR ACCESS CHARGES
WESTERLY OF THE ROAD, SE 1/4 SW 1/4, EXCEPT THE ROAD, SECTION
30, TOWNSHIP 84, RANGE 6 AND THE NORTH 120 FEET W 718 FEET NW
1/4 NW 1/4 FRACTIONAL, EXCEPT THE ROAD, SECTION 31, TOWNSHIP
84, RANGE 6 (the Linn Mar Community School District Campus)
(1) The schedule of fees for connecting the portion of the above
property in said benefitted district locally known as 3555 N 10th St, Marion,
Linn County, Iowa (Excelsior Middle School) is $341,186.68, due at the
time of connection.
(2) The schedule of fees for connecting the portion of the above
property in said benefitted district locally known as 3111 N 10th St, Marion,
Linn County, Iowa (Linn Mar High School) is $330,651.64, due at the time
of connection.
B. TRACTS OF LAND WITHIN THE WEST 7/8 OF THE NORTHEAST
QUARTER OF THE SOUTHWEST FRACTIONAL QUARTER (NE 1/4 SW 1/4
FRL.) OF SECTION THIRTY (30), TOWNSHIP EIGHTY-FOUR (84) NORTH,
RANGE SIX (6) WEST OF THE 5TH PRINCIPAL MERIDIAN, CITY OF
MARION, LINN COUNTY, IOWA, MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS
FOLLOWS:
TRACT "A"
COMMENCING AT THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF SAID NORTHEAST
QUARTER OF THE SOUTHWEST FRACTIONAL QUARTER (NE 1/4 SW 1/4
FRL.); THENCE SOUTH 01003'51" EAST ALONG THE WEST LINE OF THE
OF SAID NORTHEAST QUARTER OF THE SOUTHWEST FRACTIONAL
QUARTER (NW 1/4 SW 1/4 FRL.) A DISTANCE OF 38.10 FEET TO THE
POINT OF BEGINNING OF THE HEREIN DESCRIBED TRACT "A" AND
ALSO THE BEGINNING OF A 453.00 FOOT RADIUS NON-TANGENT
CURVE, CONCAVE NORTHEASTERLY; THENCE SOUTHEASTERLY 43.12
FEET ALONG THE ARC OF SAID CURVE WITH CHORD THAT BEARS
SOUTH 24013'49" EAST, 43.10 FEET; THENCE SOUTH 26057'26" EAST, 30.14
FEET TO THE BEGINNING OF A 735.00 FOOT RADIUS NON-TANGENT
CURVE, CONCAVE SOUTHERLY; THENCE SOUTHWESTERLY 34.72
FEET ALONG THE ARC OF SAID CURVE WITH A CHORD THAT BEARS
SOUTH 59006'58"WEST, 34.72 FEET TO SAID WEST LINE; THENCE NORTH
01003'51" WEST ALONG SAID WEST LINE A DISTANCE OF 84.01 FEET TO
THE POINT OF BEGINNING, CONTAINING 1,215 SQUARE FEET, MORE
OR LESS.
AND
TRACT "B"
COMMENCING AT THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF SAID NORTHEAST
QUARTER OF THE SOUTHWEST FRACTIONAL QUARTER (NE 1/4 SW 1/4
FRL.); THENCE SOUTH 89027'55" EAST (SOUTH 89028'35" EAST-RECORD)
ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF SAID NORTHEAST QUARTER OF THE
SOUTHWEST FRACTIONAL QUARTER (NE 1/4 SW 1/4 FRL.); A DISTANCE
OF 57.13 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING OF THE HEREIN
CHAPTER 100A OTHER CONNECTION OR ACCESS CHARGES
DESCRIBED TRACT “B” THENCE CONTINUING SOUTH 890 27'55" EAST
(SOUTH 898'35" EAST-RECORD) ALONG SAID NORTH LINE 884.47 FEET;
THENCE NORTH 90000'00"WEST, 547.22 FEET TO THE BEGINNING OF A
735.00 FOOT RADIUS TANGENT CURVE, CONCAVE SOUTHERLY;
THENCE SOUTHWESTERLY 312.80 FEET ALONG THE ARC OF SAID
CURVE WITH A CHORD THAT BEARS SOUTH 77048'29" WEST, 310.45
FEET; THENCE NORTH 26057'26" WEST, 30.14 FEET TO THE BEGINNING
OF A 387.00 FOOT RADIUS TANGENT CURVE, CONCAVE
NORTHEASTERLY; THENCE NORTHWESTERLY 51.11 FEET ALONG THE
ARC OF SAID CURVE WITH A CHORD THAT BEARS NORTH 23010'27"
WEST, 51.07 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING, CONTAINING 11,205
SQUARE FEET, MORE OR LESS.
CONTAINING 12,420 SQUARE FEET, MORE OR LESS, TOAL
BASIS OF BEARING: THE NORTH LINE OF THE NORTHEAST QUARTER
OF THE SOUTHWEST FRACTIONAL QUARTER (NE 1/4 SW 1/4 FRL.) OF
SAID SECTION 30 IS ASSUMED TO BEAR SOUTH 890 27'55" EAST.
AND
A TRACT OF LAND WITHIN THE WEST 7/8 OF THE NORTHEAST
QUARTER OF THE SOUTHWEST FRACTIONAL QUARTER (NE 1/4 SW
FRL. 1/4) OF SECTION THIRTY (30), TOWNSHIP EIGHTY-FOUR (84)
NORTH, RANGE SIX (6) WEST OF THE 5TH PRINCIPAL MERIDIAN, CITY
OF MARION, LINN COUNTY, IOWA, WITH SAID TRACT BEING SHOWN
ON ACQUISITION PLAT EXHIBIT "A" (SHEETS 1 OF 2 AND 2 OF 2)
ATTACHED HERETO AND BY REFERENCE MADE A PART HEREOF,
MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS:
BEGINNING AT THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF SAID NORTHEAST
QUARTER OF THE SOUTHWEST FRACTIONAL QUARTER (NE 1/4 SW
FRL1/4) THENCE SOUTH 89027'55" EAST (SOUTH 89028'35" EASTRECORD)
ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF SAID NORTHEAST QUARTER OF
THE SOUTHWEST FRACTIONAL QUARTER (NE 1/4 SW FRL 1/4 ) A
DISTANCE OF 57.13 FEET TO THE BEGINNING OF A 387.00 FOOT RADIUS
NON-TANGENT CURVE, CONCAVE NORTHEASTERLY; THENCE
SOUTHEASTERLY 51.11 FEET ALONG THE ARC OF SAID CURVE WITH
A CHORD THAT BEARS SOUTH 23010'27" EAST, 51.07 FEET; THENCE
SOUTH 26057'26" EAST, 30.14 FEET TO THE BEGINNING OF A 735.00 FOOT
RADIUS NON- TANGENT CURVE, CONCAVE SOUTHERLY; THENCE
NORTHEASTERLY 312.80 FEET ALONG THE ARC OF SAID CURVE WITH
A CHORD THAT BEARS NORTH 77048'29" EAST, 310.45 FEET; THENCE
NORTH 90000'00" EAST, 547.22 FEET TO SAID NORTH LINE; THENCE
SOUTH 89027'55" EAST (SOUTH 89028'35" EAST-RECORD) ALONG SAID
NORTH LINE 213.85 FEET TO THE WEST LINE OF LOT 2 OF IRREGULAR
SURVEY OF THE SOUTHWEST FRACTIONAL QUARTER (SW FRL.1/4) OF
SAID SECTION THIRTY (30); THENCE SOUTH 01003'20" EAST ALONG
SAID WEST LINE 118.02 FEET; THENCE NORTH 90000'00" WEST, 763.26
CHAPTER 100A OTHER CONNECTION OR ACCESS CHARGES
FEET TO THE BEGINNING OF A 615.00 FOOT RADIUS TANGENT CURVE,
CONCAVE SOUTHERLY; THENCE SOUTHWESTERLY 421.62 FEET
ALONG THE ARC OF SAID CURVE WITH A CHORD THAT BEARS SOUTH
70021'36" WEST, 413.41 FEET TO THE WEST LINE OF SAID NORTHEAST
QUARTER OF THE SOUTHWEST FRACTIONAL QUARTER (NE 1/4 SW
FRL.1/4); THENCE NORTH 01003'51" WEST ALONG SAID WEST LINE
145.67 FEET TO THE BEGINNING OF A 735.00 FOOT RADIUS NONTANGENT
CURVE, CONCAVE SOUTHERLY; THENCE NORTHEASTERLY
34.72 FEET ALONG THE ARC OF SAID CURVE WITH A CHORD THAT
BEARS NORTH 59006'58" EAST, 34.72 FEET; THENCE NORTH 26057'26"
WEST, 30.14 FEET TO THE BEGINNING OF A 453.00 FOOT RADIUS
TANGENT CURVE, CONCAVE NORTHEASTERLY; THENCE
NORTHWESTERLY 43.12 FEET ALONG THE ARC OF SAID CURVE WITH
A CHORD THAT BEARS NORTH 24013'49" WEST, 43.10 FEET TO SAID
WEST LINE; THENCE NORTH 01003'51" WEST ALONG SAID WEST LINE
38.10 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING, CONTAINING 3.38 ACRES,
MORE OR LESS.
BASIS OF BEARING: THE NORTH LINE OF THE NORTHEAST QUARTER
OF THE SOUTHWEST FRACTIONAL QUARTER (NE 1/4 SW FRL. 1/4 ) OF
SAID SECTION 30 IS ASSUMED TO BEAR SOUTH 89027'55" EAST.
The schedule of fees for connecting the above property in said benefited district is
$50,694.98 at the time of final plat or building permit, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 17-25 – Nov. 17 Supp.)
100A.16 2184 ECHO HILL ROAD DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited district to be known as the 2184 Echo Hill
Road District. Said district encompasses the properties listed below with the fee as shown:
THAT PART OF THE NE 1/4 NE 1/4 SECTION 23-84-7, LINN COUNTY, IOWA,
DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS: COMMENCING AS A POINT OF REFERENCE
AT THE NORTHEAST CORNER OF SAID SECTION 23-84-7; THENCE S
0o00'00" W, 1295.8 FEET ALONG THE EAST LINE OF NE 1/4 23-84-7 TO THE
CENTER LINE OF EAST-WEST ROAD; THENCE S 89053'20" W, 428.17 FEET
ALONG SAID CENTER LINE TO THE PLACE OF BEGINNING; THENCE
CONTINUING S 89053'20" W, 436.4 FEET ALONG SAID CENTER LINE;
THENCE N 0023'20" E, 454.3 FEET; THENCE N 89053'20" E, 432.4 FEET;
THENCE S 0006'40" E, 454.3 FEET TO THE PLACE OF BEGINNING. TRACT
IS SUBJECT TO ROAD CENTERED ON THE SOUTH LINE AND CONTAINS
3.93 ACRES EXCLUSIVE OF SAID ROAD.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting the above described property, locally known
as 2184 Echo Hill Road, Marion, Linn County, Iowa is as follows: $72.74 per lineal foot
due at the time of final platting.
(Ord. 18-26 – Nov. 18 Supp.)
CHAPTER 100A OTHER CONNECTION OR ACCESS CHARGES
100A.17 35TH AVENUE DISTRICT- BRIARGATE.
1. There is hereby established a benefited district to be known as the 35th Avenue
District-Briargate. Said district encompasses the properties listed below with the fee as
shown:
LOTS 1 AND 2 RJ CARLSON 1ST ADDITION TO LINN COUNTY, IOWA.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in the above described district is as
follows: $140.40 per lineal foot at the time of final platting.
(Ord. 18-27 – Nov. 18 Supp.)
CHAPTER 100
BENEFITED DISTRICT
SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES
100.01 General Provisions 100.13 35th Avenue/Indian Creek Sanitary District
100.02 Definitions 100.14 Winslow Road Sanitary Sewer District
100.03 Connection Charge Required 100.15 Tower Terrace Road Sanitary Sewer District
100.04 Mulberry Ridge Sanitary Sewer District 100.16 Meadowridge Sanitary Sewer Extension Sewer District
100.05 Linn-Mar Sanitary Sewer District 100.17 American Legion Sewer District
100.06 Glen Rock Farms Sanitary Sewer District 100.18 1995 Indian Creek Sanitary Sewer Extension Sewer
100.07 Huntington Hills 1st Addition Sanitary Sewer District
District 100.19 Linn-Aire Industrial Park Second Addition and Marion
100.08 29th Avenue Storm Sewer District Commerce Park 1st Addition Sewer District
100.09 35th Avenue Sanitary Sewer District 100.20 Dry Creek Storm Water Detention District
100.10 Linn-Mar II Addition Sanitary Sewer District 100.21 Linn-Mar/Echo Hill Road Sanitary Sewer Extension
100.11 Parkgate Village First Addition Sanitary Sewer District
Sewer District 100.22 Foxborough Sanitary Sewer Extension Sewer District
100.12 Indian Creek Sanitary District
100.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS. The purpose of this chapter is to establish storm and
sanitary sewer connection charges for certain properties within the City to recover the costs of
designing and constructing major storm or sanitary sewer facilities from property owners who
connect to such facilities subsequent to their construction. In the event the Council determines
the necessity of constructing a major storm or sanitary sewer facility and determines that the
utilization of a connection charge is the most equitable manner in which to recover the City’s
costs associated therewith, the Council shall first hold a public hearing on the proposed
adoption of an ordinance to establish a benefited district and a connection charge.
(Ord. 03-01 – Feb. 03 Supp.)
100.02 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:
1. “Benefited district” means that area of the City to which storm or sanitary sewer
service can feasibly be provided by a major storm or sanitary sewer facility of a given
design and capacity.
2. “Connection” means the act of connecting a building storm or sanitary sewer to
a lateral sewer or manhole constituting a part of a major storm or sanitary sewer facility,
or the act of connecting a lateral sewer serving a subdivision to a trunk sewer or
manhole constituting a part of a major storm or sanitary sewer facility.
3. “Major storm or sanitary sewer facility or facilities” means and includes storm
or sanitary sewer mains, storm or sanitary sewer trunk lines or storm or sanitary sewer
interceptors eight (8) inches in diameter or larger, and storm or sanitary sewer force
mains, pumping stations and detention basins.
(Ord. 03-01 – Feb. 03 Supp.)
100.03 CONNECTION CHARGE REQUIRED. After the effective date of the ordinance
establishing a benefited district and a connection charge, no owner of property within the
district, whose property is eligible for connection to the storm or sanitary sewer facility, shall
make such connection until the required connection charge has been paid. If land use is
different than residential and the proposed development uses considerably less sanitary sewer
than DNR design criteria the minimum acreage fee may be revised with the approval of the
City Engineer. The sewer connection charge required by this chapter is in addition to, and not
in lieu of, any other fees required under the plumbing code or other provisions of this Code of
Ordinances. In the event a property owner makes a connection to the storm or sanitary sewer
facility without having paid the required connection charge, the City shall disconnect the
building storm or sanitary sewer until the required charge has been paid.
Beginning January 1, 2003, the connection charges set forth in the subsequent sections of this
chapter of the Code of Ordinances will be calculated with a 5.0 percent increase as of each
January 1 following adoption of the particular hookup fee. In no event will the connection fee
calculated hereunder exceed twice the amount of the original connection fee. (Ord. 03-
01 – Feb. 03 Supp.)
100.04 MULBERRY RIDGE SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited sanitary sewer district, consisting of two
sections, to be known as the Mulberry Ridge Sanitary Sewer District. Said district
encompasses 1620 acres more or less (excluding Lowe Park) lying within the following
boundaries:
All of the Dry Creek Drainage Area north of East Robins Road, Linn County, Iowa.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to the City
sewer(s) are as follows:
A. 21 Inch Sanitary Sewer Under East Robins Road:
Capacity Rate Method – Based on DNR density specifications
Acreage Method (Residential) = $42.00/acre
Medium Density (Multi-Family) 11-15 people/acre = $63.00/acre
High Density (Multi-Family) 16+ people/acre = $210.00/acre
Commercial, institutional or office use = $210.00/acre
B. 12 Inch Sanitary Sewer Along the North Side of East Robins Road:
Capacity Rate Method – Based on DNR density specifications
Acreage Method (Residential) = $455.00/acre
Medium Density (Multi-Family) 11-15 people/acre = $683.00/acre
High Density (Multi-Family) 16+ people/acre = $1,365.00/acre
Commercial, institutional or office use = $2,275.00/acre
(Ord. 01-38 – Feb. 02 Supp.)
100.05 LINN-MAR SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited sanitary sewer district, consisting of
two sections, to be known as the Linn-Mar Sanitary Sewer District. Said district
encompasses 1620 acres more or less (excluding Lowe Park) lying within the
following boundaries:
North extension of Dry Creek Sanitary Sewer, north of East Robins Road, Linn
County, Iowa.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to the
City sewer(s) are as follows:
Hookup Fee for Linn-Mar Sanitary Sewer Extension Project
School Cost
Construction $313,466.38 (-Over sizing amount of $58,061.12 paid to Linn-
Mar)
Engineering $ 19,252.70
Total $332,719.08
City Over Sizing Cost $ 58,061.12 Linn-Mar Sanitary Sewer Extension Project
Resolution No 12859 $ 16,779.85 Old resolution to be included in this new fee
Total $ 74,840.97
Total Hookup Fee Amount Percentage of Fee Collected
Linn-Mar $332,719.08 81.64%
City $ 74,840.97 18.36%
Total $407,560.05
Capacity Rate Method – Based on DNR density specifications
Acreage Method
Residential, R-2 - $407,560.05/1200 Ac. = $340.00/acre (rounded up)
1000 gal. per capita per day
Medium Density (Multi-Family) 11-15 people/acre = $510.00/acre
1500 gal. per capita per day
High Density (Multi-Family) above 15 people/acre = $1020.00/acre
3000 gal. per capita per day (assumed 30 people/acre)
Commercial, institutional or office use = $1700.00/acre
5000 gal. per acre
(Ord. 02-07 – May 02 Supp.)
100.06 GLEN ROCK FARMS SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited sanitary sewer district to be known
as the Glen Rock Farms Sanitary Sewer District. Said district lying within the
following boundaries:
All of the Barry’s Run Drainage Area North of Huntington Hills Addition, Linn
County, Iowa.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to the
City sewer(s) are as follows:
12 inch sanitary sewer extension for Glen Rock Farms Addition north of
Huntington Hills Addition:
Capacity Rate Method – Based on DNR density specifications.
Unit Method (Residential) = $346.00/residential dwelling unit.
(Ord. 02-12 – Aug. 02 Supp.)
100.07 HUNTINGTON HILLS 1ST ADDITION SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited sanitary sewer district to be known
as the Huntington Hills Sanitary Sewer District. Said district lying within the
following boundaries:
All of the Barry’s Run Drainage Area North of and including the Huntington Hills 1st
Addition, Linn County, Iowa.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to the
City sewer(s) are as follows:
12 inch sanitary sewer extension from the east side of Winslow Road to the
south property line of Huntington Hills 1st Addition:
Capacity Rate Method – Based on DNR density specifications.
Unit Method (Residential) = $56.00/residential dwelling unit.
(Ord. 02-19 – Aug. 02 Supp.)
100.08 29TH AVENUE STORM SEWER DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited storm sewer district, consisting of one
section, to be known as the 29th Avenue Storm Sewer District. Said district
encompasses the North side of 29th Avenue from station 10+53 to 28+00 as
established in the 2002 29th Avenue Phase I Paving Project.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to the
City sewer(s) are as follows:
$14.50 per L/F
Location of said storm sewer hook up fee shall be determined by the stationing
established in the 2002 29th Avenue Phase I Paving Project from station 10+53 to
28+00.
(Ord. 03-01 – Feb. 03 Supp.)
100.09 35TH AVENUE SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited storm sewer district, consisting of one
section, to be known as the 35th Avenue Sanitary Sewer District. Said district
encompasses the 35th Avenue Sanitary Sewer Project from Station 0+00 to 13+36
as established in the 2002 35th Avenue Sanitary Sewer Project.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to the
City sewer(s) are as follows:
$642.26 per acre of land that will be served by said sewer extension.
Location of said sanitary sewer hook up fee shall be determined by the stationing
established in the 2002 35th Avenue Sanitary Sewer Project from station 0+00 to
13+36.
(Ord. 03-20 – Nov. 03 Supp.)
100.10 LINN-MAR II ADDITION SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited sanitary sewer district, consisting of
one section, to be known as the Linn-Mar II Addition Sanitary Sewer District. Said
district encompasses 270 acres.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to the
City sewer(s) are as follows:
A. Acreage Method
Residential, R-2 = $28.00/acre - 1000 gal. per capita per day
Medium Density (Multi-Family) 11-15 people/acre = $42.00/acre -
1500 gal. per capita per day
High Density (Multi-Family) above 15 people/acre = $84.00/acre -
3000 gal. per capita per day (assumed 30 people/acre)
Commercial, institutional or office use = $140.00/acre - 500 gal. per
acre
B. Location of said sanitary sewer hook up fee shall be determined by
the stationing established in the Linn-Mar sanitary sewer trunk line extension
of 2004.
(Ord. 04-06 – May. 04 Supp.)
100.11 PARKGATE VILLAGE FIRST ADDITION SANITARY SEWER
DISTRICT.
1. There is hereby established a benefited sanitary sewer district, consisting of
one section, to be known as the Parkgate Village First Addition Sanitary Sewer
District. Said district encompasses 159.5 acres.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to the
City sewer(s) are as follows:
A. Acreage Method
Residential, R-2 = $962.00/acre - 1000 gal. per capita per day
Medium Density (Multi-Family) 11-15 people/acre = $1,443.00/acre
- 1500 gal. per capita per day
High Density (Multi-Family) above 15 people/acre = $2,886.00/acre
- 3000 gal. per capita per day (assumed 30 people/acre)
Commercial, institutional or office use = $4,810.00/acre - 500 gal. per
acre
B. Location of said sanitary sewer hook up fee shall be determined by
the stationing established in the Parkgate Village Addition First Addition.
(Ord. 05-11 – Nov. 05 Supp.)
100.12 INDIAN CREEK SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT. There is hereby
established a benefited sanitary sewer district, consisting of one section, to be known as
the Indian Creek Sanitary Sewer District. Said district encompasses 2,905 acres. The
schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to the City sewer(s) are
as follows:
1. Acreage Method
Residential, R-2 = $402.90/acre - 1000 gal. per capita per day
Medium Density (Multi-Family) 11-15 people/acre = $604.35/acre - 1500
gal. per acre
High Density (Multi-Family) above 15 people/acre = $1,208.70/acre - 3000
gal. per acre
Commercial, institutional or office use = $2,014.50/acre - 5000 gal. per acre
2. Location of said sanitary sewer hook up fee shall be determined by the
stationing established in the Indian Creek sanitary sewer trunk line extension of
2003.
Residences adjacent to the project established prior to the passage of Ordinance 06-04 shall
have a maximum fee of $402.90.
(Ord. 06-04 – May 06 Supp.)
100.13 35TH AVENUE/INDIAN CREEK SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT. There
is hereby established a benefited sanitary sewer district, consisting of one section, to be
known as the 35th Avenue/Indian Creek Sanitary Sewer District. Said district encompasses
268 acres. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to the
City sewer(s) are as follows:
1. Acreage Method
Residential, R-2 = $493.24/acre - 1000 gal. per capita
Medium Density (Multi-Family) 11-15 people/acre = $739.86/acre - 1500
gal. per acre
High Density (Multi-Family) above 15 people/acre = $1,479.72/acre - 3000
gal. per acre
Commercial, institutional or office use = $2,466.20/acre - 5000 gal. per acre
2. Location of said sanitary sewer hook up fee shall be determined by the
stationing established in the 35th Aveune/Indian Creek sanitary sewer trunk line
extension project.
(Ord. 06-05 – May 06 Supp.)
100.14 WINSLOW ROAD SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT. There is hereby
established a benefited sanitary sewer district, consisting of one section, to be known as
the Winslow Sanitary Sewer District. Said district encompasses 288 acres. The schedule
of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to the City sewer(s) are as follows:
1. Acreage Method
Residential, R-2 = $652.80/acre - 1000 gal. per capita per day
Medium Density (Multi-Family) 11-15 people/acre = $979.20/acre - 1500
gal. per acre
High Density (Multi-Family) above 15 people/acre = $1,958.40/acre - 3000
gal. per acre
Commercial, institutional or office use = $3,264.00/acre - 5000 gal. per acre
2. Location of said sanitary sewer hook up fee shall be determined by the
stationing established in the Winslow Road sanitary sewer trunk line extension
project.
(Ord. 06-16 – Nov. 06 Supp.)
100.15 TOWER TERRACE ROAD SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT. There is
hereby established a benefited sanitary sewer district, consisting of one section, to be
known as the Tower Terrace Road Sanitary Sewer District. Said district encompasses 268
acres. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to the City
sewer(s) are as follows:
1. Acreage Method
Residential, R-2 = $270.66/acre - 1000 gal. per capita per day
Medium Density (Multi-Family) 11-15 people/acre = $406.00/acre - 1500
gal. per acre
High Density (Multi-Family) above 15 people/acre = $812.00/acre - 3000
gal. per acre
Commercial, institutional or office use = $1,353.30/acre - 5000 gal. per acre
2. Location of said sanitary sewer hook up fee shall be on the north side of
Tower Terrace Road from Station 100+56 to 123+19 as determined by the stationing
established in the Tower Terrace sanitary sewer trunk line extension project
associated with Prairie Bend First Addition to the City of Marion.
(Ord. 07-06 – Aug. 07 Supp.)
100.16 MEADOWRIDGE SANITARY SEWER EXTENSION SEWER DISTRICT.
There is hereby established a benefited sanitary sewer district (previously established by
Resolution 9235, September 7, 1989), consisting of one section, to be known as the
Meadowridge Sanitary Sewer Extension Sewer District. Said district encompasses an area
partially in Linn County and in the City of Marion, Iowa. The schedule of fees for
connecting property in said benefited district to the City sewer(s) are as follows:
Acreage Method = $171.66 per acre of platted land which will be served by said sewer
extension.
100.17 AMERICAN LEGION SEWER DISTRICT. There is hereby established a
benefited sanitary sewer district (previously established by Resolution 11482, November 3,
1994), consisting of one section, to be known as the American Legion Sanitary Sewer
Extension Sewer District. Said district encompasses an area in the City of Marion, Iowa.
The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to the City sewer(s)
are as follows:
Acreage Method = $675.00 per acre of area served by each connection.
100.18 1995 INDIAN CREEK SANITARY SEWER EXTENSION SEWER
DISTRICT. There is hereby established a benefited sanitary sewer district (previously
established by Resolution 12680, June 5, 1997), consisting of one section, to be known as
the 1995 Indian Creek Sanitary Sewer Extension Sewer District. Said district encompasses
an area in Linn County and in the City of Marion, Iowa. The schedule of fees for
connecting property in said benefited district to the City sewer(s) are as follows:
1. For the 12-inch diameter “Linn-Mar Lateral” from Station 100+59 to Station
123+12.96:
A. Single family and multi-family density up to and including six units
per acre - $47.65 per dwelling unit.
B. Multi-family density greater than six units per acre - $40.50 per
dwelling unit.
C. Commercial Development - $183.45 per acre of site.
D. Industrial Development - $369.28 per acre of site.
2. For the 12-inch diameter “Linn-Mar Lateral” westerly of Station 100+59:
A. Single family and multi-family density up to and including six units
per acre - $85.98 per dwelling unit.
B. Multi-family density greater than six units per acre - $73.08 per
dwelling unit.
C. Commercial Development - $331.03 per acre of site.
D. Industrial Development - $645.50 per acre of site.
3. For the 21-inch diameter “Indian Creek Interceptor” from Station 0+00 to
Station 58+80:
A. Single family and multi-family density up to and including six units
per acre - $136.00 per dwelling unit.
B. Multi-family density greater than six units per acre - $115.60 per
dwelling unit.
C. Commercial Development - $523.60 per acre of site.
D. Industrial Development - $1,054.00 per acre of site.
4. For the 12-inch diameter “Berry’s Run Lateral” from Station 200+20 to
Station 231+03.95:
A. Single family and multi-family density up to and including six units
per acre - $167.34 per dwelling unit.
B. Multi-family density greater than six units per acre - $142.24 per
dwelling unit.
C. Commercial Development - $644.26 per acre of site.
D. Industrial Development - $1,296.90 per acre of site.
If the “site” size for a commercial or industrial user cannot be satisfactorily determined,
the amount of hook-up fee may be calculated based on the anticipated sewer discharge rate
the facility will generate. The City Engineer shall review the proposed plans and determine
an appropriate fee amount which represents the proportion of sewer capacity the facility
will utilize. The applicant may appeal the amount of said hook-up fees to the City Council.
100.19 LINN-AIRE INDUSTRIAL PARK SECOND ADDITION AND MARION
COMMERCE PARK 1ST ADDITION SEWER DISTRICT. There is hereby
established a benefited sanitary sewer district (previously established by Resolution 13648, March 18,
1999), consisting of a portion of the developed area, to be known as the Linn-Aire Industrial
Park Second Addition and Marion Commerce Park 1st Addition Sewer District. Said
district encompasses an area in the City of Marion, Iowa. The schedule of fees for
connection property in said benefited district to the City sewer(s) are as follows:
1. Pursuant to an agreement with the developer on Linn-Aire Industrial Park 2nd
Addition, the City of Marion agreed to pay $40,000 for the extension of said sanitary sewer
and to recoup $44,000 in connection fees in conjunction with development of Lots 2, 4,
and 5 of Linn-Aire Industrial Park 2nd Addition and the remaining unplatted land lying east
of 62nd Street and between Lot 5 and Linn-Aire Avenue extended.
2. Lot 5 of Linn-Aire Industrial Park 2nd Addition and the remaining unplatted land
lying east of 62nd Street between said Lot 5 and Linn-Aire Avenue extended has been
platted as Marion Commerce Park 1st Addition.
3. Sanitary sewer hook-up fees are to be calculated based on total acreage of Lots 2
and 4 Linn-Aire Industrial Park 2nd Addition and all lots contained in Marion Commerce
Park 1st Addition. For a total acreage of 46.99 acres, to recoup $44,000 would require
$936.37 per acre to be charged as a hook-up fee.
4. Acreage Method = $936.37 per acre of land for Lots 2 and 4 of Linn-Aire Industrial
Park 2nd Addition and Lots 1 through 16 of Marion Commerce Park 1st Addition.
(Sections 100.16 – 100.19 added by Ord. 08-18 – Nov. 08 Supp.)
100.20 DRY CREEK STORM WATER DETENTION DISTRICT. There is hereby
established a benefited storm water detention district, consisting of one section, to be known as
the Dry Creek Storm Water Detention District. Said district encompasses 363.40 acres. The
schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to the City detention basin is as
follows:
1. Acreage Method (all zonings and uses) = $926.77/acre.
2. Location of said storm water detention basin hook up fee shall be determined by
Exhibit A – Dry Creek Storm Water Detention Basin, Drainage Basin.
3. Said hook up fee shall apply to all property contained within the final plat, including
but not limited to: lots, out lots, right-of-way and green spaces.
4. All new development within the detention basin shall be required to participate in
the hook up fee and shall not be required to provide individual storm water detention.
(Ord. 08-24 – Feb. 09 Supp.)
100.21 LINN-MAR/ECHO HILL ROAD SANITARY SEWER EXTENSION SEWER
DISTRICT. There is hereby established a benefited sanitary sewer district consisting of one
section, to be known as the Linn-Mar/Echo Hill Road Sanitary Sewer Extension Sewer District.
Said district encompasses an area of approximately 300 acres partially in Linn County and in the
City of Marion, Iowa, lying generally within one-half mile in any direction from the intersection
of Alburnett Road and Echo Hill Road. The hookup fee has been established by an acreage
amount. The City of Marion will receive 11.45% of the hookup fee for the over-sizing costs and
the remainder thereof to Linn-Mar Community School District. The hookup fee shall be collected
at time of final platting or at the time of receiving a building permit if the site does not require a
final plat for construction. The hookup fee by capacity rate would only be used if an area proposes
a development or business that would use more sewage than the estimated residential usage (R-2
zone) of 10 people/acre. The schedule of fees for connecting property in said benefited district to
the City sewer(s) are as follows:
1. Hookup Fee per Acre = $890.00
2. City of Marion % of Hookup = 11.45%
3. Linn-Mar % of Hookup = 88.55%
4. Capacity Rate Method – Based on DNR density specification:
A. Acreage Method (Residential, R-2) = $890.00/acre – 1000 gal. per capita
per day.
B. Medium Density (Multi-Family) 11-15 people/acre = $1,335.00/acre –
1500 gal. per capita per day.
C. High Density (Multi-Family) Above 15 people/acre = $2,670.00/acre –
3000 gal. per capita per day.
D. Commercial, institutional or office use = $4,450.00/acre – 5000 gal. per
acre.
(Ord. 09-15 – Aug. 09 Supp.)
100.22 FOXBOROUGH SANITARY SEWER EXTENSION SEWER DISTRICT. There
is hereby established a benefited sanitary sewer district consisting of one section, to be known as
the Foxborough Sanitary Sewer Extension Sewer District. Said district encompasses the properties
listed below with the fee as shown:
1. All lots lying within Hunters Field Third Addition to the City of Marion, Linn
County, Iowa.
2. The schedule of fees for connecting the above properties in said benefited district
is $83.00 per lineal foot. (Ord. 14-12 – Aug. 14 Supp.)
(Ord. 13-22 – Nov. 13 Supp.)
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
105.01 Definitions 105.10 Vehicle Licenses
105.02 Sanitary Disposal Required 105.11 Private Haulers
105.03 Feedstock Collectors 105.12 Tree and Brush Hauling
105.04 Feedstock Collection – All Properties 105.13 Rates
105.05 Municipal Collection 105.14 Elderly or Disability Exemption and Rates
105.06 Disposal Hierarchy 105.15 Compliance
105.07 Prohibited Practices 105.16 Authority to Establish Rules
105.08 Littering Prohibited 105.17 Garbage, Refuse and Rubbish
105.09 Collection Containers
105.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Business establishment” means any establishment which is not a dwelling
unit and which generates solid waste, feedstock, recyclable material and/or yard
waste incident to its normal activity.
2. “Commercial vehicle” means any vehicle used for transporting solid waste,
feedstock, recyclable material and/or yard waste from business establishments, as
defined, or which is in the business of transporting such materials.
3. “Corrugated cardboard” includes containers or materials used in containers
that have three or more layers of Kraft paper material, at least two exterior flat layers
with one wavy interior core.
4. “Feedstock” means any material generated as a result of or is a by-product
of residential, industrial or commercial activities that is used for combustion for
energy recovery, for combustion for waste disposal or for creation of bio-fuel or
bio-products.
5. “Garbage” means animal and vegetable wastes, containers and packaging
contaminated by animal or vegetable waste or both, and other such wastes resulting
from food preparation and serving.
6. “Generator” means any person or entity whose activities or processes
produce solid waste, feedstock and/or recyclable materials and/or yard waste.
7. “Hauler” means any person who regularly or occasionally hauls solid waste,
feedstock, recyclable materials and/or yard waste for consideration, fee or for profit.
8. “Household” means any permanent premises containing a habitable space
intended for residential use and which generates solid waste, feedstock, recyclable
material and/or yard waste as a result of the domestic activities of not more than one
family. A household may be referred to as a "dwelling unit."
9. “Manufactured/mobile home” means a transportable, single-family dwelling
unit suitable for year-round occupancy having no foundation other than wheels,
jacks, piers, grade beams or skirting and containing water supply, waste disposal,
heating and electrical conveniences.
10. “Manufactured/mobile home community” means a parcel of land under
single ownership, which has been planned and improved, for the placement of the
manufactured/mobile homes for non-transient use.
11. “Materials” means solid waste, feedstock, recyclable material and/or yard
waste.
12. “Non-commercial vehicle” means any vehicle not for hire, used for
transporting solid waste, feedstock, recyclable material and/or yard waste from
dwelling units.
13. “Non-recyclable corrugated cardboard” means corrugated cardboard with
permanently attached packing material and/or non-paper liners; wax-coated
cardboard; cardboard contaminated with oil, paint, blood, or other organic materials;
or cardboard contaminated with any other material that renders the corrugated
cardboard non-marketable. It does not include cardboard that has been contaminated
through compaction in a hauling vehicle.
14. “Private hauler” means any hauler who hauls materials from his or her own
premises, including independent contractors engaged in any type of construction or
repair within the City and hauling materials therefrom.
15. “Recyclable corrugated cardboard” includes marketable corrugated
cardboard that may have glue, staples, and/or tape, but does not have permanently
attached packing material and/or non-paper liners and is not waxed, or contaminated
with oil, paint, blood or other organic materials.
16. “Recyclable materials” means any clean and dry material which is generated
as a result of or is a by-product of residential, commercial or industrial activities and
which has a market for reprocessing or reuse. Such materials may be found in solid
waste but are non-collectable as recyclable unless they are segregated by the
generator and cared for separately. These materials are as follows but not limited to:
plastic containers with recycle numbers 1 to 7, metal food and beverage containers,
aluminum foil and pie tins, newspapers, magazines, inserts, catalogs, chipboard
(tears brown or gray), mixed paper, junk mail, yard waste and corrugated cardboard.
17. “Recycling” means any process by which waste, or materials that would
otherwise become waste, are collected, separated, processed or returned to use in
any form of raw materials or products. Recycling does not include any form of
energy recovery.
18. “Refuse” means any garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, residues from
street cleaning, market and industrial solid wastes, recyclable material, or sewage
treatment wastes in a dry or semi-dry form.
19. “Rubbish” means any ashes, paper, cardboard, metal, plastic, yard waste,
wood, glass, bedding materials, litter or similar materials.
20. “Solid waste” means any garbage, refuse, rubbish, yard waste, recyclable
materials, or other similar discarded solid or semi-solid materials, including but not
limited to such materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural and
domestic activities, that is not a recyclable material or a feedstock. Solid waste may
include vehicles as defined in Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa. Solid waste does
not mean or include hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of
Iowa or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979, petroleum contaminated soil
which has been remediated to acceptable State or Federal standards, toxic materials,
or yard waste that has been composted or infectious, medical or biological waste.
21. “Vehicle license” means a license issued for a vehicle used in the business
of hauling or transferring solid waste, feedstock and/or recyclable materials.
22. “Yard waste” means any of the following, free of any other debris and which
is generated as a result of yard and garden development and maintenance: grass
clippings, lawn rakings, leaves, hedge trimmings, trees and tree trimmings, garden
vegetation, bark, flowers, or all other similar organic waste. Yard waste does not
mean or include stumps.
105.02 SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED. It is the duty of each owner to provide
for the sanitary disposal of all refuse accumulating on the owner's premises before it
becomes a nuisance. Any such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of
more than seven (7) days shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate
such nuisances in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50 or by initiating proper
action in district court.
105.03 FEEDSTOCK COLLECTORS. All persons, firms or haulers that collect solid
waste, feedstock, recyclable materials and/or yard waste shall do so in compliance with the
terms and conditions of this chapter.
105.04 FEEDSTOCK COLLECTION – ALL PROPERTIES.
1. Accumulated solid waste, feedstock and recyclable materials shall be
collected from all residences, dwelling units, commercial and industrial
establishments within the City at least once weekly in accordance with and subject
to the provisions of this chapter. All materials collected are deemed to be feedstock
until sorting or separation determines the material to be solid waste, recyclable
materials or yard waste.
2. All collections shall be made between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) a.m.
and ten o'clock (10:00) p.m.
3. All yard waste shall be separated from all other solid waste, feedstock and
recyclable material accumulated on the premises.
4. The generator shall separate all recyclable corrugated cardboard from all
other garbage, refuse and rubbish for the purpose of recycling. Recyclable
corrugated cardboard shall not be purposely rendered non-recyclable for ease of
disposal. Recyclable corrugated cardboard may be mixed with other approved
recyclable materials for recycling. Recyclable corrugated cardboard that has been
separated from all other garbage, refuse and rubbish may be composted. Recyclable
corrugated cardboard that is mixed with approved compostable materials and is
approved for composting may be composted.
5. All manufactured/mobile home communities, multiple-family residential
buildings and industrial and commercial establishments shall offer recycling
opportunities for generators either by providing drop-off facilities or curb-side
collection or some other alternative method for diverting solid waste from area
landfills.
105.05 MUNICIPAL COLLECTION.
1. The Public Services Department shall provide for the collection of properly
contained, bundled or placed solid waste, feedstock, yard waste and recyclable
materials from all designated domestic and commercial generators located within
the City of Marion. The collection of solid waste, feedstock and recyclable materials
by the Public Services Department from generators located within the City of
Marion is mandatory. The Public Services Department may enter into contracts with
haulers for purposes of solid waste, feedstock, recyclable material and/or yard waste
collection. (Ord. 16-02 – May 16 Supp.)
2. Accumulated domestic solid waste, feedstock and recyclable materials shall
be placed at the end of the driveway, if any, or curbside no sooner than seven o'clock
(7:00) p.m. on the day prior to collection and no later than seven o'clock (7:00) a.m.
on collection day. Solid waste or recyclable materials placed at the curbside shall
not be placed behind any parked cars. Solid waste, feedstock or recyclable materials
placed at the curbside that is behind any parked cars at the time of collection will
not be collected. Solid waste, feedstock or recyclable materials placed at the
curbside later than seven o'clock (7:00) a.m. on collection day will not be collected
if the collection truck has gone past the residence prior to placement. Collection
containers shall be removed from public property within twenty-four (24) hours
after collection, and shall be stored adjacent to the dwelling unit or screened from
view. When there is an accumulation of ice or snow on the ground, all solid waste,
feedstock and recyclable material shall be placed in a scooped out area adjacent to
the curb or driveway adjacent to the curb for safe collection by the collection
personnel.
3. All yard waste shall be separated from all other solid waste accumulated on
the premises. Such separated yard waste may be composted on the premises, placed
in yard waste containers for collection as feedstock, or bundled in accordance with
established policies and placed appropriately near the curb for collection on
collection days. Fee-paying customers may also haul and dispose of separated yard
waste at the City compost facility subject to the rules, regulations and hours of
operation of said facility.
4. Curbside recycling shall be provided to all fee paying customers. Only bins
provided and sold by the City can be used for curbside collection of recyclable
materials. The bin and lid shall remain with the property. Any lost or stolen bins and
lids will be the responsibility of the generator to replace. Any resident moving shall
leave the bin with the residence. If no bin is found, it shall be the responsibility of
the customers to locate or replace the missing bin. Customers may purchase a bin
and lid from the Public Services Department at a cost as established by the Public
Services Director.
5. The Public Services Department will not collect dead animals, animal
manure or litter, old cars or car bodies, liquids, hazardous or toxic wastes or
chemicals, explosives, hot ashes, infectious, medical or biological waste, logs,
stumps or debris four (4) inches in diameter or more than four (4) feet long and not
bundled, small items or materials in piles requiring shovel or fork to handle, or
material resulting from construction, demolition or repair of buildings. Ashes and
sawdust must be contained in a bag. Broken glass or other sharp objects must be
marked as such and set out separately. Sharp materials such as needles from
injections shall not be placed in solid waste, feedstock or recyclable containers for
disposal. In addition, no article or bundle which by its nature constitutes a hazard to
the City employee will be collected.
6. Unflocked household Christmas trees may be set out as a part of regular solid
waste collection for a period not to exceed two weeks during the month of January. The
Public Services Director shall determine the schedule for Christmas tree collection.
Flocked trees will not be accepted for disposal.
7. Large household items which will not fit in collection containers or exceed the
40 pound weight limit or both, and unbundled brush and trees may be set out for
collection on a "special collection" basis. Special collections shall be made on a regular
basis. The Public Services Director shall determine the special collection schedule and
fees. Customers must contact the Public Services Department to arrange for special
collection.
8. In the event of City-wide tree damage due to ice storms, windstorms, or similar
events, the Public Services Director after consultation with the City Manager may
designate and provide notice of an appropriate time period for the separate collection
of unbundled trees and brush. Households may place unbundled trees, branches and
brush during this time period without having to contact the Public Services Department
or paying for a special collection.
9. Yard waste material, except for Christmas trees as provided in subsection 6 of
this section, will not be collected as part of weekly feedstock collection during the
months of December, January, and February. Yard waste during these months shall
either be collected on a special collection basis or the customer may haul and dispose
of the yard waste at the City compost facility. In the event of unusual weather
conditions, the Public Services Director may modify such schedule after consultation
with the City Manager.
105.06 DISPOSAL HIERARCHY.
1. Disposal of all solid waste, feedstock and/or recyclable materials shall
comply with the waste management hierarchy set out in Iowa Code § 455B.301A:
A. All materials that have been segregated by the generator for recycling
and/or reuse, for which a properly permitted facility that is accepting such
recyclable and/or reusable material is located within the planning area, shall
be delivered only to such facility;
B. All feedstock not disposed of pursuant to 105.06(1)(A) above shall be
delivered to a properly permitted facility that is accepting such feedstock for
purposes of combustion for energy recovery, combustion for waste disposal,
or creation of bio-fuel or bio-products, if such a facility is located within the
planning area;
C. All feedstock not disposed of pursuant to 105.06(l)(A) or (B) above
shall be delivered to a properly permitted facility that is accepting such
feedstock for purposes of combustion for waste disposal, if such a facility is
located within the planning area;
D. All material not disposed of pursuant to 105.06(1)(A), (B) or (C)
above shall be delivered to a properly permitted sanitary landfill located in
the planning area that is accepting solid waste for purposes of disposal and
landfilling.
2. Upon the request of any private hauler or hauler and upon good cause shown,
the City Council may allow delivery of solid waste, recyclable materials, feedstock
and/or yard waste to any properly permitted facility identified in 105.06(A), (B),
(C) or (D) above.
3. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit delivery of solid waste to a waste
disposal facility located outside of the State of Iowa.
105.07 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
1. Other than as set forth in 105.06, no person shall deposit solid waste,
recyclable materials, feedstock and/or yard waste for final disposal at any site other
than a State permitted solid waste disposal facility. Uncontaminated soil, brick,
concrete, sand and other similar inert excess or spoil materials from construction,
mining or reclamation sites may be deposited for final disposal or fill sites other
than State permitted solid waste disposal facilities so long as these disposals are in
conformance with applicable State regulations.
2. No person shall deposit, throw, keep or place any solid waste, feedstock,
recyclable material or yard waste on any public property or in any lane, alley, street
or other public place except as otherwise authorized within this chapter.
3. The raking of leaves or other yard waste onto City streets or alleys is
specifically prohibited.
105.08 LITTERING PROHIBITED. No person shall discard any litter onto or in any
water or land, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized
collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such
purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor vehicle shall
be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor
vehicle actually discarded the litter.
105.09 COLLECTION CONTAINERS.
1. Solid waste, feedstock and recyclable material collection containers shall be
provided for all residences, dwelling units, commercial and industrial
establishments within the City. Such containers shall be sufficient in number and
size to completely contain all solid waste, feedstock and recyclable material.
Garbage and recyclables shall be kept in watertight, disposable or reusable
containers with tight lids or closures.
2. Residential solid waste and feedstock collection containers for materials
other than yard waste and recyclable materials shall be made of corrugated metal or
plastic of the type approved by the Public Services Department, with tight-fitting
removable lids that are not permanently attached, covers or closures. Reusable
containers shall withstand temperatures to 50 degrees below zero Fahrenheit. The
containers shall not exceed in size 32 gallons liquid measure. Contents of reusable
containers shall be readily and fully removable by the solid waste collector and may
not extend above the lid area when placed at the curb. Container can weigh no more
than 40 pounds.
3. Yard waste collection containers shall comply with the following provisions:
A. The use of plastic bags for yard waste is prohibited.
B. Reusable containers shall be manufactured of corrugated metal or
plastic and shall not exceed in size 32 gallons liquid measure and shall not
have permanently attached lids or covers. Contents shall be readily and fully
removable by the solid waste collector. Reusable yard waste containers shall
be clearly marked with a legible letter "Y" or the words "Yard Waste"
legibly painted or otherwise imprinted or affixed to the outside of the
container. The "Y" must face the street when set out so it can be seen from
the collection vehicle. Container can weigh no more than 40 pounds.
C. Biodegradable Paper Bags. Grass clippings for curbside collection
may only be placed in biodegradable paper bags. Such biodegradable paper
bags shall not exceed in size 32 gallons liquid measure. The bags shall consist
of double-layered paper construction and shall be manufactured specifically
for the purpose of yard waste disposal. Each bag should be clearly imprinted
with a logo or other label indicating that it is biodegradable and suitable for
the containment of yard waste. The Public Services Director shall determine
the acceptability of paper bags used for yard waste material. Container can
weigh no more than 40 pounds. The City may require use of specially
manufactured and sold biodegradable paper bags, at its discretion.
4. Oil drums, lard cans, fiber barrels, corrugated cardboard boxes or containers
of less than 20 gallons liquid measure shall not be used as solid waste, feedstock,
yard waste, or recyclable material collection containers.
5. Solid waste, feedstock, yard waste and recyclable material containers used
by commercial and industrial establishments and multiple-family residential
dwellings shall be constructed as to completely contain waste within the base, walls
and cover. A cover shall be in place at all times.
6. Storage of collection containers shall be on private property. On collection
days, containers shall be placed in plain view at a point within two (2) feet of the
curb line. The Public Services Department may make exceptions for elderly or
disabled persons upon request to the Public Services Department. Material not
intended for collection shall not be kept on or near the curb. The City shall not be
responsible for any material not intended for collection, but so placed, which is
collected for disposal.
7. Yard waste containers shall be grouped and placed at the designated location
near the curb and separated from all other collection containers of materials by a
distance sufficient to allow easy recognition to assure separate collection.
8. All corrugated cardboard boxes shall be flattened and placed in or under the
recycling container and bundled in accordance with rules as established by the
Public Services Department. Such bundles may be bound with twine.
105.10 VEHICLE LICENSES.
1. Each vehicle used by a hauler and which is used to transfer solid waste,
feedstock, recyclable materials or yard waste within the City shall be licensed by
the City. Upon inspection and approval of the vehicle by the Public Services
Department, and upon payment of the designated annual license fee of thirty dollars
($30.00) to the Clerk, the Public Services Director shall issue a vehicle license. The
annual license fee shall be due on July 1. The license is not transferable from vehicle
to vehicle or hauler to hauler. The license sticker shall be affixed to the vehicle in
the appropriate location on the day of issue or within five (5) business days
thereafter.
2. Prior to issuance of a hauler license, a certificate of insurance must be
presented to the Public Services Director, along with information on the hauler
pertaining to the principals of the business, address, phone number and a signed
hold harmless agreement with the City, to protect and indemnify the City from any
and all claims, damages, causes of actions of whatever kind arising out of issuance
of a license to do business within the City.
3. Each applicant for a hauler license shall be the titleholder, lessee or principal
owner of the vehicle. Minimum equipment standards shall be:
A. The solid waste, feedstock, recyclable material or yard waste
containment area shall be so constructed as not to drop or eject materials
when the vehicle is in motion.
B. Tailgates shall be at least thirty (30) inches in height or one-half the
height of the sideboards, whichever is less. Tailgates shall at all times be in
good repair.
C. All vehicles shall be equipped or supplied with covers for the
containment area. Such covers shall be so constructed as to completely
contain the solid waste, feedstock, recyclable material and yard waste
payload within the containment area during all operations prior to unloading.
D. All vehicles shall have the name and phone number of the hauler
prominently displayed on the side of the truck in lettering not less than two
(2) inches in height.
105.11 PRIVATE HAULERS. Private haulers using cars, pickup trucks or utility
trailers shall contain and cover all loads securely. Private haulers using vehicles larger than
cars, pickup trucks or utility trailers shall use vehicles which meet all of the minimum
equipment standards for waste haulers.
105.12 TREE AND BRUSH HAULING. Trees, brush and all other woody herbaceous
materials shall be so contained as to not extend beyond the sideboards. Such materials may
be hauled without a tailgate so long as the complete load is secure when no tailgate is in
place. No materials shall extend beyond the containment area to the rear such that any
materials drag or make contact with the roadway.
105.13 RATES.
1. Base Rate. The base rate for material collection and disposal is $15.50 per
unit per month effective July 1, 2019. This base rate includes one container per
week, plus curbside recycling and yard waste collection. Every additional refuse
container must display a sticker in accordance with rules as established by the Public
Services Director. The cost of purchasing the sticker is $2.50 effective July 1, 2019.
Any container not properly tagged will not be collected by the City.
(Ord. 19-18 – Aug. 19 Supp.)
2. Payment of Bills. All fees are due and payable with and under the same terms
and conditions as payment for water service as established by the Utility Board of
Trustees. To the extent that the fees are billed as part of a combined service account,
utility services may be discontinued if the account becomes delinquent.
3. Lien for Nonpayment. The owner of the premises served and any lessee or
tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for solid waste, feedstock
and/or recyclable material collection and disposal. Fees remaining unpaid and
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by
the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property
taxes.
4. Home Occupations. Home occupations, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance,
may contract for private collection upon two weeks' written notice to the Public
Services Department. If municipal collection service is retained, the collection fee
shall be double the rate for a residential dwelling unit
5. Service Outside City Limits. Where property is located in the immediate
proximity of the City limits, but outside of the limits, the owner or occupant may
request in writing to the Public Services Director that the City collect solid waste,
feedstock, recyclable material and/or yard waste. The Public Services Director will
then determine whether the property is in such close proximity to existing collection
routes that the cost to the City for making the collection will not exceed the fees to
be collected. If the Public Services Director makes this finding, the Public Services
Director shall approve the application, and the rate charged to the property outside
the corporate limits will be one and one-half times the rate charged a similar
property inside the corporate limits.
6. Special Collections. Special collections shall be provided for a unit fee of
$40.00 for the first 15-minute interval required to make the collection and $40.00
for each additional 15 minutes as may be necessary to complete the collection. If
the special collection involves any materials for which the City will be charged an
additional or special landfill fee, then the billing for the special collection shall have
these additional or special fees added to the unit fee cost. If special collection
material is set out in cardboard boxes, an additional $10.00 fee will be assessed to
the collection cost. If a special collection is assessed a fine at the landfill, the fee for
the special collection shall include the cost of the fine. The department shall not
initiate a special collection without the payment of cash, check, or credit card of the
departments estimate of fees in advance of the collection. If the estimated amount
was not sufficient to cover the actual fees, the customer shall be billed for the
balance following the special collection. If the estimated amount paid was in excess
of the actual fees, the department shall promptly refund the balance to the customer.
(Ord. 19-18 – Aug. 19 Supp.)
7. Vacated Premises. In circumstances where the residential dwelling unit is
permanently vacated or unused for a period of not less than one hundred and eighty
(180) days, the Public Services Board may waive the collection fees charged based
on the circumstances of hardship attested to, provided the owner or agent of such
unit submits signed written request with supporting documentation setting forth the
relevant facts and it is approved by the Public Service Board.
(Ord. 15-14 – Aug. 15 Supp.)
8. False Statements. No person shall make an intentionally false, misleading,
incomplete or incorrect statement on any application or other written statement
provided for or referred to in the terms of this chapter.
9. The department is hereby authorized to sell or dispose of compost materials
and wood chips as follows:
A. Compost and uncolored wood chips to residential solid waste
customers - free of charge.
B. Compost $4.00 per cubic yard and wood chips $2.00 per cubic yard
to all others.
10. Commercial Service Rates. Upon approval by the Public Services Board, the
Public Services Department may provide for the collection of feedstock from
nonresidential generators. Rates for collection shall include provisions for a
furnished collection bin provided to the generator. Rates for monthly commercial
service collection are established as follows:
Residential Commercial $18.00 per month
Light Commercial $25.00 per month
Medium Commercial $35.00 per month
Heavy Commercial $55.00 per month
(Ord. 18-02 – May 18 Supp.)
105.14 ELDERLY OR DISABILITY EXEMPTION AND RATES.
1. A household shall be defined as "elderly or disabled" if all of the occupants
within the dwelling unit meet the following requirements:
A. The occupants are at least 65 years of age, or
B. The occupants are certified as permanently and totally disabled by the
Social Security Administration, the Veterans Administration, the State
Department of Social Welfare or a similar agency, and a copy of the written
certification is furnished to the Public Services Director. In the alternative,
the occupants must furnish a medical report from a medical doctor certifying
the occupants to be permanently and totally disabled.
2. Any customer who has been exempted from the requirements of placing
materials at the curb by reason of age or disability shall place the materials in plastic
bags and store them inside a reusable materials container in such a manner that will
allow the operator to pick up only the bags and carry them to the truck. All yard
waste shall be placed at curbside only. An application for an exemption shall remain
on file and upon approval shall remain in effect until the occupants move from the
dwelling unit.
3. (Repealed by Ord. 14-07 – Aug. 14 Supp.)
105.15 COMPLIANCE.
1. Refuse deposited and remaining on City property for a period longer than
twenty-four (24) hours may be removed by the City and the actual cost charged to
the adjoining property owner, including landfill tipping fees, personnel and
equipment, plus $50.00 administrative fee per occurrence.
2. Solid waste, feedstock, recyclable materials and/or yard waste that do not
comply with the provisions of this chapter or with regulations and rules promulgated
to implement and enforce this chapter may not be collected by the Public Services
Department. Under such circumstances, it is the responsibility of the generator to
take the materials to the Public Services Department for proper disposal in such
manner and at such time as may be prescribed by the Public Services Director, or
otherwise take such action so as to comply with this chapter and/or applicable
regulations and rules.
105.16 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH RULES. The Public Services Director is
authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations consistent with the provisions
of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall be presented for review and adoption by
the Public Services Board prior to implementation.
105.17 GARBAGE, REFUSE AND RUBBISH.
1. Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following terms, phrases,
words and their derivations shall have the meanings given as follows:
A. “Garbage” is putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
B. “Refuse” is all putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except
body waste), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles or parts thereof, and solid market and industrial
waste.
C. “Rubbish” is non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and non-combustible waste, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery, toys, and similar materials.
2. Removal. No person shall throw or deposit garbage, refuse or rubbish on any
occupied private property within the City whether owned by such person or not,
except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that the same will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk
or other public place or upon any other private property and additionally shall be
stored in a manner which will keep the premises sightly and shall not cause the same
to be a nuisance to the adjoining property and shall not have an adverse effect upon
the fair market value of the property or any adjacent property.
(Ch. 105 - Ord. 13-15 – Aug. 13 Supp.)
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
110.01 Franchise Granted 110.15 Franchise Fee Collection
110.02 State Code Restrictions and Limitations 110.16 Franchise Fee Shown Separately
110.03 Excavations and Restorations 110.17 Franchise Fee Remittance
110.04 Existing Facilities 110.18 Refund of Franchise Fee
110.05 Easements 110.19 Use of Franchise Fee
110.06 Street Usage 110.20 Notice of Franchise Fee Modification
110.07 System Plans and Maps 110.21 Administration Cost
110.08 Annual Planning Meeting 110.22 Annexed Property
110.09 Extension of System 110.23 Real Estate
110.10 Service Provided 110.24 Term
110.11 Continuous Service 110.25 Severability
110.12 Non-Exclusive 110.26 Publication Expense
110.13 Franchise Fee Billing 110.27 Entire Agreement
110.14 Franchise Fee Exception
110.01 FRANCHISE GRANTED. There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy
Company, an Iowa corporation, (hereinafter called “Company,)” and to its successors
and assigns the right and non-exclusive franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain
and operate in the City of Marion, Iowa, (hereinafter called the “City,)” a gas
distribution system, to furnish natural gas along, under and upon the right-of-way,
streets, avenues, alleys and public places to serve customers within and without the City
and to furnish and sell natural gas to the City and its inhabitants. For the term of this
franchise, the Company is granted the right of eminent domain, the exercise of which is
subject to City Council approval upon application by the Company. This franchise shall
be effective for a twenty (20) years from and after written acceptance by the Company,
subject to a right of renegotiation at the end of the 10th and 15th years.
110.02 STATE CODE RESTRICTIONS AND LIMITATIONS. The rights and
privileges hereby granted are subject to the restrictions and limitations of Chapter 364
of the Code of Iowa 2019, or as subsequently amended or changed.
110.03 EXCAVATIONS AND RESTORATIONS. Company shall have the right
to excavate in any public street for the purpose of laying, relaying, repairing or
extending gas pipes, mains, conduits, and other facilities provided that the same shall
be so placed as not to unreasonably interfere with any above or below-ground utility
services or facilities which have been or may hereafter be located by or under authority
of the City.
In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys and public places for the
installation of gas pipes, conduits or apparatus, the Company shall protect the site while
work is in progress by guards, barriers, or signals, shall not unreasonably obstruct the
use of the streets, and shall replace the surface, restoring it to the condition as existed
immediately prior to excavation. Company agrees any replacement of road surface shall
conform to current City code regarding its depth and composition. The Company shall
not be required to restore or modify public right of way, sidewalks or other areas in or
adjacent to the Company project to a condition superior to its immediate previously
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
existing condition or to a condition exceeding its previously existing condition except
to the extent any alterations are required for the City to comply with city, state or federal
rules, regulations or laws. The Company shall make all such restorations in a reasonable
amount of time following completion of the work, and shall not cause any undue delay
that is not caused by weather, fire, natural disaster, unavoidable accidents or casualties.
The City may at its discretion assign personnel for inspection of excavation and related
work being performed by the company.
110.04 EXISTING FACILITIES.
1. Whenever the City shall pave or repave any street or shall change the
grade line of any street or public place or shall construct or reconstruct any
conduit, water main service or water connection, sewer or other Municipal
public works or utility, it shall be the duty of the company, when so ordered by
the City, to change its mains, services and other property in the streets or other
public places at its own expense so as to conform to the established grade or line
of such street or public place and so as not to interfere with the conduits, sewers,
Municipal public works or utilities, and other mains so constructed or
reconstructed. However, the company shall not be required to relocate pipes,
mains and appurtenances when the street, alley or public grounds, in which they
are located, is vacated for the convenience of abutting property owners and not
as an incident to a public improvement, unless the reasonable cost of such
relocation and the loss and expense resulting therefrom is first paid to the
company by the abutting property owners. In the case of public improvements,
including, but not limited to, urban renewal projects, the City may require the
company to relocate pipes, mains, services and appurtenances in the streets at
company's expense.
2. The City may at its discretion assign personnel for inspection of
excavation and related work being performed by the company. Should the
company fail or refuse to do and perform the things provided in this chapter, the
City may, after reasonable notice, perform the work and charge the reasonable
and necessary expense thereof to the company and the company shall promptly
pay said charges.
3. In the event the company is required to move, remove or modify the
placement of any of its facilities located within the City because of any public
improvement or public purposes of the City, the company shall do so at its own
expenses as directed by the City. In planning for the extension or modification
of streets and roads, the City shall, to the extent practicable in the discretion of
City Staff, design such changes to limit the need for the relocation of company
facilities.
4. The City may require the company for the purposes of facilitating the
construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the street, avenue, rightof-
way or alley, public places or grounds in accord with the ordinances of the
City at the company's cost and expense in accordance with Iowa law, including
company's tariff on file with and made effective by the Iowa Utilities Board as
may subsequently be amended, to construct, replace, repair, locate and relocate
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
its existing facilities or equipment in, on, over or under any public street, avenue,
right-of-way, alley, public places or grounds in the City in such a manner as the
City may reasonably require, except the company shall not be required to
construct, replace, repair, locate and relocate existing facilities where company
facilities are located in private easements (whether titled in the company or other
entities) unless said private easement is upon land owned by the City.
5. If the City orders or requests the company to relocate its existing
facilities or equipment for any reason other than as specified above, or as the
result of the initial request of a commercial or other nonpublic development, the
company shall receive payment for the cost of such relocation as a precondition
to relocating its existing facilities or equipment.
6. The City shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its public
works projects so as not arbitrarily to cause the company unreasonable
additional expense in exercising its authority under this section. The City shall
also provide a reasonable alternative location for the company's facilities as part
of its relocation request.
7. In the event of a relocation, all facilities and/or equipment shall be
relocated or replaced in a manner and to locations consistent with in accordance
with all chapters of the Marion City Code of Ordinances, all applicable state and
local codes and ordinances, and any policies or standards adopted by the City of
Marion.
110.05 EASEMENTS. The City shall give the Company reasonable advance written
notice to vacate a public right-of-way. Vacating a public right-of-way shall not deprive
the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing facilities, until the reasonable
cost of relocating the same are paid to the Company, and the City shall utilize reasonable
efforts to assist Company in securing an easement or other continued rights of record to
continue to operate and maintain its facilities upon such relocation.
110.06 STREET USAGE.
1. The City reserves to itself the power to impose reasonable regulations on
the company's use of streets. The Company Will notify the City and obtain a
permit before performing work in the right of way.
2. In the use of right-of-way under this franchise, the company shall be
subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions and ordinances now or
hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City in the reasonable exercise of its
police power. In addition, the company shall be subject to all rules, regulations,
policies, resolutions, and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated
by the City relating to permits, sidewalk and pavement cuts, utility location,
construction coordination, screening, and other requirements on the use of the
right-of-way; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall constitute
a waiver of or be construed as waiving the right of the company to oppose,
challenge, or seek judicial review of, in such manner as is now or may hereafter
be provided by law, any such rules, regulation, policy, resolution, and ordinance
proposed, adopted, or promulgated by the City. Further, the company shall
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
comply with all Federal, State, and local laws, ordinances and policies relating
to the location of gas service lines, facilities, and other improvements.
3. The Company understands that for aspects of above ground facilities that
are not related directly to the generation and distribution of natural gas, there
may be zoning or other ordinances and standards which apply to all developers
within an area of the City, including requirements related to design or other
aesthetics, public safety, or coordination with public improvements. The
Company agrees to abide by these ordinances and standards to the extent they
do not unreasonably interfere with the Company’s ability to carry out its
ordinary and necessary business functions or place undue burdens on the
Company. The City and the Company agree to work with one another to ensure
that the interests of both entities are protected.
4. The City encourages the conservation of right-of-way by the sharing of
space by all utilities. Notwithstanding provision of this franchise prohibiting
third party use, to the extent required by Federal or State law, the company will
permit any other franchised entity by appropriate contract or agreement
negotiated by the parties to use any and all facilities constructed or erected by
the company.
110.07 SYSTEM PLANS AND MAPS.
1. Upon reasonable request, the Company shall provide the City, on a
project specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location, relative to
boundaries of the right of way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it
has control that is located in the public right of way, including documents, maps
and other information in paper or electronic or other forms (“Information”).
2. The company and City recognize that the information provided under
subsections 1 above may in whole or part be considered a confidential record
under State or Federal law or both. The Company and City recognize the
Information may in whole or part be considered a confidential record under state
or federal law or both. Upon receipt of a request from a third party for
information concerning information about the Company’s facilities within the
City, the City will promptly submit same to Company. If the Company believes
any of the information requested constitutes a trade secret which may otherwise
be protected from public disclosure by state or federal law, or otherwise exempt
from disclosure under the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Critical Energy Infrastructure
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
requirements pursuant to 18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, or Chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa,
as such statutes and regulations may be amended from time to time, then the Company
shall provide the City with a written explanation of the basis for such assertion of
confidentiality or exemption from disclosure within ten (10) days. In the event the company
fails to take any such action within ten (10) business days after receipt of such notice, the
City may disclose the documents or information without any liability of any kind to the
company. (Ord. 17-18, 5-21-2018)
110.08 ANNUAL PLANNING MEETING. Company operations staff will, at the request of
the City, attend an annual meeting with City staff, utility staff and other interested city entities to
discuss utility reliability standards, including comparisons to regional and national reliability
statistics, annual and long-term construction planning for the Company and City, tree trimming
plans and other related items. This will not replace any periodic meetings needed on specific
projects and issues.
110.09 EXTENSION OF SYSTEM. The Company shall extend its mains and pipes and
operate, and maintain the system in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities
Board or its successors and Iowa law.
110.10 SERVICE PROVIDED. During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish
natural gas in the quantity and quality consistent and in accordance with the applicable regulations
of the Iowa Utilities Board and the Company’s tariff made effective by the Iowa Utilities Board or
its successors and Iowa law.
110.11 CONTINUOUS SERVICE. Service to be rendered by the Company under this
franchise shall be continuous unless prevented from doing so by fire, acts of God, unavoidable
accidents or casualties, or reasonable interruptions necessary to properly service the Company's
equipment, and in such event service shall be resumed as quickly as is reasonably possible.
110.12 NON-EXCLUSIVE. The Franchise granted by this Ordinance shall not be exclusive.
110.13 FRANCHISE FEE BILLING. There is hereby imposed a franchise fee of four percent
(4%) upon the gross revenue generated from sales of natural gas by the Company within the
corporate limits of the City.
110.14 FRANCHISE FEE EXCEPTION. The franchise fee shall not be applied to any
account for the City of Marion or the City of Marion Water Department.
110.15 FRANCHISE FEE COLLECTION. The Company shall begin collecting the franchise
fee within 90 days of final approval of the city council of Marion and within statutory
requirements.
110.16 FRANCHISE FEE SHOWN SEPARATELY. The amount of the franchise fee shall
be shown separately on the utility bill to each customer.
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
110.17 FRANCHISE FEE REMITTANCE. The Company shall remit franchise fee receipts
to the City no more frequently than on or before the last business day of the month following each
calendar year quarter.
110.18 REFUND OF FRANCHISE FEE. The Company shall not, under any circumstances
be required to return or refund any franchise fees that have been collected from customers and
remitted to the City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or information in defense
of the City's imposition of franchise fees or the Company is required to assist the City in identifying
customers or calculating any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers the City
shall reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by the Company to provide such data or
information.
110.19 USE OF FRANCHISE FEE. The City shall be solely responsible for the proper use of
any amounts collected as franchise fees, and shall only use such fees as collected for a purpose as
allowed by applicable law.
110.20 NOTICE OF FRANCHISE FEE MODIFICATION. The City shall give the
Company reasonable, not less than 6 months, notice prior to the request to adjust the franchise fee
percentage to be collected pursuant to this Ordinance. The City agrees not to modify the amount
more than one time in a two-year period.
110.21 ADMINISTRATION COST. The costs of franchise fee administration are not charged
directly to the City. The City and Company agree that the Company may charge an administration
fee as in an amount not to exceed the limitation provided for in state statute.
110.22 ANNEXED PROPERTY. The City Clerk shall provide written notification by certified
mail to any officer of the Company or designee of any final order authorizing annexation or other
change in corporate limits of the City, and the Company shall apply the franchise fee to its
customers affected by the annexation or change in corporate limits, commencing on an agreed
date, which is not less than ninety (90) days from the receipt of the certified notice. The City shall
include with the notice a list of any utility accounts exempt from the franchise fee within the
annexed area.
110.23 REAL ESTATE. In the event that the Company has or acquires any interest in real estate
within the city or within two (2) miles of the corporate boundaries at that time, for which the
Company intends to sell or transfer to a third party, not to include any successors in interest,
subsidiaries, or future entities of the Company, the Company shall provide the City with notice of
said transaction. The City shall have the right for ninety (90) days to enter into a contract for the
sale or transfer of said property under the same terms contained in the proposed contract with the
third party. The failure of the City to respond within ninety (90) days shall be deemed as a refusal
by the City, unless the parties otherwise agree.
110.24 TERM. The term of the franchise granted by this Ordinance and the rights granted
thereunder shall continue for the period of twenty (20) years from and after written acceptance by
the Company, subject to a right of renegotiation at the end of the 10th and 15th years. The
acceptance shall be filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days from passage of this Ordinance.
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
110.25 SEVERABILITY. If any section or provision of this ordinance is held invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of any other provisions of this
ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or portions and to this end each
section and provision of this ordinance is severable.
110.26 PUBLICATION EXPENSE. The expense of the publication of this Ordinance shall be
paid by the Company.
110.27 ENTIRE AGREEMENT. This Ordinance sets forth and constitutes the entire
agreement between the Company and the City with respect to the rights contained herein, and may
not be supplemented, superseded, modified or otherwise amended without the written approval
and acceptance of the Company. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the City enact
or maintain any Ordinance or place any limitations, either operationally or through the assessment
of fees other than those approved and accepted by the Company within this Ordinance, that create
additional burdens upon the Company, or which delay utility operations.
(Ch. 110 - Ord. 19-07 – May 19 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
- 539 -
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
(INTERSTATE POWER & LIGHT COMPANY)
111.01 Franchise Granted 111.16 Future Agreements
111.02 Construction; Maintenance; Indemnification 111.17 Franchise Fee Billing
111.03 Excavations 111.18 Franchise Fee Exception
111.04 Existing Facilities 111.19 Franchise Fee Collection
111.05 Easements 111.20 Franchise Fee Shown Separately
111.06 System Plans and Maps 111.21 Franchise Fee Remittance
111.07 Annual Planning Meeting 111.22 Refund of Franchise Fee
111.08 Tree Maintenance 111.23 Use of Franchise Fee
111.09 Service Provided 111.24 Notice of Franchise Fee Modification
111.10 Undergrounding 111.25 Administration Cost
111.11 Continuous Service 111.26 Annexed Property
111.12 City Use of Company Facilities 111.27 Term
111.13 Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy 111.28 Severability
111.14 Streetlights 111.29 Publication Expense
111.15 Non-Exclusive 111.30 Entire Agreement
111.01 FRANCHISE GRANTED. There is hereby granted to Interstate Power and
Light Company hereinafter referred to as the "Company," its successors and assigns, the
right and non-exclusive franchise to acquire, construct, reconstruct, erect, maintain and
operate in the City, works and plants for the manufacture and generation of electricity
and a distribution system for electric light, heat and power and the right to erect and
maintain the necessary poles, lines, wires, conduits and other appliances for the
distribution of electric current along, under and upon the streets, alleys and public places
in the said City to supply individuals, corporations, communities, and municipalities
both inside and outside of said City with electric light, heat and power for the period of
twenty-five (25) years, subject to a right of cancellation at the end of the 20th year; also
the right of eminent domain as provided in Section 364.2 of the Code of Iowa.
111.02 CONSTRUCTION; MAINTENANCE; INDEMNIFICATION. The
poles, lines, wires, circuits, and other appliances shall be placed and maintained so as
not to unnecessarily interfere with the travel on said streets, alleys, and public places in
said City nor unnecessarily interfere with the proper use of the same, including ordinary
drainage, or with the sewers, underground pipe and other property of the City. The said
Company, its successors and assigns shall hold the City free and harmless from all
damages to the extent arising from the negligent acts or omissions of the Company in
the erection or maintenance of said system.
111.03 EXCAVATIONS. In making any excavations in any street, alley, or public
place, Company, its successors and assigns, shall protect the site while work is in
progress by guards, barriers or signals, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of the
streets, and shall back fill all openings in such manner as to prevent settling or
depressions in surface, pavement or sidewalk of such excavations with same materials,
restoring the condition as nearly as practical. The Company shall not be required to
restore or modify public right of way, sidewalks or other areas in or adjacent to the
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
(INTERSTATE POWER & LIGHT COMPANY)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
- 540 -
Company project to a condition superior to its immediate previously existing condition.
The Company shall make all such restorations in a reasonable amount of time following
completion of the work, and shall not cause any undue delay that is not caused by
weather, fire, natural disaster, unavoidable accidents or casualties.
111.04 EXISTING FACILITIES. The Company shall, in accordance with Iowa law
including Company’s tariff on file with and made effective by the Iowa Utilities Board
as may subsequently be amended, at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its existing
facilities or equipment in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the City in such
a manner as the City may at any time reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating
the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the street or alley or any
public improvement of, in or about any such street or alley or reasonably promoting the
efficient operation of any such improvement. If the City requires the Company to
relocate facilities in the public right of way that have been relocated at Company
expense at the direction of the City during the previous five years, the reasonable costs
of such relocation will be paid by the City. If the City orders or requests the Company
to relocate its existing facilities or equipment for any reason other than as specified
above, or as the result of the initial request of a commercial or private developer or other
non-public entity, the Company shall receive payment for the cost of such relocation as
a precondition to relocating its existing facilities or equipment. The City shall consider
reasonable alternatives in designing its public works projects so as not arbitrarily to
cause the Company unreasonable additional expense in exercising its authority under
this section. The City shall also provide a reasonable alternative location for the
Company’s facilities as part of its relocation request.
The City understands that the Company will be bound to relocate or replace any
facilities in compliance with the Iowa Utilities Board regulations, the Company’s
Tariffs, and all applicable Federal and State codes. The Company understands that for
aspects of facilities that are not related directly to the generation and distribution of
electricity, there may be zoning or other ordinances and standards which apply to all
developers within an area of the City. The Company agrees to abide by these ordinances
and standards to the extent they do not unreasonably interfere with the Company’s
ability to carry out its ordinary and necessary business functions or place undue burdens
on the Company. The City and the Company agree to work with one another to ensure
that the interests of both entities are protected.
111.05 EASEMENTS. Prior to the City abandoning or vacating any street, avenue,
alley or public ground where the Company has electric facilities, the City shall grant the
Company a utility easement for said facilities. If the City does not grant the Company
a utility easement for said facilities prior to abandoning or vacating a street, avenue,
alley or public place, the City shall at its cost and expense obtain easements for existing
Company facilities.
111.06 SYSTEM PLANS AND MAPS. Upon reasonable request, and to the extent
Company keeps such information in the ordinary course of business, the Company shall
provide the City, on a project specific basis, information indicating the horizontal
location, relative to boundaries of the right of way, of all equipment which it owns or
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
(INTERSTATE POWER & LIGHT COMPANY)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
- 541 -
over which it has control that is located in the public right of way, including documents,
maps and other information in paper or electronic or other forms (“Information”). The
Company and City recognize the Information may in whole or part be considered a
confidential record under state or federal law or both. Upon receipt of a request from a
third party for information concerning information about the Company’s facilities
within the City, the City will promptly submit same to Company. If the Company
believes any of the information requested constitutes a trade secret which may otherwise
be protected from public disclosure by state or federal law, or otherwise exempt from
disclosure under the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission Critical Energy Infrastructure requirements pursuant to 18
CFR 388.112 and 388.113, or Chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa, as such statutes and
regulations may be amended from time to time, then the Company shall provide the City
with a written explanation of the basis for such assertion of confidentiality or exemption
from disclosure within ten (10) days.
111.07 ANNUAL PLANNING MEETING. Company operations staff will, at the
request of the City, attend an annual meeting with City Public Works staff, utility staff
and other interested city entities to discuss utility reliability standards, including
comparisons to regional and national reliability statistics, annual and long-term
construction planning for the Company and City, tree trimming plans and other related
items. This will not replace any periodic meetings needed on specific projects and
issues.
111.08 TREE MAINTENANCE. The Company is authorized and empowered to
prune or remove at Company expense any tree extending into any street, alley or public
grounds to maintain electric reliability, safety, to restore utility service and to prevent
limbs, branches or trunks from interfering with the wires and facilities of the Company.
The pruning and removal of trees shall be performed in accordance with Company’s
then current line clearance vegetation plan as filed and approved by the Iowa Utilities
Board, as well as all applicable codes and standards referenced therein.
111.09 SERVICE PROVIDED. During the term of this franchise, the Company
shall furnish electric energy in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa
Utilities Board and the Company’s tariffs. The Company will maintain compliance with
Iowa Utilities Board regulatory standards for reliability.
111.10 UNDERGROUNDING. When Company intends to replace, upgrade, or
install new lines overhead, the City may request estimates for the undergrounding of
such replacement lines, upgrades or new lines, including lines to be adjusted for road
moves, for specific projects addressed at the annual planning meeting, as referenced in
Section 111.06. When requested, the Company will provide to the City two estimates:
1) an estimate for the cost of the project with overhead construction and 2) an estimate
for the cost of the project with underground construction. The City will have no more
than 60 days from the estimate date to determine if it wants the line built overhead or
placed underground. If the City chooses underground construction for the project, the
City or the Company’s customers within the City will be responsible for the incremental
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
(INTERSTATE POWER & LIGHT COMPANY)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
- 542 -
cost of undergrounding, defined as the differential between the estimate for
underground construction and the estimate for overhead construction. Within a
reasonable period of time after receipt of the payment for the incremental cost of
undergrounding, the Company will install the underground facilities. The Company
reserves the right to bill for the amount that the incremental cost associated with
installation exceeds its estimate. The City reserves the right to a refund of overpayment
if the incremental costs are less than the amount billed in the estimate. If the City wishes
to have a line not scheduled for replacement or upgrade placed underground, the City
shall contact the Company to make such a request. The City or the Company’s
customers within the city shall cover all costs related to this work. If undergrounding of
distribution or service lines requires customers of the Company to make adjustments to
customer-owned electrical systems, the City bears the responsibility of communication
with those customers and, if it chooses, the cost of converting the customer's utility
entrance from overhead to underground. The Company reserves the right to review all
of the City's communications with its customers. The City may elect to have the
Company bill the City directly or bill the Company’s customers within the City’s
boundaries for any costs attributable to the City under this section or any other
applicable sections as provided in the Company’s Government Facilities Relocation
Rider.
111.11 CONTINUOUS SERVICE. Service to be rendered by the Company under
this franchise shall be continuous unless prevented from doing so by fire, acts of God,
unavoidable accidents or casualties, or reasonable interruptions necessary to properly
service the Company's equipment, and in such event service shall be resumed as quickly
as is reasonably possible.
111.12 CITY USE OF COMPANY FACILITIES. The Company, upon request of
the City, and without cost to it, shall permit its poles, conduits and other distribution
facilities, so far as may be done without interfering with the free use its own wires and
fixtures, to be used for the purpose of maintaining thereon any control wires and other
appurtenances which may be necessary for any use by the City. The City shall defend,
indemnify, and hold the Company harmless from any and all causes of action for injury,
litigation or damages which may arise out of or by reason of the placing or maintenance
of such control wires and other appurtenances by the City upon facilities of the
Company, provided such causes of action did not arise out of the negligence of the
Company. Such control wires and other appurtenances shall meet all applicable codes,
rules and regulations that may be in effect. Specifically, all installations of said wires
and appurtenances shall be conditioned upon compliance with the safety rules of
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
(INTERSTATE POWER & LIGHT COMPANY)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
- 543 -
the Company, as well as the requirements of the National Electric safety Code (NESC) or other
safety requirements as adopted by the Iowa Utilities Board under 199 IAC Chapter 25. If the
Company has a need for space utilized by the City, including conduits, the City will, within a
reasonable period of time, remove said control wires and appurtenances or will, at its own cost,
provide the Company with a reasonable alternative location, that similarly allows expansion of the
electrical distribution system serving the electric customers, without disrupting Company
operations.
111.13 ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE ENERGY. The Company will
provide to the City energy efficiency materials and rebate forms for display in the building permit
department and other City departments as requested by the City. The Company will participate in
neighborhood and community events, when possible, and upon a request from the City or
neighborhood organization, to encourage City residents to utilize the Company’s energy efficiency
programs.
111.14 STREETLIGHTS. If the City would at any time desire to purchase the Company's
street lights located within the City, the Company agrees to negotiate the sale of such street lights.
The terms and conditions of such a sale will include that the street lights will be purchased at a
mutually agreed price and on an as is, where is basis. Upon sale, City shall assume all risk and loss
related to the operation and maintenance of the purchased street lighting. Any agreement will
require the City to purchase all street lights in the corporate limits of the City that are owned by
the Company.
111.15 NON-EXCLUSIVE. The Franchise granted by this Ordinance shall not be exclusive.
111.16 FUTURE AGREEMENTS. The Company, upon request of the City, shall explore with
the City agreements that are mutually beneficial, and economically feasible to both parties, for
interconnection of alternative energy electrical facilities, use of facilities and purchase of excess
alternatively produced power, in a timely manner, adhering to all Federal, State or local codes,
rules and regulations in effect at the time of agreement. The Company will work with the City for
fair regulatory treatment of such projects. Agreements are subject to generation reliability
requirements.
111.17 FRANCHISE FEE BILLING. There is hereby imposed a franchise fee of four percent
(4%) upon the gross revenue generated from sales of electricity by the Company within the
corporate limits of the City.
111.18 FRANCHISE FEE EXCEPTION. The franchise fee shall not be applied to any
account for the City of Marion or the City of Marion Water Department.
111.19 FRANCHISE FEE COLLECTION. The Company shall begin collecting the franchise
fee upon receipt of written approval of the required tax rider tariff from the Iowa Utilities Board.
111.20 FRANCHISE FEE SHOWN SEPARATELY. The amount of the franchise fee shall
be shown separately on the utility bill to each customer.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
(INTERSTATE POWER & LIGHT COMPANY)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
- 544 -
111.21 FRANCHISE FEE REMITTANCE. The Company shall remit franchise fee receipts
to the City no more frequently than on or before the last business day of the month following each
calendar year quarter.
111.22 REFUND OF FRANCHISE FEE. The Company shall not, under any circumstances
be required to return or refund any franchise fees that have been collected from customers and
remitted to the City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or information in defense
of the City's imposition of franchise fees or the Company is required to assist the City in identifying
customers or calculating any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers the City
shall reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by the Company to provide such data or
information.
111.23 USE OF FRANCHISE FEE. The City shall be solely responsible for the proper use of
any amounts collected as franchise fees, and shall only use such fees as collected for a purpose as
allowed by applicable law.
111.24 NOTICE OF FRANCHISE FEE MODIFICATION. The City shall give the
Company reasonable, not less than 6 months, notice prior to the request to adjust the franchise fee
percentage to be collected pursuant to this Ordinance. The City agrees not to modify the amount
more than one time in a two-year period.
111.25 ADMINISTRATION COST. The costs of franchise fee administration are not charged
directly to the City. The City and Company agree that the Company may charge an administration
fee as in an amount not to exceed the limitation provided for in state statute.
111.26 ANNEXED PROPERTY. The City Clerk shall provide written notification by certified
mail to the Company’s Real Estate and Right of Way Department of any final order authorizing
annexation or other change in corporate limits of the City, and the Company shall apply the
franchise fee to its customers affected by the annexation or change in corporate limits,
commencing on an agreed date, which is not less than ninety (90) days from the receipt of the
certified notice. The City shall include with the notice a list of any utility accounts exempt from
the franchise fee within the annexed area.
111.27 TERM. The term of the franchise granted by this Ordinance and the rights granted
thereunder shall continue for the period of twenty-five (25) years from and after written acceptance
by the Company, subject to a right of cancellation at the end of the 20th year. The acceptance shall
be filed with the City Clerk within ninety (90) days from passage of this Ordinance.
111.28 SEVERABILITY. If any section or provision of this ordinance is held invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of any other provisions of this
ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or portions and to this end each
section and provision of this ordinance is severable.
111.29 PUBLICATION EXPENSE. The expense of the publication of this Ordinance shall be
paid by the Company.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
(INTERSTATE POWER & LIGHT COMPANY)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
- 545 -
111.30 ENTIRE AGREEMENT. This Ordinance sets forth and constitutes the entire
agreement between the Company and the City with respect to the rights contained herein, and may
not be supplemented, superseded, modified or otherwise amended without the written approval
and acceptance of the Company. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the City enact
or maintain any Ordinance or place any limitations, either operationally or through the assessment
of fees other than those approved and accepted by the Company within this Ordinance, that create
additional burdens upon the Company, or which delay utility operations.
(Ch. 111 - Ord. 19-08 – May 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
CHAPTER 112
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
112.01 Definitions 112.19 Channel Capacity, Excess and Picture Quality
112.02 Qualifications of Grantee and Grant of Authority 112.20 Interconnection
112.03 Franchise Terms 112.21 City Rights
112.04 Continuity of Service Mandatory 112.22 Activities Prohibited
112.05 Right to Require Removal Upon Expiration 112.23 Payments to the City
112.06 Resolution of Disputes 112.24 Records and Reports
112.07 Compliance with Laws, Regulations 112.25 Subscriber Rates and Charges
and Ordinances 112.26 Local Office; Complaint Procedures
112.08 Liability and Indemnification 112.27 Protection of Privacy
112.09 Bond 112.28 Additional Regulations
112.10 Penalties to Company for Violation 112.29 Penalties
112.11 System Construction, Maintenance and Procedure 112.30 Program Content Restrictions
112.12 Construction Schedule 112.31 Employment Requirement
112.13 Line Extensions 112.32 Scheduled Reevaluation
112.14 Compliance with Standard 112.33 Changes and Amendments
112.15 Company Rules and Regulations 112.34 Binding on Company
112.16 Subscriber Rights 112.35 Access Requirements
112.17 Approval of Transfer 112.36 Company Accounts
112.18 Compliance with FCC Rules and Regulations 112.37 Most Favored Nations
112.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:
1. “Cable television system” or “system” means all goods, wires, cables,
conduits, manholes, fixtures, equipment, attachments and all appurtenances thereto
which are used in the construction, operation and maintenance of the cable
television franchise or which receive and amplify signals broadcast by one or more
television and/or radio stations and which transmit programming originated by the
system itself or by another party, and distribute such signals and programming by
wire, cable or other means to persons who subscribe to such service.
2. “Company” means Cox Cable Cedar Rapids, Inc. an Iowa corporation, and
its lawful successors and assigns, the grantee of rights under this chapter.
3. “Federal Communications Commission” or “FCC” means the federal
agency constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended.
4. “Goods” means all things which are moveable whether or not attached to
realty.
5. “Gross revenues” means all revenue derived or produced from or in
connection with or related to, directly or indirectly, to the operation of the system
within the City by the Company or its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents or any person
which the Company has a financial interest from or in connection with the
operation of the system within the City with no deductions whatsoever.
6. “Pay cable” means the delivery of programming to subscribers for a fee or
charge, in addition to a basic service charge, or a per-channel, per-program or
other subscription basis.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
7. “Person” means an individual, corporation, government or governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association or
any other legal entity.
8. “Subscriber” means a person owning or leasing television receiving goods
which are physically wired to receive any transmission from the system or a
purchaser or any service delivered over the system.
112.02 QUALIFICATIONS OF GRANTEE AND GRANT OF AUTHORITY. This
chapter, which grants to the Company the nonexclusive right to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system in the City, was passed and adopted by the Council
after a public hearing. The hearing was held after public notice was given and the notice
afforded all interested parties the opportunity to comment upon the legal, character,
financial, technical and other qualifications of the Company. The City hereby grants to
the Company a nonexclusive franchise, right and privilege to construct, erect, operate,
modify and maintain in, upon, along, across, above and over and under highways, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and in all
extensions thereof and additions thereto, in the City, necessary for the construction,
maintenance and operation within the City of a cable television system for the purpose of
distributing television and radio signals and other electronic impulses in order to furnish
television and radio programs and various communications and other electronic services
to the public. This grant includes the right to use and occupy streets, alleys, public ways
and public places and all manner of easements for the purpose and in the manner set
forth. The City specifically reserves the right to grant additional franchises to any person
at any time.
112.03 FRANCHISE TERMS. The franchise granted herein may be renewed by the
Council upon application of the Company pursuant to the procedures established in this
section, and in accordance with the then existing rules of the FCC and applicable law.
The franchise granted to the Company shall terminate on July 31, 2008. At least 13
months prior to the expiration of the franchise, the Company shall inform the Council in
writing of its intent to seek renewal of the franchise. Upon termination of the franchise,
the City, at its election and upon payment to the Company of a price equal to the fair
market value of the system, shall have the right to purchase and take over the system. If
the City and Company are unable to agree as to the fair market value of the system, the
same shall be arbitrated as set forth in Section 112.06 of this chapter. The fair market
value of the system shall not include an evaluation of good will or an evaluation of any
right of privilege appertaining to it under the franchise. Upon the exercise of this option
by the City and its service of a notice of such action upon the Company and upon
payment of the purchase price, the Company shall immediately transfer to the City
possession and title to all of the system, free of any and all liens and encumbrances not
agreed to be assumed by the City and the Company shall execute such warranty deeds,
bills of sale, of other conveyances to the City as shall be necessary for this purpose. The
Company shall make it a condition of each contract entered into by it with reference to its
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
operation of the system under the franchise that the contracts shall be subject to the
exercise of this option, in the event of purchase by the City or by some other person with
the approval of the City, or any person operating the system on a temporary basis in
cooperation with the City or with a representative appointed by the City. After the
Council has received notice in writing of the Company’s intent to seek renewal of the
franchise granted herein, the Council shall, after giving public notice, proceed to
determine whether the operator has satisfactorily performed the obligations under the
franchise. To determine satisfactory performance, the Council shall consider technical
developments and performance of the system, programming, other services offered, costs
of services, any other particular requirements set in this chapter and shall also consider
the Company’s annual reports made to the City and the FCC. Industry performance on a
national basis shall also be considered. Provisions shall be made for public comment. A
four month period shall be provided to determine the Company’s eligibility for renewal.
Council shall then prepare within two months any amendments to this chapter that it
believes necessary. If the Council finds the Company’s performance satisfactory, a new
franchise may be granted pursuant to this chapter, as amended, for a period of fifteen (15)
years. In the event the current Company is determined by the Council to have performed
unsatisfactorily, new applicants shall be sought and evaluated and a franchise award shall
be made by the Council according to franchising procedures adopted by the Council.
112.04 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY. It is the right of all
subscribers to receive all available services insofar as their financial and other obligations
to the Company are honored. In the event that the Company elects to overbuild, rebuild,
modify or sell the system, or the City terminates or fails to renew the franchise, or the
City elects to purchase the system, the Company shall do everything in its power to
insure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of
circumstances. In the event of purchase by the City or a change of Company, the current
Company shall cooperate with the City to operate the system for a temporary period in
maintaining continuing of service to all subscribers. In the event the Company fails to
operate the cable television system for five (5) consecutive days without prior approval of
the Council, except for strikes, acts of God, or other circumstances beyond the control of
the Company, the City or its agents shall operate the cable television system until such
time that the Company again operates the system or until a new operator is selected, in
the event of revocation. If the City is required to fulfill this obligation for the Company,
the Company shall reimburse the City for any costs or damages that are the result of the
Company ’s failure to perform.
112.05 RIGHT TO REQUIRE REMOVAL UPON EXPIRATION. At the
expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its termination and
cancellation, as provided for herein, the City shall have the right to require the Company
to remove at its own expense all portions of the cable television system from all streets
within the City and the Company shall restore said streets to a condition reasonably
satisfactory to the City.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
112.06 RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES. It is the intent of the City to provide for the
orderly resolution of any controversy or dispute between the Company and the City
arising out of the enforcement or interpretation of any section or provision of this chapter,
or any rule, regulation or procedure relating to cable communication matters. Fact
finding and mediation shall be the means of resolving the great majority of such
controversies or disputes. Only those matters specifically designated as arbitrable may be
submitted to that process for binding resolution. None of these methods, however, shall
be the first resort of the parties, but shall be undertaken only after reasonable time and
full effort to reach agreement by negotiation. Any controversy or dispute, upon the
election of either the Company or the City, shall be submitted to an expert individual
acceptable to both parties for an investigation of the facts and a report thereof. Such fact
finding shall be for the purpose of developing better information for the use of both
parties and shall not be binding upon either party. All fees or other expenses resulting
from such finding shall be borne equally by the Company and the City. Any controversy
or dispute, upon the election of either the Company or the City, shall be submitted to an
expert individual, acceptable to both the Company and the City for the purpose of
facilitating discussion and receiving new perspectives on the issues and new proposals for
compromise. Such mediation shall not be binding on either party. All fees and other
expenses resulting from mediation shall be equally borne by the Company and the City.
Only those matters which are expressly arbitrable under the provisions of the franchise
may be submitted to arbitration which includes only the purchase price of the system by
the City upon expiration or revocation. Arbitrable matters may be submitted to a single
expert individual, if both parties agree to do so. Otherwise, arbitrable matters shall be
submitted to a three member expert panel. Arbitration shall be binding on both parties.
Arbitrated matters shall be held to have been adjudicated and settled, and not open, either
directly or indirectly, for review pursuant to the provision of the rules and procedures of
the American Arbitration Association. All fees or other expenses resulting from such
arbitration shall be paid by the Company and the City as hereinafter provided. In the case
of fact finding and mediation, both parties shall present a maximum total of three names
each for possible service as experts. If there is no agreement on any of the names, a
Judge of competent jurisdiction shall select a person to fulfill the function of expert. In
the case of arbitration, both parties shall agree upon the number of persons to serve on the
arbitration panel. Such number shall be either one or three. If a single member panel is
agreed upon, both parties shall name jointly the person, utilizing the procedures
established for fact finding and mediation. If a three member panel is agreed upon, one
person shall be named by the City, one shall be named by the Company, and a third
person shall be named by agreement between the Company and the City. The third
person shall serve as the presiding officer of the panel. If there is no agreement on the
single arbitrator or the presiding officer of the three member panel, the procedure
established for fact finding and mediation shall be followed. The fees of single experts
and arbitrators shall be equally borne by the Company and the City. The fee of the
arbitrator who represents one of the parties shall be borne by that party. The fee of the
presiding officer of an arbitration panel shall be equally borne by the Company and the
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
City. The expenses of fact finding and mediation shall be equally borne by the Company
and the City. The expenses of arbitration shall be borne as determined by the arbitration
panel in its award of finding, but in no event shall the City be obligated for more than
one-half the expense.
112.07 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS, REGULATIONS AND ORDINANCES.
The Company shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of police power by the
City and any rules and regulations the City may promulgate by ordinance or resolution.
The construction, operation and maintenance of the system shall be in full compliance
with the applicable provisions of the National Building & Electrical Code and National
Electric Safety Code as they now exist or may hereafter be amended and in full
compliance with all other codes, ordinances, rules and regulations adopted by the City,
the State, or the United States or any agency thereof which may now have or hereafter
acquire jurisdiction over the operation of the system by the Company
112.08 LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION. The Company shall defend,
indemnify and hold the City harmless for and from all liability, damage, cost and
expenses arising from or out of claims of injury to persons or damage to property
occasioned by reason of any conduct undertaken by the Company or City pursuant to this
chapter. The City shall notify the Company within a reasonable time after the
presentation of any claim or demand to the City, either by suit, or otherwise, made
against the City on account of any negligence or contract on the part of the Company. A
failure of the City to notify the Company shall not relieve the Company of its obligation
to the City. The Company further agrees as follows:
1. The Company shall carry Worker’s Compensation Insurance, with statutory
limits, and Employer’s Liability Insurance as required by law.
2. The Company shall carry Comprehensive General Liability and
Comprehensive Automobile Liability Insurance with bodily injury limits of not
less than three million dollars.
3. The Company shall carry Copyright Infringement Insurance, for copyright
infringement occasioned by the operation of the Company under this chapter or
alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum limit of one million
dollars.
4. The Company with respect to its Worker’s Compensation Insurance and
Employer’s Liability Insurance and Comprehensive General Liability and
Copyright Infringement Insurance, shall name the City as an additional insured
with separate limits of no less than the amount required of the Company.
5. All insurance required of the Company shall be written by insurance
companies approved by the City and authorized to do business in Iowa and with
the Company having agents readily available to service the insurance policy and
each insurance Company shall agree to furnish the City with certified copies of
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
certificates of insurance and to provide that the insurance shall not be cancelled
unless ten (10) days’ prior written notice shall be given to the City.
6. If the Company should commit a breach of this chapter and not remedy the
breach within sixty (60) days after having received written notice from the City to
do so, then the City, at its discretion, may declare a portion of the performance
bond required from the Company equivalent to the amount of damages sustained
by the City which are directly attributable to the breach, forfeited and the
Company shall thereupon be required to remedy the breach with reasonable
dispatch and within 60 days of such forfeiture replace the forfeited portion of the
bond. This subsection shall not serve to absolve the Company of any of its
obligations under this chapter or the rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission.
7. The Company shall pay all premiums chargeable for all insurance and shall
keep the same in full force and effect at all times throughout the term of the
franchise granted by this chapter and during any renewal thereof and during the
period of time required for the removal of the system subsequent to the
termination of the franchise granted by this chapter. The performance bond
required of the Company shall contain a provision that it shall not be terminated or
otherwise allowed to expire prior to 60 days after written notice to that effect is
given to the City.
8. Within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, the Company shall file with the Federal Communications Commission a
request, petition or other application as may be proper, to secure from the Federal
Communications Commission any and all necessary permits, licenses, waivers or
other documents as may be necessary to be secured from the Federal
Communications Commission to fully comply with the terms of this chapter.
However, the same shall be previously submitted to the City. The Company shall
diligently pursue all applications with the Federal Communications Commission
and shall do all reasonable things necessary and proper to secure any permit,
license, waiver or approval from the Federal Communications Commission. The
Company shall keep the City advised from time to time of the progress of its
submissions to the Federal Communications Commission.
112.09 BOND. Within 30 days after the effective date of the franchise, the Company
shall obtain and shall maintain at its cost and expense throughout the term of the
franchise and shall file with the Clerk a bond, with a Company authorized to do business
in the State of Iowa and found acceptable to the City, which bond shall be in the sum of
fifty thousand dollars and which bond shall run to the City and shall guarantee the timely
construction and full activation of the cable television system and which shall provide but
not be limited to the following conditions: There shall be recoverable by the City, jointly
and severally from the principal and surety, any and all damages, loss or costs suffered by
the City resulting from the failure of the Company to satisfactorily complete and fully
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
activate the cable television system within 24 months from the issuance of the certificate
of compliance for the system by the FCC and shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance by the Company of all duties and responsibilities expressly or implicitly set
forth in this chapter, and such other requirements as may be provided by law and the
actual payment by the Company to the City of all sums due the City under the provisions
of this chapter and any and all damages, loss or costs suffered by the City resulting from
the failure of the Company to remove the system at the expiration, termination of
cancellation of the Company’s franchise as set forth in this ordinance. Any extension of
prescribed time limits set forth in this chapter must be specifically authorized by the
Council. Such extension shall be authorized only when the Council finds that such
extension is necessary and appropriate due to causes beyond the control of the Company.
The rights reserved to the City with respect to the bond are in addition to other rights of
the City, whether reserved by the franchise or authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to said bond shall affect any other right the
City may have. If the Company should commit a breach of this chapter and not remedy
the breach within 60 days after having received written notice from the City to do so,
then the City, at its discretion, may declare a portion of the bond equivalent to the amount
of damages sustained by the City or fine assessable to the Company, forfeited and the
Company shall thereupon be required to remedy the breach with reasonable dispatch and
within 60 days of such forfeiture replace the forfeited portion of the bond. This section
shall not serve to absolve the Company of any of its obligations under this chapter or the
rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. The Company shall
pay all premiums chargeable for the bond and shall keep the same in full force and effect
at all times throughout the term of the franchise granted by this chapter and during any
renewal thereof and during the period of time required for the removal of the system
subsequent to the termination, revocation or cancellation of the franchise granted by this
chapter. The bond required by this section shall contain a provision that shall not be
terminated or otherwise allowed to expire prior to 60 days after written notice to that
effect given to the City.
112.10 PENALTIES TO COMPANY FOR VIOLATION. For violations of this
chapter, the penalty shall be as follows:
1. For failure to obtain prior City approval regarding installation of various
part of the system, one hundred dollars per day.
2. For failure to commence operations in accordance with this chapter, two
hundred dollars per day.
3. For failure to complete construction and installation of the system as
provided in this chapter, five hundred dollars per day.
4. For failure to provide data and reports as requested by the Council, fifty
dollars per day.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
5. For persistent failure to comply with reasonable recommendations of the
Council relating to rates and/or services as provided by this chapter and such
reasonable requests or recommendations as may be made pursuant to authority
granted by this chapter, fifty dollars per day.
6. In the event that the system fails to meet any FCC performance standards
for a full 3-month period, Company shall reduce all subscriber fees by 25 percent
until all FCC performance standards are met. The City shall notify the Company
during the first month of the 3-month period that the system has failed to meet
FCC performance standards. Performance standards shall be those set forth by the
Federal Communications Commission.
112.11 SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE AND PROCEDURE.
1. Upon the grant of the franchise to construct and maintain a cable television
system in the City, and in furtherance of the Company’s execution of contracts
with public utility companies or any other owner or lessee of any poles located
within or without the City to whatever extent such contract or contracts may be
expedient and of advantage to the Company for the use of poles and posts
necessary for proper installation of the system, the Company may obtain right-ofway
permits from appropriate State, County and Federal officials necessary to
cross highways or roads under their respective jurisdictions to supply main trunk
lines from the Company’s receiving antennas, obtain permission from the Federal
Aviation Authority to erect and maintain antennas suitable to the needs of the
system and its subscribers and obtain whatever other permits a City, County, State
or Federal agency may require. The Company shall construct its system using
materials of good and durable quality and all work involved in the construction,
installation, maintenance or repair of the system shall be performed in a safe,
thorough, reliable and workmanlike manner. Any municipal property damaged or
destroyed shall be promptly repaired or replaced by the Company and restored to
serviceable condition.
2. The Company’s system shall be located, erected and maintained so that
none of its facilities shall endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or
interfere with any improvements the City may deem proper to make, or
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges,
easements or public property.
3. In the event that the City shall annex territory as authorized by law, the
Company shall extend energized trunk cable to the portion of the City so annexed
within a reasonable time acceptable to the City Council but not less than one year
from the date the annexation is certified. Nothing contained in this section shall
preclude the requirements of Section 112.12 of this chapter, from being enforced.
4. The Company’s system shall be located as to cause no interference with the
proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause no
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin any of said streets, alleys or other public ways and places. Whenever in
any place within the City both the electric and telephone utilities shall be located
underground, it shall be the obligation of the Company to locate or cause its
property to be located underground within such places including service lines to
the house. Whenever in any place within the City both the electric and telephone
utilities or either one of them, shall be located upon poles above ground, Company
may locate or cause its cables to be place upon the existing poles above ground. If
either telephone or electric service lines to the house are overhead then the
subscriber shall have the choice of cable television service drops being placed
underground or overhead at the subscriber’s cost as set forth in Section 112.25 of
this chapter. If the electric utility and telephone utility shall be located
underground in any place within the City after the Company shall have previously
installed its property above ground, it shall nevertheless, at its own expense and at
the same time or immediately thereafter remove and relocate its property
underground in such places. In areas of the City where electric and telephone
utilities are underground, the Company may locate certain equipment above
ground upon a showing of necessity to and with the approval of the Council.
Facilities of the Company may be placed underground at a property owner’s
request in an area where electric utilities and telephone utilities are overhead and
the additional expense shall be paid by the property owner requesting the
underground placement. The provisions of this section shall control over
conflicting provisions of the Subdivision Regulations in this Code of Ordinances
until the completion of initial construction as set out in Section 112.12 of this
chapter.
5. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, ground or
other surfacing, the Company shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner
approved by the City, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, ground,
bushes, grass, plantings and other similar items or surface of any area disturbed, in
as good a condition as before the work was commenced. The City Engineer shall
approve in advance the time allowed for the Company to disturb pavement,
sidewalk, driveway, ground or other surfacing. Unless the City Engineer approves
a request of the City to do otherwise, all installations under a street, alley or
driveway shall be prohibited.
6. In the event that at any time during the period of the franchise the City shall
elect to alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other public way, the
Company, upon reasonable notice by the City, shall remove, relay and relocate
any part of its system at its own expense.
7. The Company shall not place any part of its system where it will interfere
with any gas, electric or telephone fixture, water hydrant or main, or sewer and
shall assist the City, without two (2) hours of request, in locating any part of the
system.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
8. The Company shall prior to the commencement of any construction of any
part or phase of the system submit a plat and construction schedule to the Council.
The plat and schedule shall be approved by the Council or its authorized
representative prior to the commencement of any construction by the Company.
9. All other City ordinances concerning street occupancy and construction
shall be in full force and effect upon the cable television system installation.
10. The Company shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the City, temporarily and promptly raise or lower its
wires to prevent the moving of said buildings. The expense of temporary removal,
raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the service, and
the Company shall have the authority to require payment in advance. The
Company shall not be given less than 48 hours’ advance notice to arrange the
temporary wire changes.
11. The Company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the City so as to prevent their
branches from coming in contact with wires and cables of the Company. All
trimming shall be done under the direction and supervision and with the prior
approval of the Public Services Director. All trimming authorized by this chapter
shall be done at the expense of the Company.
12. The Company shall provide, upon request and without installation or any
type of continuing user charge or fee, service to any municipal building owned or
leased and operated by the City. This shall mean only one energized cable to such
building. The cost of any internal wiring shall not be borne by the Company.
13. The Company shall provide, upon request and without installation or any
type of continuing user charge, service to any nonresidential public or parochial
elementary or secondary school building, to any nonresidential nonprofit higher
education buildings, to any buildings of private or public nonprofit facilities
licensed by the State as hospitals, and to any other nonresidential nonprofit public
educational agencies. This shall mean only an energized cable to the building and
the cost of any internal wiring shall not be borne by the Company.
14. The Company shall provide upon request and without installation or any
type of continuing use charge or fee, service to those agencies and locations listed
in subsections 12 and 13 above who demonstrate the capabilities to utilize
channels on the system for the dissemination of educational information either for
classroom instruction or in-home use including the necessary hardware, excluding
production equipment, required to feed a signal back to the head end of origination
of program. The Company shall not be required to provide more than five
modulators at no cost under this subsection; however, the Company shall provide
additional modulators hereunder at the Company’s cost.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
15. For those agencies listed in subsections 12 and 13, converters shall be
provided by the Company for each outlet for maintenance charge only. The
Company shall not be responsible for the cost of any internal wiring to each outlet
in each facility.
112.12 CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE. The Company shall accomplish the
construction of at least fifty percent of the system for the City within one year after
receiving the Federal Communications Commission’s certification; thereafter, the
remaining fifty percent of the service shall be completed in the second year making cable
service available to all residents of the City, subject to the provisions of Section 112.13.
112.13 LINE EXTENSIONS.
1. It shall be the obligation of the Company to serve all residents of the City
except to the extent that density of potential subscribers, adverse terrain or other
factors render providing service impractical, technically unfeasible or
economically noncompensatory as approved by the Council. For purposes of
determining compliance with the provisions of this section, and to provide for
reasonable and nondiscriminatory policy governing extensions of cable service
within the City, the Company shall extend service to new subscribers at the
approved installation charge and monthly rate for consumers of that classification,
where there are platted subdivisions within the City.
2. In the event that the standards of subsection 1 above are not met, extensions
of service shall be required only on a basis which is reasonable and compensatory
as shall be determined by the Council. In any individual case where it can be
shown that it is unreasonable and noncompensatory to extend cable, it shall be an
option of the City to request the Company and the property owners to agree on a
sharing of the costs of the extension of the cable and that as future subscribers use
the extended line reimbursement made to the original parties. In the event the
owner and Company are unable to agree, the City at its option may require that the
Company enter into arbitration in the same manner and to the same extent as if the
City were party to the dispute.
3. Whenever the Company desires to exclude an area of the City from service
by reason of the provisions of subsection 1 above it shall so advise the Council
and the Council shall set a public hearing and provide for the publication of notice
at the cost of the Company and at the public hearing the persons who may be
affected by the lack of said service shall have the opportunity to appear and be
heard. This provision shall apply to the initial construction of the system if any
portion of the City is not to be included in the initial construction of the system.
112.14 COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARD. All facilities and equipment of the
Company shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements and
specifications of the National Electrical Safety Code and other applicable ordinances and
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
regulations of the City or other County, State or Federal agencies including all
amendments thereto.
112.15 COMPANY RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Company shall have the
authority to promulgate rules, regulations, terms and conditions subject to the approval of
the Council governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to
enable the Company to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this chapter,
and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all its customers. The rules and
regulations, terms and conditions so promulgated shall not be in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter or of any County, State or Federal ordinances, laws or rules and
regulations.
112.16 SUBSCRIBER RIGHTS.
1. The Company shall not create rules and regulations that preclude the
subscriber from having an outside antenna system and antenna switch device.
2. The Company shall publish a list of acceptable switch devices and make
said list available to its subscribers. The Company in no way shall be responsible
for servicing of switching devices not purchased from the Company.
3. The Company rules and regulations shall not prohibit the removal and
reinstallation of a receiving device from any subscriber by a trained, authorized
Company or firm dealing in the repair and maintenance of these devices. There
shall be no disconnection or installation charge or fees for disconnection and
reinstallation during the repair and replacement of any receiving device.
4. The Company shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with
television reception of persons not served by the Company, nor shall the system
interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of the various
utilities serving the residents of the City. The Company shall not require the
removal, or offer to remove, any existing antenna as a condition of providing cable
service. The Company shall allow switching devices from the service to the
subscriber’s television antenna as long as they provide no interference or hazard to
the system.
5. Upon termination of service to any subscriber, for any reason, the Company
shall, upon the subscriber’s written request, promptly remove all of its facilities
and equipment from the subscriber’s premises without charge.
6. If the Company fails to provide any material service requested by a
subscriber or programmer in accordance with the standards set forth in this
chapter, the Company shall, after adequate notification and being afforded the
opportunity to provide the service, promptly refund all deposits or advance
charges paid for the service in question by the subscriber or programmer. This
section includes any advance charges or fees which may be repaid on a daily
prorated basis.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
112.17 APPROVAL OF TRANSFER.
1. The franchise shall not be assigned or transferred either in whole or in part
or leased, sublet or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or
equitable, or any right, interest, or property therein passed or vested in any person
either by an act of the Company or by operation of law without the consent of the
Council.
2. The consent or approval of the Federal Communications Commission to
any assignment, lease, transfer, sublease or mortgage of the franchise shall not
constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the City in and to the streets.
3. Prior approval of the Council shall be required where ownership or control
of more than ten percent of the right of control of the Company is acquired by any
person or group of persons acting in concert. By its acceptance of the franchise
the Company specifically agrees that any such acquisition occurring without prior
approval of the Council shall constitute a violation of this chapter. The Company
shall file each year an annual report of ownership to the Council.
4. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a mortgage or a pledge
of the system or any part thereof or a leasing by the Company from another person
of system equipment or any part thereof for financing purposes or otherwise. Any
such mortgage, pledge or lease shall be made only with the prior approval of the
Council and shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the City under this
chapter and any other applicable law.
5. City approval shall not be unreasonably withheld if the vendee, assignee or
lessee has filed with the appropriate officials of the City an instrument duly
executed, reciting the fact that such sale, assignment or lease accepting the terms
of this chapter and agreeing to perform all conditions thereof and if proper
evidence is submitted showing such person capable of performing the service.
112.18 COMPLIANCE WITH FCC RULES AND REGULATIONS. The
Company shall, at all times, comply with the rules and regulations governing cable
television operations promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission. This
shall include adherence by the Company to Federal Communications Commission rules
regarding technical and engineering specifications involved in the construction of the
system and a signal carriage therein. Any modifications as provided in Section
76.31(A)6 of the Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations shall be
automatically included within and considered a part of this chapter by reference within
one year after the adoption of any modification or at any time of the franchise renewal if
sooner.
112.19 CHANNEL CAPACITY, EXCESS AND PICTURE QUALITY. The cable
television system to be installed shall:
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
1. Be upgraded to increase channel capacity to 42 channels. Absent
conditions beyond the control of the Company, the system upgrade will be
completed by December 31, 1993. The Company shall upgrade and maintain the
system in keeping with the latest state-of-the-art technology.
2. Provide one channel, without charge, for the exclusive use of the City. This
channel may be shared with other Marion services with the understanding that the
City has first priority on usage. Upon completion of the upgrade, the Company
will have the capability of transmitting Council meetings and other governmental
and community events to subscribers within the franchise area.
3. Provide at least one public access channel.
4. Provide equipment and facilities for access use. Included should be video
cameras and equipment capable of storing programs for later showing. Access
studio facilities must be made available to all access users on a first come, first
served basis. The Company shall provide technical and production assistance to
access users as needed.
5. Be capable of passing standard color television signals without the
introduction of material degradation of color fidelity and intelligence from the
head and input to the subscribers’ televisions receivers and shall be capable of 24-
hour continuous operation.
6. The Company shall establish operating rules for channels, which rules shall
be available for public inspection and the rules shall provide for availability on a
first come, first served basis and shall be nondiscriminatory in effect and shall not
allow for censorship of access programming.
112.20 INTERCONNECTION. The Company may be required to interconnect its
system with any other broadband communication facility operating in an adjacent
territory. Interconnections shall be made within sixty (60) days of a request made by the
City. For good cause shown, the Company may request and the Council may grant
reasonable extensions of time to comply with the requirements.
112.21 CITY RIGHTS.
1. City Rules. The right is hereby reserved to the City to adopt, in addition to
the provisions herein contained and existing applicable ordinances, such additional
regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the police power.
2. Use of System by City. The City has the right of maintaining upon poles or
in the underground conduits of the Company wire and fixtures necessary for a
traffic signal control system or a police or fire alarm system. The wires and
fixtures shall be installed and maintained at the expense of the City and shall
comply with reasonable rules and regulations of the Company designed to ensure a
minimum danger of contact or conflict between the wires and fixtures of the
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
Company. The Company shall charge no fee to the City for uses under this
section.
3. Emergency or Disaster. In the case of any emergency or disaster declared
by the Governor, Mayor, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Civil Defense Director, or other
appropriate official, the Company shall, upon the request of the City, make its
facilities available to the City for emergency use during the emergency or disaster
period. The Company shall, at its expense, provide the City with the emergency
override equipment activated by phone lock-out. At any time in case of a fire or
disaster it shall become necessary in the judgment of the Fire Chief, Police Chief
or Civil Defense Director to cut or move any part of the system, it may be done
and any subsequent repairs shall be made by the Company, at its own cost and
expense without charge against the City. The Company shall incorporate into its
facilities the capability for an emergency override alert whereby the City or other
governmental unit in times of crises may be able to introduce a bulletin on all
channels simultaneously.
4. Liability. The City shall not be liable for any damage occurring to the
property of the Company caused by employees of the City in the performance of
their duties, except for damage caused to the Company’s facilities by the
negligence of the City’s employees while they are conducting City business and
damages shall be limited to the cost of repairs or replacement. The City shall not
be liable for the interruption of service by actions of City employees in the
performance of their duties, nor shall the City be held liable for the failure of the
Company to be able to perform normal services due to acts of God or other factors
beyond the control of the City.
5. No Property Right. Nothing in this chapter shall grant to the Company any
right of property in the City-owned property, nor shall the City be compelled to
maintain any of its property any longer than, or in any fashion other than in the
City’s judgment its own business or needs may require.
6. Construction Approval by City. Except for individual service drops, the
Company shall not commence construction of any part of system without the prior
approval of the City Engineer, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
The City has the right to inspect the construction, operation and maintenance of
the system to insure adherence to the terms of this chapter and rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
7. Correction of Defects. In the event the Company should violate any of the
terms of this chapter, or any of the rules and regulations as may be from time to
time lawfully adopted, or if the Company becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling
to pay its debts or is judged as bankrupt, or attempts to or does practice any
fraudulent or deceitful practice in its conduct or relations under the franchise with
the City or subscribers or potential subscribers, the City may give to the Company
thirty (30) days’ written notice to correct such violation or condition, and if the
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
Company does not make the correction within thirty (30) days from the posting of
the written notice, the Company shall be subject to cancellation of the franchise
and after the expiration of an additional thirty-day written notice of cancellation
from the City to the Company, the Company’s franchise, and its right to operate
thereunder in the City shall stand forfeited and cancelled. Notice shall be by
certified mail.
8. Franchise Right. The City hereby expressly reserves the right to grant
additional franchises within the City to other persons for the conduct of other
cable television systems under terms no less burdensome or more favorable than
those contained herein.
112.22 ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
1. The Company, its officers, agents and employees are prohibited from
engaging in the sale, service, rental or leasing of television receivers, radio
receivers or related parts and accessories with any person anywhere in the City,
whether for a fee or charge or not. The Company shall be allowed to furnish, sell
or service equipment or apparatus between the terminals of the television or FM
radio back to the head end installation. The Company shall prohibit any of its
officers, agents and employees from violating the terms of this section, whether in
the performance of duties of the Company or otherwise.
2. Company shall not deny service, deny access or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers or general citizens on the basis of sex, race, color, creed,
religion, disability, age or national origin. Company shall comply at all times with
other applicable Federal, State and City laws, and all executive and administrative
orders relating to nondiscrimination.
112.23 PAYMENTS TO THE CITY.
1. The Company shall pay to the City five percent (5%) of all the gross
revenues. At the close of the Company’s fiscal year, an annual report shall be
provided to the Council detailing all gross revenues received by the Company and
indicating its source. The City reserves the right to require additional information
detailing properties and expenses relative to the Company’s services within the
City for the year. The Company shall, at least annually, submit a copy of its
stockholders report to the Council. If the FCC requirements change during the
term of the franchise, the City reserves the right to increase the 5% payment to the
City in accordance with FCC regulations; however, the payment shall not be
reduced during the term of the franchise.
2. All payments to the City shall be made quarterly and are due forty-five (45)
days after the close of the period. For determining time of payments, the City’s
fiscal year is July 1 through June 30. Upon application, the City may allow the
Company to pay by the Company’s fiscal year if different from the City’s.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
112.24 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
1. The Company may keep full, true, accurate and current books of account,
which books and records and all other pertinent books, records, maps, plans,
financial statements and other like materials shall be made available for inspection
and copying by the City upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours.
The City may audit books and records, from time to time, and shall also require
the Company, not more than once a year, to furnish the City a copy of an audit at
the Company’s expense from an independent auditor, and such other FCC reports
as the City may desire.
2. Within six months from the effective date of its franchise, the Company
shall submit to the Council a plan for the entire City indicating the date on which
the Company expects the installation of the system to be completed and available
for service to subscribers. The Company shall furnish the City with progress
reports yearly indicating in detail the area of construction of the system to date.
112.25 SUBSCRIBER RATES AND CHARGES. In consideration for services
rendered to subscribers, the Company shall have the right to charge and collect from
subscribers fair and reasonable compensation calculated to offset all necessary costs for
provision of the services and including a fair rate of return on investment devoted thereto,
under efficient and economical management.
112.26 LOCAL OFFICE; COMPLAINT PROCEDURES.
1. The Company shall maintain within the City a local business office or agent
for the purpose of receiving and resolving all subscriber complaints. The
provisions of this section shall be complied with if the Company maintains a local
business headquarters office staff of adequate personnel no more than three (3)
miles from the corporate limits of the City, which office may be reached by local,
toll-free telephone call, and provides the City with a name, address, and published
phone number of the person who will act as the Company’s agent to receive
complaints. The local office shall be open during all regular business hours,
having a publicly listed telephone, and shall be so operated that complaints and
requests for repairs or adjustments may be received on a 24-hour basis.
Complaints from subscribers shall be investigated and corrected as soon as
possible, but at least within three (3) business days of their receipt. The Company
shall maintain a service log which will indicate the nature of each complaint, and
the name and address of the complainant and a description of the action taken by
the Company and the time and date of the action taken.
2. The Company shall establish procedures for receiving, acting upon, and
resolving subscriber complaints to the satisfaction of the City Manager. The
Company shall furnish a notice of such procedures to each subscriber at the time
of initial subscription to the system and of any changes thereto at the time the
changes are enacted. The Company shall require its employees or representatives
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
to wear proper identification at all times. The City designates the City Manager as
the officer responsible for the continuing administration of the franchise, and the
implementation of complaint procedures.
3. Complaints by any person as to the operation of the cable television system
may be filed in writing with the City Manager and the cable Company. The City
Manager shall be notified by the Company within thirty (30) days after receiving
the complaint as to the disposition of the complaint with action taken being
described. Within the time prescribed by the City Manager, the Company shall
resolve the complaint or advise the City of its refusal or inability to do so.
112.27 PROTECTION OF PRIVACY.
1. Except to allow Company to investigate and uncover Pay-Per-View theft,
the Company shall not permit the transmission of any signal, aural, visual or
digital, including polling the channel selection, from any subscriber’s premises
without first obtaining written permission of the subscriber.
2. Grantee shall not permit the installation of any special terminal equipment
in any subscriber’s premises that will permit transmission from subscriber’s
premises of two-way services utilizing aural, visual or digital signals without first
obtaining written permission of the subscriber.
3. It is unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether
physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a
franchised C.A.T.V. system for the purpose of taking, receiving television signals,
radio signals, pictures, programs, or sound.
4. It is unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether
physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of
system for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive or transmit any
television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the
owner of the system.
5. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
6. The Company shall not sell or in any other manner make available the
Company’s subscriber lists to any person, unless:
A. The same is necessary to conduct a legitimate cable-related business
activity, provided that the receivers of such information are likewise
restricted from selling or in any manner make such information available to
others; or
B. It is pursuant to court order; or
C. Permission is granted by the subscriber.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
112.28 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS. The City reserves the right to adopt, in
addition to the provisions contained in this chapter, any additional rules or regulations as
it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police power.
112.29 PENALTIES. Should the Company, its successors or assigns, violate any of
the provisions of this chapter or any reasonable rules and regulations established by the
City pursuant hereto, and should such violation continue for more than thirty (30) days
after the City has given written notice of the violation, failure or default, the same shall
be cause for the forfeiture or revocation of the franchise and the termination of all rights
hereunder, provided, however, any delay in correcting the violation which is caused by
factors beyond the control of the Company shall not be included in computing the length
of the continuance of the violation. The City Manager may make written demand that the
Company do or comply with any such provision, rules, order or determination. If the
violation by the Company continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such
written demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being
actively and expeditiously pursued, the City Manager shall cause to be served upon the
Company at least ten days prior to the date of such Council meeting, a written notice of
intent to request such termination and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which
shall be published at least ten (10) days before such meeting. The Council shall consider
the request of the City Manager and shall hear any person interested therein, and shall
determine in its discretion, whether or not any violation by the Company was with just
cause. If such violation by the Company is found to have been with just cause, the
Council shall direct the Company to comply therewith within such time and manner and
upon such terms and conditions as are just and reasonable. If the Council shall determine
such violation by the Company was without just cause, then the Council may, by
resolution, declare that the franchise of the Company shall be terminated and forfeited
unless there is compliance by the Company within such period as the Council may fix.
112.30 PROGRAM CONTENT RESTRICTIONS. In addition to providing basic
cable television services, the Company may offer optional pay cable services. The
Company shall not program or in any way display any programming that violates
applicable local, State or Federal obscenity laws.
112.31 EMPLOYMENT REQUIREMENT. The Company shall not refuse to hire,
discharge from employment or discriminate against any person regarding compensation,
terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of sex, race, color, creed,
disability, religion, age or national origin. The Company shall maintain a copy of its
Affirmative Action Program for inspection by the City.
112.32 SCHEDULED REEVALUATION. The City and the Company shall hold
scheduled reevaluation sessions within thirty (30) days of the fifth and tenth anniversary
dates of the Company’s obtaining certification for the system from the FCC. All such
reevaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper of
general circulation at least five (5) days before each session. Special reevaluation
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
sessions may be held at any time during the term of the ordinance, provided that both the
City and the Company shall mutually agree upon the time and place of the topics to be
negotiated. All such reevaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a
newspaper of general circulation at least five (5) days before each session. The following
topics may be discussed at each scheduled reevaluation session: service rate structures;
free or disconnected services; application of new technology; system performances;
services provided; programming offered; customer complaints; privacy and human rights;
amendments to this chapter; underground progress; and judicial and FCC rulings. Topics
in addition to these listed above may be added if agreed upon by both parties. Members
of the general public may add topics either by working through the negotiating parties, or
by presenting a petition. If such a petition bears the valid signatures of 50 or more
qualified electors of the City, the proposed topic or topics shall be added to the list of
topics be discussed at the reevaluation session.
112.33 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS. The Council reserves the right to change
or amend this chapter at any time during the term of the franchise.
112.34 BINDING ON COMPANY. The provisions, terms, and conditions of the
franchise shall be binding upon the Company, successors, heirs, and assigns upon
acceptance thereof by the Company.
112.35 ACCESS REQUIREMENTS. For purposes of providing minimal provisions
for access, the Company shall meet the requirement of all FCC rules which are in effect,
and whether or not such rules are in effect shall meet the requirements of the provisions
set forth in Appendix A attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.
112.36 COMPANY ACCOUNTS. During the term of the franchise the Company
shall maintain its active checking and/or savings accounts in financial institutions located
within the City and shall make all initial deposits of gross revenues into one or more of
said accounts.
112.37 MOST FAVORED NATIONS. The Company, by acceptance of the franchise,
agrees that the City may, at its election, with or without notice, revise the franchise
during its term to conform to any and all provisions of any franchise granted to the
Company by the City of Cedar Rapids or the City of Hiawatha, calculated on an
equivalent cost-per-subscriber basis, and any such changes shall be in full force and
effect as if adopted herein.
CHAPTER 112 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 78-26 granting a cable TV franchise for the City was passed
and adopted on September 7, 1978.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
CHAPTER 113
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
113.01 Definitions 113.20 Records and Reports
113.02 Qualifications of Grantee and Grant of Authority 113.21 Subscriber Rates and Charges
113.03 Franchise Term 113.22 Local Office; Complaint Procedures;
113.04 Liability and Indemnification Customer Service Standards
113.09 Bond 113.23 Protection of Privacy
113.06 Violations 113.24 Performance Evaluation Sessions
113.07 Resident Company and Agent 113.25 City Rights to Purchase System
113.08 Application for Permit 113.26 Offer of Converters
113.09 System Construction, Maintenance and Procedure 113.27 System Testing
113.10 Line Extensions 113.28 Additional Regulations
113.11 Compliance with Standards 113.29 Penalties
113.12 Company Rules and Regulations 113.30 Program Content Restrictions
113.13 Approval of Transfer 113.31 Employment Requirement
113.14 Compliance with FCC Rules and Regulations 113.32 Changes and Amendments
113.15 Channel Capacity, Excess and Picture Quality 113.33 Binding on Company
113.16 Access Requirements 113.34 Services to Persons with Disabilities
113.17 City Rights 113.35 Resolution of Disputes
113.18 Activities Prohibited 113.36 Most Favored Nation
113.19 Payments to the City
113.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:
1. “Cable service” means the transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming sources, and subscriber interaction, if any,
which is required for the selection of such video programming or other
programming service.
2. “Cable television system” or “system” means that portion of any
communication system which receives and amplifies signals broadcast by one or
more television and/or radio stations and which transmits programming originated
by the system itself or by another party, and distributes such signals and
programming by wire, cable or other means to persons who subscribe to such
service.
3. “Company” means ImOn Communications, LLC., an Iowa corporation and
its lawful successors and assigns. “Company” may also be referred to as
“grantee.”
(Ord. 07-02 – Aug. 07 Supp.)
4. “Federal Communications Commission” or “FCC” means that Federal
agency constituted by the Communications Act of 1934 as amended.
5. “Gross revenues” means all revenue derived or produced from or in
connection with or related to, directly or indirectly, to the provision of cable
service via the system within the City by the Company or its affiliates,
subsidiaries, parents or any person which the Company has a financial interest
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
from or in connection with the operation of the system within the City with no
deductions whatsoever. However, “gross revenues” does not include any revenues
the Company derives from telecommunications services.
6. “Normal operating condition” means those service conditions which are
within the control of the Company. Those conditions which are not within the
control of the Company include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual
weather conditions, and reasonable periods of time after the occurrence of the
event causing such conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the
control of the Company include, but are not limited to, special promotions, payper-
view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and
maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
7. “Plant mile” means a linear mile measured on the ground where wire, cable
or other means is hung on strand or buried underground.
8. “Service interruption” means the loss of picture or sound on one or more
cable channels, or unreasonable degradation of the aural or video signal to the
extent programming on the channel cannot be viewed or heard by a subscriber.
9. “Standard installation of cable services” means an installation of equipment
and other materials necessary in order to provide cable service, where the surface
distance from the Company’s distribution line to the nearest exterior point of the
structure for which the installation has been ordered is 125 feet or less.
113.02 QUALIFICATIONS OF GRANTEE AND GRANT OF AUTHORITY.
This Regulatory Ordinance which grants to the Company the nonexclusive right to
construct, operate and maintain a cable television system in the City, was passed and
adopted by the Council after a public proceeding. Said proceeding was held after public
notice was given and afforded all interested parties the opportunity to comment upon the
legal, character, financial, technical and other qualifications of the Company. Therefore,
the City hereby grants to the company a nonexclusive franchise, right and privilege to
construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, and over
and under the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places now
laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the City, poles,
wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors and
fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the City of a cable television
system for the purpose of distributing television and radio signals, and other electronic
impulses in order to furnish television and radio programs, and various communications
and other electronic services to the public. The right so granted includes the right to use
and occupy said streets, alleys, public ways and public places and all manner of
easements for the purposes herein set forth. The franchise granted herein shall not excuse
the Company from complying with any other regulatory ordinances of the City, including
without limitation, any telecommunications ordinance subsequently adopted by the City,
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
and shall not be deemed to have granted the Company a franchise for
telecommunications services.
113.03 FRANCHISE TERM. The franchise granted herein may be renewed by the
City Council upon application by the Company pursuant to the procedures established in
this section, and in accordance with the then existing rules of the FCC and applicable
law. The franchise granted to the Company shall terminate on January 6, 2022. The
Company shall notify the City at least 3 years prior to the expiration of its franchise as to
whether or not the Company intends to seek a franchise renewal. The Council, upon
notification by the Company of its intention to seek franchise renewal, shall follow all
procedures of law effective and applicable at the time. The Company shall, at all times
during the life of this chapter, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the
City and to such reasonable regulation as the City shall hereafter by resolution or
ordinance provide. The construction, operation and maintenance of the system by the
Company shall be in full compliance with such portions of the National Building and
Electric Code and National Electric Safety Code as may be applicable and as the same
may be amended and revised from time to time, and in full compliance with all other
codes, ordinances, rules and regulations now in effect or hereinafter adopted by the
Federal Communications Commission, the City, or other agency of the State of Iowa or
the United States, which may hereafter acquire jurisdiction of the operations of the
Company authorized herein.
(Ord. 07-02 – Aug. 07 Supp.)
113.04 LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION. The Company shall indemnify the
City for, and hold it harmless from all liability, damage, cost or expense arising from
claims of injury to persons or damage to property occasioned by reason of any conduct
undertaken pursuant to this chapter. The City shall notify the Company’s representative
within 15 days after the
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
presentation of any claim or demand to the City, either by suit, or otherwise, made
against the City on account of any negligence or contract as aforesaid on the part of the
company. Failure to do so shall not relieve the company of its obligation to the City.
The company further agrees as follows:
1. Company shall carry Worker’s Compensation insurance, with statutory
limit, and employer’s liability insurance as required by law.
2. Company shall carry comprehensive general liability and comprehensive
automobile liability insurance with bodily injury limits of not less than $3 million,
naming the City as additional insured with separable limits of no less than said
amount.
3. Company’s Worker’s Compensation, comprehensive general liability and
comprehensive automobile liability insurance shall be written by an insurance
company approved by the City, and company agrees to furnish City with certified
copies of certificates of insurance of said policies, which shall provide that
insurance shall not be canceled unless 10 days’ prior written notice shall first be
given to the City. Where the company is self-insured, it shall provide the City
with documentation proving the viability of its self-insurance program and the size
of its risk management fund.
113.05 BOND.
1. Within 30 days after the effective date of the franchise, the company shall
file with the Clerk a performance bond in the amount of $50,000.00 to be
maintained in full amount at all times in a surety company approved by the City as
security for the faithful performance by it of all the provisions of the franchise,
and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency of the City
having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this contract, and the payment by
the company of any claims, liens and taxes due the City which arise by reason of
the construction, operation or maintenance of the system.
2. If the company fails to pay to the City any compensation required pursuant
to this chapter within the time fixed herein; or, fails, after 10 days’ notice to pay to
the City the franchise fee due and unpaid; or, fails to repay to the City, within such
10 days, any damages, costs or expenses which the City shall be compelled to pay
by reason of any act or default of the company in connection with this franchise;
or, fails, after 3 days’ notice of such failure by the Clerk, to comply with any
provisions of this chapter which the Council reasonably determines can be
remedied by an expenditure of the security, the City may immediately be entitled
to payment, with interest and any penalties, from the bond company, which
amount shall be promptly paid by the bond company.
113.06 VIOLATIONS. For violations of this chapter the penalties shall be chargeable
to performance bond as follows:
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
1. For failure to obtain prior City approval regarding installation of various
parts of the system as provided for in Section 113.17(6) – $100 per day.
2. For failure to provide data and reports as requested by the Council – $50
per day.
3. For persistent failure to comply with reasonable recommendations of the
Council relating to service as provided for in this chapter and such reasonable
requests or recommendations as may be made pursuant to authority granted by this
chapter – $50 per day.
4. For failure to restore the cash deposit as required herein within the specified
30 days, the entire cash deposit remaining (if any) shall be forfeited.
5. In the event that the system fails to meet any FCC performance standards
for a full 3-month period, grantee shall pay a penalty equal to 25% of the
company’s gross revenues for the period during which the system failed to meet
the standards. The City shall notify the company during the first month of the
three-month period that the system has failed to meet performance standards.
113.07 RESIDENT COMPANY AND AGENT. All insurance policies and bonds as
are required of the company in this chapter shall be written by a company or companies
authorized and qualified to do business in the State of Iowa. Certificates of all coverage
required shall be promptly filed by the company with the City.
113.08 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. Within 60 days after the effective date of
this chapter, the company shall file with the Federal Communications Commission such
request, petition or other application as is then proper to secure from said Federal
Communications Commission any and all necessary permits, licenses, waivers, or the like
as may be necessary to be secured from said Federal Communications Commission to
fully comply with the terms of this chapter. The company shall concurrently submit
same to the City. The company shall thereafter diligently pursue such application with
the Federal Communications Commission and shall do all reasonable things necessary
and proper to secure any such permit, license, waiver, approval or the like from it. The
company shall keep the City advised, from time to time, of the progress of such
application.
113.09 SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE AND PROCEDURE.
1. Upon grant of the franchise to construct and maintain a cable television
system in the City, and in furtherance of the company’s execution of contracts
with public utility companies or any other owner or lessee of any poles located
within or without the City to whatever extent such contract or contracts may be
expedient and of advantage to the company for use of poles and posts necessary
for proper installation of the system, the company may obtain right-of-way permits
from appropriate State, County, and Federal officials necessary to cross highways
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
or roads under their respective jurisdictions to supply main trunk lines from the
company’s receiving antennas, obtain permission from the Federal Aviation
Authority to erect and maintain antennas suitable to the needs of the system and its
subscribers and obtain whatever other permits a City, County, State or Federal
Agency may require. The company shall construct its cable system using material
of good and durable quality and all work involved in the construction, installation,
maintenance and repair of the cable system shall be performed in a safe, thorough,
and reliable manner. Any municipal property damaged or destroyed shall be
promptly repaired or replaced by the company and restored to serviceable
condition, at company expense.
2. The company’s system, poles, wires, and appurtenances shall be located,
erected and maintained so that none of its facilities shall endanger or interfere with
the lives of persons, or interfere with any improvements the City may deem proper
to make, or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys,
bridges, easements or public property. However, in the event that the City shall
annex further territory as authorized by law, the company shall extend energized
trunk cable to the remaining portions of the City so annexed within a reasonable
time acceptable to the Council. If the annexed area is already served by a
competing cable company, the grantee is not required to serve the area unless it is
petitioned to do so by the residents of the annexed area at the equivalent of 25
homes per mile. Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the requirements
of Section 113.10 of this chapter from being enforced.
3. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by
the company within the City shall be located as to cause no interference with the
proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause no
interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin any of the said streets, alleys, or other public ways and places. Wherever,
within the City, telephone and electrical cable is underground at the time of
installation, the company shall also place the cable television cable underground;
and at any time after installation that the telephone and electrical cable is hereafter
placed underground, the company shall also at the same time reinstall and place all
cable television cable underground.
4. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, ground or
other surfacing, the company shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner
approved by the City, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, ground,
bushes, grass, planting, and similar items, or surface of any street or alley
disturbed, in as good condition as before said work was commenced. The City
Engineer shall approve all requests of the company in advance, in the case of
disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, ground, or other surfacing. Further,
the Public Services Director shall approve in advance the time allowed for the
company to disturb pavement, sidewalk, driveway, ground or other surfacing.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
5. In the event that at any time during the period of the franchise the City shall
elect to make any improvement or change it deems proper to make to any street,
alley, or other public way, the company, upon reasonable notice by the City, shall
remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other fixtures at its own expense.
6. The company shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will
interfere with any gas, electric or telephone fixture, water hydrant or main. The
company shall, prior to commencement of any construction of any parts or phases
of the system, prepare a plat and construction schedule, which such plat and
schedule shall be kept on file by the company and may be reviewed by the Council
or its authorized representative prior to the commencement of any such
construction by the company, at the City’s option.
7. The company shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving
permit issued by the City, temporarily promptly raise or lower its wires to permit
the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or
lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the
company shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The
company shall be given not less than 48 hours’ advance notice to arrange for such
temporary wire changes.
8. The company shall have the authority to trim trees upon or overhanging any
streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places of the City so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the
company. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction and
with the approval of the Public Services Director. All trimming authorized by this
chapter shall be done at the expense of the company.
9. The company shall provide upon request and without installation charge or
any type of continuing use charge or fee, service to any municipal building owned
or leased and operated by the City. This shall mean only an energized cable to
such building. The cost of any internal wiring shall not be the expense of the
company.
10. The company shall provide upon request and without installation charge or
any type of continuing use charge, service to any public or parochial elementary or
secondary school buildings, to any nonprofit higher education building, to any
buildings of private or public nonprofit facilities licensed by the State of Iowa as
hospitals, and any other nonprofit public educational agencies. This shall mean an
energized cable to such building. The cost of any internal wiring shall not be
borne by the company. The company shall have the authority to enforce signal
leakage standards established in the Federal Cable Act.
11. The company shall provide upon request and without installation charge or
any type of continuing use charge or fee, service to those agency locations listed in
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
subsections 9 and 10 who demonstrate the capabilities to utilize channels on the
cable system for the dissemination of educational information either for classroom
instruction or in-home use including the necessary hardware and modulators,
excluding production equipment required to feed a signal back to the head end of
origination of program. Five modulators shall be provided at no cost for
origination by agencies listed in subsections 9 and 10 above. The company shall
provide modulators at a reasonable cost should the need for said modulators
exceed the 5 provided by the company as outlined in this subsection.
12. Any public or parochial school, any nonprofit higher educational
institutions, any buildings of private or public nonprofit public facilities, licensed
by the State of Iowa as hospitals, any other nonprofit public educational agencies
and any municipal buildings owned or leased and operated by the City shall be
allowed to purchase converters from the company at a reasonable cost, or from
any other source provided such converters comply with technical specifications
established by the company. If the converters are provided by the institution either
by purchase from the company, or, from another source meeting technical
specifications, then the same shall be maintained by the institution or agency
without any monthly charge by the company. If the company provides the
converter, then it shall be the responsibility of the company to maintain the
converter.
13. The company shall provide upon request to any public or parochial high
school, or the Grant Wood Educational Agency access to the Iowa
Communications Network. This access shall be provided without installation
charge or any type of continuing use charge or fee. The Company will build a
locally switched network, that may include the use of diverse routing for reliability
purposes. This network shall meet all the specifications set forth by the State of
Iowa as it relates to the construction of “Phase 3” of the Iowa Communications
Network. The company will only be required to honor those requests that have
secured the funding to equip a classroom for interactive teaching as provided by
the State of Iowa.
113.10 LINE EXTENSIONS.
1. It shall be the obligation of the company to serve all residents of the City
except to the extent that density of potential subscribers, adverse terrain or other
factors render providing service impracticable, technically unfeasible or
economically noncompensatory as approved by the Council. For purposes of
determining compliance with the provisions of this section, and to provide for
reasonable and nondiscriminatory policy governing extensions of cable service
within the City, the company shall extend service to new subscribers at the
approved installation charge and monthly rate for consumers of that classification
where there are platted subdivisions within the City.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
2. In the event the standards of subsection 1 are not met, extensions of service
shall be required only on a basis which is reasonable and compensatory as shall be
determined by the Council. In any individual case where it can be shown that it is
unreasonable and noncompensatory to extend cable, it shall be an option of the
City to request the company and the property owners to agree on a sharing of the
costs of the extension of the cable and that as future subscribers use the extended
line reimbursement be made to the original parties. In the event the owner and
company are unable to agree, the City at its option may require that the company
enter into arbitration in the same manner and to the same extent as if the City were
party to the dispute.
3. Whenever the company desires to exclude an area of the City from service
by reason of the provisions of subparagraph 1 above, it shall so advise the Council
and the Council shall set a public hearing and provide for the publication of notice
at the cost of the company and at the public hearing the persons who may be
affected by the lack of said service shall have the opportunity to appear and be
heard. This provision shall apply to the initial construction of the system if any
portion of the City is not to be included in the initial construction of the system.
113.11 COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS. All facilities and equipment of the
company shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements and
specifications of the National Electrical Safety Code and such applicable ordinances and
regulations set forth by the City and/or any other local, State or Federal agencies,
including all amendments.
113.12 COMPANY RULES AND REGULATIONS. The company shall have the
authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions subject to approval
of the Council governing its obligations under this chapter, and to assure an uninterrupted
service to each and all of its customers, provided, however, that such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or of Federal and
State laws, and City ordinances or rules and regulations of the City. The company shall
not create rules and regulations that preclude the subscriber from having an outside
antenna system and antenna switch device. The company may publish a list of
acceptable switch devices and make said list available to its subscribers. The company is
responsible for maintenance of switch devices furnished by itself, but not if furnished by
a source other than the company.
113.13 APPROVAL OF TRANSFER.
1. No transfer of control of the cable system shall take place, whether by
forced or voluntary sale, lease, mortgage, assignment, encumbrance of any other
form of disposition, without prior notice to and approval by the Council, which
shall not be unreasonably refused. The notice shall include full identifying
particulars of the proposed transaction, and the Council shall act by resolution, or
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
disapprove a transfer of control; if no action is taken within sixty days, approval
shall be deemed to have been given.
2. The consent or approval of the Council to any assignment, lease, transfer,
sub-lease, or mortgage of the company shall not constitute a waiver or release of
the rights of the City in and to the streets.
3. For the purposes of this section the term “control” is not limited to majority
stock ownership,. but includes actual working control in whatever manner
exercised.
4. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise
upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or group of persons of 10
percent of the voting shares of the company.
5. A mortgage or pledge of the cable system equipment or any part thereof or
a leasing by a company from another person of said cable system equipment or
part thereof for financing purposes or otherwise shall be made only with the prior
approval of the Council and shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the
City under this chapter or applicable law.
6. The company shall give the City written notice of any sale, lease, or
transfer of any kind of more than 5% of the voting shares of the company. Upon
such notice, the City may require the company to produce for its examination any
documents or books of account relating to the condition of the company.
113.14 COMPLIANCE WITH FCC RULES AND REGULATIONS. The company
shall, at all times, comply with .the rules and regulations governing CATV operations
promulgated by the FCC. This shall include adherence by the company to FCC rules
regarding technical and engineering specifications involved in the construction of the
CATV System and signal carriage therein.
113.15 CHANNEL CAPACITY, EXCESS AND PICTURE QUALITY.
1. The cable television system shall:
A. Upon construction, have an 80-channel capability and a technical
capacity for return or two-way communications. The company shall
construct the system with fiber optic cable wherever feasible. There shall
be no diminution, a lessening of the mix, level or quality of services due to
such expansion or any other implementation of any technological
advancement. The company will install and maintain a cable television
system in keeping with latest state-of-the-art technology including the
capability for satellite reception.
B. Provide 1 channel, without charge, for exclusive use of the City.
This channel may be shared with other services with the understanding that
the City has first priority on its usage.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
C. Provide at least 1 channel without charge for those educational uses
as now or hereafter required by the Federal Communications Commission.
D. Provide at least 1 channel for those public access uses as now or
hereafter required by the Federal Communications Commission. To the
extent time is available, access channels may also be used for other
broadcast and nonbroadcast services.
2. The Company shall provide $110,000.00, plus any additional funding
reasonably required to establish a video production unit or such other substantially
similar project or units as may be agreed upon by the City and the Company. This
unit will be capable of broadcasting live remote programming, outfitted with all
the equipment needed to produce live and/or taped productions. The video
production unit will be staffed with personnel adequate to enable the Company to
fulfill this agreement.
3. The company will provide the City with 35 hours of production time per
month. Twenty-three hours will be allocated for coverage of Council meetings.
Twelve hours will be allocated for other productions. However, if the Council
meetings do not require 23 hours of production time per month, the remainder can
be applied to other productions. If Council meeting coverage takes more than 23
hours per month, the company will absorb that overage. If the City does not use
all of its production time in a given month, those hours may be carried over to the
next month. No more than 15 hours of production time can be carried over from
one calendar year to the next. The company will give the City additional
production time as it becomes available. This production time may also be
allocated for any other purposes as may be agreed upon by the City and the
Company.
4. The company will contribute up to $1,000.00 to Kirkwood Community
College on an annual basis in exchange for the production for the City of as many
video programs as the Kirkwood Communications Media and Public Relations
Program curriculum allows.
5. The company will broadcast City information of interest to citizens on the
Government Access Channel. The City will provide the information to the
Company in an electronic format until it can be delivered electronically.
6. The cable system shall be capable of passing standard color television
signals without the introduction of material degradation of color fidelity and
intelligence from the head end input to the subscriber’s television receiver.
113.16 ACCESS REQUIREMENTS. For purposes of providing minimal provisions
for access, the company shall meet the requirements of all FCC rules which are in effect,
and whether or not such rules are in effect, shall regardless meet the requirements of the
provisions set forth in Appendix A of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
113.17 CITY RIGHTS.
1. City Rules. The right is hereby reserved to the City to adopt, in addition to
the provisions herein contained and existing applicable ordinances, such additional
regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the police power, provided
that such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in
conflict with the rights herein granted, and shall not be in conflict with the
applicable laws of the State of Iowa or the United States.
2. Use of System by City. The City shall have the right, during the life of this
chapter, of maintaining upon the poles or in the underground conduits of the
company within the City limits wire and fixtures necessary for a traffic signal
control system and/or a police and fire alarm system. Such wires and fixtures
shall be installed and maintained at the sole expense of the City and shall at all
times comply with all the reasonable rules and regulations of the company so that
there may be a minimum danger of contact or conflict between the wires and
fixtures of the company and wires and fixtures used by the City without cost to the
City. The City shall also have the right to lease spectrum space from the company
for these purposes at reasonable rates subject to the technical capability of the
cable system.
3. Emergency or Disaster. In the case of any emergency or disaster declared
by the Mayor, the company shall, upon the request of the Mayor, make available
its facilities to the City for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period.
The company shall, at its expense, provide the Mayor’s office with the emergency
override equipment activated by phone lock-out, or any other feasible method or
methods.
4. Liability. The City shall not be liable for any damage occurring to the
property of the company caused by employees of the City in the performance of
their duties, except for damage caused to the company’s facilities by the
negligence of the City’s employees while they are conducting City business. The
City shall not be liable for the interruption of service by actions of City employees
in the performance of their duties, nor shall the City be held liable for the failure
of the company to be able to perform normal services due to acts of God or other
factors beyond the control of the City.
5. No Property Right. Nothing in this chapter shall grant to the company any
right of property in the City-owned property, nor shall the City be compelled to
maintain any of its property any longer than, or in any fashion other than in the
City’s judgment its own business or needs may require.
6. Construction Approval by City. Except for individual service drops, the
company shall not erect any pole, install any underground lines or conduit, run any
line, make any attachment, nor shall any construction of any kind be commenced
without the prior approval of the Public Services Director, which approval shall
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
not be unreasonably withheld, and the City shall have and maintain the right to
inspect the construction, operation and maintenance of the system by the company
to insure the proper performance of the terms of this chapter.
7. Correction of Defects. In the event the company should violate any of the
terms of this chapter, or any of the rules and regulations as may be from time to
time lawfully adopted, the City shall immediately give to the company 30 days’
written notice to correct such violation, and in the event the company does not
make such correction within 30 days from the receipt of such written notice, the
company shall then be subject to cancellation of the franchise, and after the
expiration of an additional thirty-day written notice of cancellation from the City
to the company, the company’s franchise, and its right to operate thereunder in the
City shall stand forfeited and canceled.
8. Franchise Right. The City hereby expressly reserves the right to grant
additional franchises within the City to other persons for the conduct of other
cable television systems under terms no less burdensome nor more favorable than
those contained herein.
113.18 ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
1. The company shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with
television reception of persons not served by the company, nor shall the system
interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner, the operation of the various
utilities serving the residents of the City.
2. The company may not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules or
regulations, grant preference or advantage to any person without prior approval of
the Council. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment
of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules.
3. The company may assess a monetary penalty against a system user as a
result of failure to pay a user’s bill by a specified date. However, no subscriber
service shall be discontinued without such procedure and hearing as required by
law.
4. The company shall credit all subscriber or system user accounts for any loss
of service that exceeds 24 hours. However, the subscriber must notify the
company of the loss of service to receive the credit.
113.19 PAYMENTS TO THE CITY.
1. The company shall, during each year of operation under this chapter pay to
the City 5% of all the company system’s gross revenues. At the close of the
company’s fiscal year, an annual report shall be provided to the Council detailing
all revenues received by the company and indicating the source of said revenues.
The City reserves the right to require that additional information be submitted by
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
the company detailing properties and income relative to the company’s services
within the City for such period. If the FCC requirements change during the term
of the franchise, the City reserves the right to change this 5% requirement in
accordance with FCC regulations.
2. All payments as required by the company to the City shall be made
monthly and shall be due 15 days after the close of the period. For determining
time of payments, the City’s fiscal year is July 1 through June 30.
113.20 RECORDS AND REPORTS. The company shall keep full, true, accurate and
current books of account, which shall be made available for inspection to an auditor
appointed by the City upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours. The
City may order an audit of books and records, from time to time, and may also require the
company, not more than once each year, to furnish the City a copy of an audit at the
company’s expense from an independent auditor.
113.21 SUBSCRIBER RATES AND CHARGES. The City reserves the right to
regulate rates, should the Congress of the United States or any court or agency decide to
return that power to the cities.
113.22 LOCAL OFFICE; COMPLAINT PROCEDURES; CUSTOMER
SERVICE STANDARDS.
1. During the term of the franchise granted in this chapter, and any renewal
thereof, the company shall maintain within the City a local business office or agent
for the purpose of receiving and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of
service, equipment malfunctions, and similar matters. The provisions of this
section shall be complied with if the company maintains a local business
headquarters office staffed with adequate personnel no more than 10 miles from
the corporate limits of the City, which office may be reached by local, toll free
telephone call, and provides the City Manager’s office with the name, address, and
phone number of a person who will act as the company’s agent to receive
complaints regarding quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and similar
matters.
2. The local office service centers shall be open during normal business hours
and shall be conveniently located. The Company shall maintain a local, toll free,
or collect call telephone access line which shall be open 24 hours per day, seven
days per week. Trained customer service representatives shall be available to
respond to customer telephone inquiries on the Telephone Access Line during
Normal Business Hours. After Normal Business Hours, the Telephone Access
Line may be answered by an automated response system. All inquiries received
by the Company after Normal Business Hours shall be responded to on the
following business day. The Company shall comply with the following minimum
standards for operation of a telephone access line.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
A. During Normal Operation Conditions, the Telephone Access Line
shall be answered by a customer service representative and the caller’s
concerns shall be initially addressed within thirty (30) seconds after a
telephone connection is made between the caller and the Company. The
thirty-second maximum includes wait time or time spent “holding” for a
customer service representative.
B. During Normal Operating Conditions, if, after initially addressing a
caller’s concerns, the customer service representative determines that the
call should be transferred to another representative of the Company, the
transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds.
C. During Normal Operating Conditions, callers on the telephone
access line shall not receive “busy signals” more than three percent (3%) of
the time.
D. During Normal Operating Conditions, the minimum standards set
forth in this section shall be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the
time, measured on a monthly basis.
E. If an historical record of subscriber complaints indicates a clear
failure of the Company to comply with the minimum standards set forth in
this section, then the City may require that the Company’s level of
compliance be measured through the use of surveys or any other reliable
method chosen by the City.
3. The company shall by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, as
subscribers are connected or reconnected to the system, furnish information
concerning the procedures for making inquiries and/or complaints, including the
name, address, and local telephone numbers of the employee or employees or
agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed. The company
shall by appropriate means require its employees or representatives to wear proper
identification at all times. The City designates a City employee to be responsible
for the continuing administration of the franchise, and implementation of
complaint procedures.
4. The Company shall comply with the following minimum standards
regarding installation and repairs:
A. Standard Installations of Cable Service, under Normal Operating
Conditions shall be completed within seven (7) days of the date ordered by
the customer.
B. The Company shall commence repairs on Service Interruptions
promptly, but no longer than twenty-four (24) hours after the Service
Interruption becomes known to the Company.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
C. All other repairs, maintenance or installations shall be commenced
by the end of the following business day after the Company has been
notified of a problem.
D. The Company may not cancel an appointment with a customer after
the close of the business day prior to the date of a scheduled appointment.
If the Company representative is running late for a scheduled appointment
with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled,
the customer shall be contacted. When contacted, the appointment shall be
rescheduled, as necessary, at a time that is convenient for the customer.
E. Minimum Compliance Percentage. During Normal Operating
Conditions, the Company shall meet or exceed the minimum standards set
forth in this section ninety-five percent (95%) of the time, measured on a
monthly basis.
5. The Company shall provide the written information itemized below to all
new customers. Such information shall also be provided at least once per year to
all existing customers and shall be provided upon request of any customer. During
Normal Operating Conditions, customers shall be notified at least thirty (30) days
in advance of any changes to the information provided below. The following
written information shall be provided:
A. An explanation of all programming services, products and other
services offered by the Company.
B. An explanation of all prices and options for programming services,
products and other services offered by the Company.
C. An explanation of all installation, repair and maintenance policies.
D. Instructions on how to use all programming services, cable related
equipment and all other products and services, including but not limited to
instructions on how to use Cable Services with VCR’s and converters.
E. An explanation of all channel positions and corresponding
programming on the Cable System.
F. An explanation of all billing and service complaint procedures and
policies. Such information shall, at a minimum, explain the procedures for
lodging a complaint with the Company and the procedures to be followed
by the Company in investigating and resolving disputes.
The Company also shall immediately notify customers in writing and through
announcements over the Cable System of any changes in rates, programming
services or channel positions. During Normal Operating Conditions, such notice
shall be provided to customers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of the
implementation of such changes.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
6. Customer invoices for Cable Service and any other products or the services
provided by the Company shall be clear, concise and understandable. Invoices
shall be fully itemized, including separate lines for basic and premium service
charges, equipment charges, optional charges, refunds, rebates, credits and any
other activity occurring on a customer’s account during the invoice period.
7. The Company shall respond to written complaints regarding billing
disputes from customers within thirty (30) days.
8. Refund checks shall be issued promptly, but no later than either:
A. The customer’s next billing cycle following resolution of a dispute
or request; or
B. Thirty (30) days;
whichever is earlier. If Cable Service is terminated, the Company need not make
refunds until all equipment owned and supplied by the Company is returned.
Credits for Cable Service shall be issued no later than the customer’s next billing
cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.
113.23 PROTECTION OF PRIVACY.
1. Except to the extent allowed by Federal law for the purpose of investigation
and uncovering of theft of premium channels, grantee shall not permit the
transmission of any signal, aural, visual or digital, including “polling” the channel
selection, from any subscriber’s premises without first obtaining written
permission of the subscriber.
2. The company shall not permit the installation of any special terminal
equipment in any subscriber’s premises that will permit transmission from
subscriber’s premises of two-way services utilizing aural, visual or digital signals
without first obtaining written permission of the subscriber.
3. It is unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether
physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a
franchised CATV system within the City for the purpose of enabling such person
or others to take or receive television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or
sounds, without payment to the owner of said system.
4. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each day of violation shall be a
separate offense..
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
5. The company shall follow subscriber privacy regulations established by the
FCC in the Federal Cable Act.
113.24 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION SESSIONS.
1. Special Reevaluation Sessions. Special reevaluation sessions may be held
at any time during the term of the franchise granted in this chapter, provided that
both the City and the company shall mutually agree on the time, the place and the
topics to be negotiated. All such reevaluation sessions shall be open to the public
and announced in a newspaper of general circulation no less than 4 and no more
than 20 days before each session.
2. Topics to be Evaluated. The following topics may be discussed at such
reevaluation session and shall include but not be limited to: application of new
technologies; system performances; services provided; programming offered;
customer complaints; privacy and human rights; amendments to this chapter;
under-grounding progress; and judicial and FCC rulings.
113.25 CITY RIGHTS TO PURCHASE SYSTEM.
1. City Purchase of System upon Revocation. In the event that the City
terminates the franchise pursuant to appropriate provisions of this chapter, the City
shall have the right to purchase the cable system at a price not to exceed its then
fair market value. The fair market value shall be determined by the City in
accordance with generally accepted appraisal and accounting principles. Under no
circumstances shall any valuation be made for “good will” or any right or
privilege granted by this chapter.
2. City Purchase of System upon Expiration. The City shall have the right to
purchase the cable system if the franchise is terminated at the end of the franchise
term. Should the City decide to purchase the system, it shall do so at a price not to
exceed its then fair market value. In determining the fair market value of the
system, the original cost of all tangible and intangible property, as well as the
salvage value, the book value, the replacement cost, cash flow, and other factors
may be considered.
3. Review of Purchase Price. The Council reserves the right to review the
purchase price of any transfer or assignment of the system, and any assignee to
this chapter expressly agrees that any negotiated sale value which the Council
deems unreasonable will not be considered in the rate base for any subsequent
request for rate increases. Reasonableness of purchase price will be determined in
accordance with criteria listed in subsections 1 and 2 applying wherever a sale
occurs following revocation; subsection 2 applying whenever the system is sold
under any other circumstances.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
4. Continuity of Service Mandatory. It shall be the right of all subscribers to
receive all available services insofar as their financial and other obligations to the
company are honored. In the event that the company elects to overbuild, rebuild,
modify, or sell the system, or the City terminates or fails to renew the franchise
granted in this chapter, or the City elects to purchase the system, the company
shall do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous,
uninterrupted service regardless of circumstances. In the event of purchase by the
City, or a change of company, the current company shall cooperate with the City
to operate the system for a temporary period in maintaining continuity of service
to all subscribers.
5. Removal of Equipment. At the expiration of the term for which the
franchise is granted, or upon its termination and cancellation, as provided herein,
the City shall have the right to require the company to remove at its own expense
all portions of the cable television system from all streets within the City.
113.26 OFFER OF CONVERTERS. The company has offered to provide converters,
and the City by the ordinance codified in this chapter accepts such offer, and by the terms
of this chapter the company is herewith required to provide such converters.
113.27 SYSTEM TESTING. The company shall promptly file with the City copies of
all system testings, either required by the FCC or filed with the FCC. Such copies shall
be filed with the Clerk within 14 days either of the completion of such testing procedures
or of filing the same with the FCC.
113.28 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS. The City reserves the right to adopt, in
addition to the provisions contained in this chapter, such additional regulations as it shall
find necessary in the exercise of its police power; provided, however, that such
regulations are reasonable and not materially in conflict with the privileges granted in this
chapter. However, notwithstanding and in addition to the foregoing, the City shall retain
the right to amend this chapter, including regulation of rates, to correspond with changes
in State, local, or Federal statutes and administrative rules and regulations. This
provision will be exercised in good faith by the Council.
113.29 PENALTIES. Should the company, its successors or assigns, violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or any reasonable rules and regulations established by the City
pursuant hereto, and should such violation continue for more than 30 days after the City
has given the company written notice of such violation, failure or default, the same shall
be cause for the forfeiture or revocation of this chapter and the termination of all rights
hereunder, provided, however, any delay in correcting such violation which is caused by
factors beyond the control of the company shall not be included in computing the length
of the continuance of such violations. In the event of the bankruptcy or receivership of
the company, all rights herein given to the company shall, at the option of the City, be
forfeited and terminated.
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
113.30 PROGRAM CONTENT RESTRICTIONS.
1. In addition to providing basic cable television service consisting of
broadcast, locally originated, access, and automated signals, the company may
offer subscribers optional services on a per-program or per-channel basis (pay
cable). The company shall not, however, program or in any way display any
programming that violates applicable obscenity laws.
2. Among the company’s offered programming services shall be an option
that would allow a subscriber to purchase a limited basic service consisting of:
some or all locally receivable broadcasts, PBS, all access channels, all C-span
channels, a preview guide and their successors.
3. The company shall not charge a subscriber for any programming services
without the subscriber’s prior consent to receive and pay for such programming.
113.31 EMPLOYMENT REQUIREMENT. The company shall not refuse to hire,
nor discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person regarding
compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of sex, race, color,
creed, handicap, age, or national origin. The company shall submit a copy of its
affirmative action program to the City within 30 days subsequent to the effective date of
the ordinance codified in this chapter, and at least annually thereafter during the term of
the franchise.
113.32 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS. The Council reserves the right to change
or amend this chapter at any time during the term of the franchise. This provision will be
exercised in good faith by the Council.
113.33 BINDING ON COMPANY. The provisions, terms, and conditions of this
chapter shall be binding upon the company, successors, heirs, and assigns upon
acceptance hereof by the company.
113.34 SERVICES TO PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES. The company shall
make every reasonable good-faith effort to provide services to persons with disabilities as
is reasonably possible employing the latest state-of-the-art techniques and equipment.
113.35 RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES. It is the intent of the City to provide for the
orderly resolution of any controversy or dispute between the company and the City
arising out of the enforcement or interpretation of any section or provision of this chapter,
or any rule, regulation or procedure relating to cable communications matters. Fact
finding and mediation shall be the means of resolving the great majority of such
controversies or disputes. Only those matters specifically designated as arbitrable may be
submitted to that process for binding resolution. None of these methods, however, shall
be the first resort of the parties, but shall be undertaken only after reasonable time and
full effort to reach agreement by negotiation. Any controversy or dispute, upon the
election of either the company or the City shall be submitted to an expert individual
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
acceptable to both parties for an investigation of the facts and a report thereof. Such fact
finding shall be for the purpose of developing better information for the use of both
parties and shall not be binding upon either party. All fees or other expenses resulting
from such fact finding shall be borne equally by the company and the City. Any
controversy or dispute, upon the election of either the company or the City, shall be
submitted to an expert individual, acceptable to both the company and the City for the
purpose of facilitating discussion and receiving new perspectives on the issues and new
proposals for compromise. Such mediation shall not be binding on either party. All fees
and other expenses resulting from mediation shall be equally borne by the company and
the City. Only those matters which are expressly arbitrable under the provisions of the
franchise may be submitted to arbitration which includes only the purchase price of the
system by the City upon expiration or revocation. Arbitrable matters may be submitted
to a single expert individual, if both parties agree to do so. Otherwise, arbitrable matters
shall be submitted to a three-member expert panel. Arbitration shall be binding on both
parties. Arbitrated matters shall be held to have been adjudicated and settled, and not
open, either directly or indirectly, for review pursuant to the provision of the rules and
procedures of the American Arbitration Association. All fees or other expenses resulting
from such arbitration shall be paid by the company and the City as hereinafter provided.
In the case of fact finding and mediation, both parties shall present a maximum total of
three names each for possible service as experts. If there is no agreement on any of the
names, a judge of competent jurisdiction shall select a person to fulfill the function of
expert. In the case of arbitration, both parties shall agree upon the number of persons to
serve on the arbitration panel. Such number shall be either one or three. If a single
member panel is agreed upon, both parties shall name jointly the person, utilizing the
procedures established for fact finding and mediation. If a three-member panel is agreed
upon, one person shall be named by the City, one shall be named by the company, and a
third person shall be named by agreement between the company and the City. The third
person shall serve as the presiding officer of the panel. If there is no agreement on the
single arbitrator or the presiding officer of the three-member panel, the procedure
established for fact finding and mediation shall be followed. The fees of single experts
and arbitrators shall be equally borne by the company and the City. The fee of the
arbitrator who represents one of the parties shall be borne by that party. The fee of the
presiding officer of an arbitration panel shall be equally borne by the company and the
City. The expenses of fact finding and mediation shall be equally borne by the company
and the City. The expenses of arbitration shall be borne as determined by the arbitration
panel in its award of finding, but in no event shall the City be obligated for more than
one-half the expense.
113.36 MOST FAVORED NATION. The Company, by acceptance of the franchise,
agrees that the City may, at its election, with or without notice, revise the franchise
during its term to conform to any and all provisions of any franchise granted to the
Company by the City of Cedar Rapids or the City of Hiawatha, calculated on an
CHAPTER 113 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
equivalent cost-per-subscriber basis, and any such changes shall be in full force and
effect as if adopted herein.
(Ord. 07-02 – Aug. 07 Supp.)
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 98-11 adopting a cable television franchise for the City was
passed and adopted on June 18, 1998.
CHAPTER 114
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
(LINN COUNTY RURAL ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE
ASSOCIATION)
114.01 Franchise Granted 114.16 Future Agreements
114.02 Construction; Maintenance; Indemnification 114.17 Franchise Fee Billing
114.03 Excavations 114.18 Franchise Fee Exception
114.04 Existing Facilities 114.19 Franchise Fee Collection
114.05 Easements 114.20 Franchise Fee Shown Separately
114.06 System Plans and Maps 114.21 Franchise Fee Remittance
114.07 Annual Planning Meeting 114.22 Refund of Franchise Fee
114.08 Tree Maintenance 114.23 Use of Franchise Fee
114.09 Service Provided 114.24 Notice of Franchise Fee Modification
114.10 Undergrounding 114.25 Administration Cost
114.11 Continuous Service 114.26 Annexed Property
114.12 City Use of Company Facilities 114.27 Term
114.13 Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy 114.28 Severability
114.14 Streetlights 114.29 Publication Expense
114.15 Non-Exclusive 114.30 Entire Agreement
114.01 FRANCHISE GRANTED. There is hereby granted to Linn County Rural Electric
Cooperative Association hereinafter referred to as the "Company," its successors and assigns, the
right and non-exclusive franchise to acquire, construct, reconstruct, erect, maintain and operate
in the City, works and plants for the manufacture and generation of electricity and a distribution
system for electric light, heat and power and the right to erect and maintain the necessary poles,
lines, wires, conduits and other appliances for the distribution of electric current along, under and
upon the streets, alleys and public places in the said City to supply individuals, corporations,
communities, and municipalities both inside and outside of said City with electric light, heat and
power for the period of twenty (20) years, subject to a right of cancellation at the end of the 10th
and 15th years; also the right of eminent domain as provided in Section 364.2 of the Code of Iowa.
114.02 CONSTRUCTION; MAINTENANCE; INDEMNIFICATION. The poles, lines,
wires, circuits, and other appliances shall be placed and maintained so as not to unnecessarily
interfere with the travel on said streets, alleys, and public places in said City nor unnecessarily
interfere with the proper use of the same, including ordinary drainage, or with the sewers,
underground pipe and other property of the City. The said Company, its successors and assigns
shall hold the City free and harmless from all damages to the extent arising from the negligent acts
or omissions of the Company in the erection or maintenance of said system. In addition to the
foregoing hold harmless requirement, the Company’s excess liability policy will include the City
and its employees as additional insureds by definition.
114.03 EXCAVATIONS. In making any excavations in any street, alley, or public place,
Company, its successors and assigns, shall protect the site while work is in progress by guards,
barriers or signals, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the use of the streets, and shall back fill all
openings in such manner as to prevent settling or depressions in surface, pavement or sidewalk of
such excavations with same materials, restoring the condition as nearly as practical. The Company
shall not be required to restore or modify public right of way, sidewalks or other areas in or
adjacent to the Company project to a condition superior to its immediate previously existing
condition. The Company shall make all such restorations in a reasonable amount of time following
completion of the work, and shall not cause any undue delay that is not caused by weather, fire,
natural disaster, unavoidable accidents or casualties.
114.04 EXISTING FACILITIES. The Company shall, in accordance with Iowa law including
Company’s tariff on file with and made effective by the Iowa Utilities Board as may subsequently
be amended, at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its existing facilities or equipment in, on,
over or under any public street or alley in the City in such a manner as the City may at any time
reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or
repair of the street or alley or any public improvement of, in or about any such street or alley or
reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such improvement. If the City orders or
requests the Company to relocate its existing facilities or equipment as the result of the initial
request of a commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, the Company shall receive
payment for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocating its existing facilities or
equipment.
In the event of a relocation, all facilities and/or equipment shall be relocated or replaced in a
manner and to locations consistent with in accordance with all chapters of the Marion City Code
of Ordinances, all applicable state and local codes and ordinances, and any policies or standards
adopted by the City of Marion. In the case where the Company has private easements in place,
the City, if it deems to need use of such easements and requests the Company to move its facilities,
shall pay for the cost of a new private easement and further shall pay for the cost of the new
facilities and installation of such facilities.
114.05 EASEMENTS. The City shall give the Company reasonable advance written notice to
vacate a public right-of-way. Vacating a public right-of-way shall not deprive the Company of its
right to operate and maintain existing facilities, until the reasonable cost of relocating the same are
paid to the Company, and the City shall utilize reasonable efforts to assist Company in securing
an easement or other continued rights of record to continue to operate and maintain its facilities
upon such relocation.
114.06 SYSTEM PLANS AND MAPS. Upon reasonable request, the Company shall provide
the City, on a project specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location, relative to
boundaries of the right of way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it has control that is
located in the public right of way, including documents, maps and other information in paper or
electronic or other forms (“Information”). The Company and City recognize the Information may
in whole or part be considered a confidential record under state or federal law or both. Upon
receipt of a request from a third party for information concerning information about the Company’s
facilities within the City, the City will promptly submit same to Company. If the Company believes
any of the information requested constitutes a trade secret which may otherwise be protected from
public disclosure by state or federal law, or otherwise exempt from disclosure under the provisions
of the Freedom of Information Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Critical Energy
Infrastructure requirements pursuant to 18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, or Chapter 22 of the Code
of Iowa, as such statutes and regulations may be amended from time to time, then the Company
shall provide the City with a written explanation of the basis for such assertion of confidentiality
or exemption from disclosure within ten (10) days.
114.07 ANNUAL PLANNING MEETING. Company operations staff will, at the request of
the City, attend an annual meeting with City Public Works staff, utility staff and other interested
city entities to discuss utility reliability standards, including comparisons to regional and national
reliability statistics, annual and long-term construction planning for the Company and City, tree
trimming plans and other related items. This will not replace any periodic meetings needed on
specific projects and issues.
114.08 TREE MAINTENANCE. The Company is authorized and empowered to prune or
remove at Company expense any tree extending into any street, alley or public grounds to maintain
electric reliability, safety, to restore utility service and to prevent limbs, branches or trunks from
interfering with the wires and facilities of the Company. The pruning and removal of trees shall
be performed in accordance with Company’s then current line clearance vegetation plan as filed,
as well as all applicable codes and standards referenced therein. In addition, the pruning and
removal of trees shall be performed in accordance with all chapters of the Marion City Code of
Ordinances, all state and local codes and ordinances, and any policies or standards adopted by the
City of Marion.
114.09 SERVICE PROVIDED. During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish
electric energy in accordance with the applicable regulations and the Company’s tariffs. The
system authorized by this Ordinance shall be modern and up-to-date and shall be of sufficient
capacity to supply all reasonable demands of said City and its inhabitants thereof and shall be kept
in a modern and up-to-date condition. The Company will maintain compliance with Iowa Utilities
Board regulatory standards for reliability.
114.10 UNDERGROUNDING. The City may request estimates for the undergrounding of
replacement lines, upgrades or new lines, including lines to be adjusted for road moves, for specific
projects addressed at the annual planning meeting, as referenced in Section 114.06. When
requested, the Company will provide to the City two estimates: 1) An estimate for the cost of the
project with overhead construction and 2) An estimate for the cost of the project with underground
construction. The City will have no more than 60 days from the estimate date to determine if it
wants the line built overhead or placed underground. If the City chooses underground construction
for the project, the City or the Company’s customers within the City will be responsible for the
incremental cost of undergrounding, defined as the differential between the estimate for
underground construction and the estimate for overhead construction Upon receipt of the payment
for the incremental cost of undergrounding, the Company will install the underground facilities.
The Company reserves the right to bill for the amount that the incremental cost associated with
installation exceeds its estimate. The City reserves the right to a refund of overpayment if the
incremental costs are less than the amount billed in the estimate. If the City wishes to have a line
not scheduled for replacement or upgrade placed underground, the City shall contact the Company
to make such a request. The City or the Company’s customers within the city shall cover all costs
related to this work. If undergrounding of distribution or service lines requires customers of the
Company to make adjustments to customer-owned electrical systems, the City bears the
responsibility of communication with those customers and, if it chooses, the cost of converting the
customer's utility entrance from overhead to underground. The Company reserves the right to
review all of the City's communications with its customers. The City may elect to have the
Company bill the city directly or bill the Company’s customers within the City’s boundaries for
any costs attributable to the City under this section or any other applicable sections as provided in
the Company’s Government Facilities Relocation Rider.
114.11 CONTINUOUS SERVICE. Service to be rendered by the Company under this
franchise shall be continuous unless prevented from doing so by fire, acts of God, unavoidable
accidents or casualties, or reasonable interruptions necessary to properly service the Company's
equipment, and in such event service shall be resumed as quickly as is reasonably possible.
114.12 CITY USE OF COMPANY FACILITIES. The Company, upon request of the City,
and without cost to it, shall permit its poles, conduits and other distribution facilities, so far as may
be done without interfering with the free use its own wires and fixtures, to be used for the purpose
of maintaining thereon any control wires and other appurtenances which may be necessary for any
use by the City. The City shall defend, indemnify, and hold the Company harmless from any and
all causes of action for injury, litigation or damages which may arise out of or by reason of the
placing or maintenance of such control wires and other appurtenances by the City upon facilities
of the Company, provided such causes of action did not arise out of the negligence of the Company.
Such control wires and other appurtenances shall meet all applicable codes, rules and regulations
that may be in effect. Specifically, all installations of said wires and appurtenances shall be
conditioned upon compliance with the safety rules of the Company, as well as the requirements of
the National Electric safety Code (NESC) or other safety requirements as adopted by the Iowa
Utilities Board under 199 IAC Chapter 25. If the Company has a need for space utilized by the
City, including conduits, the City will, within a reasonable period of time, remove said control
wires and appurtenances or will, at its own cost, provide the Company with a reasonable alternative
location, that similarly allows expansion of the electrical distribution system serving the electric
customers, without disrupting Company operations.
114.13 ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE ENERGY. The Company will
provide to the City energy efficiency materials and rebate forms for display in the building permit
department and other City departments as requested by the City. The Company will participate in
neighborhood and community events, when possible, and upon a request from the City or
neighborhood organization, to encourage City residents to utilize the Company’s energy efficiency
programs.
114.14 STREETLIGHTS. No less than once each year, Company shall provide the City with
a count of streetlights. If the City would at any time desire to purchase the Company's street lights
located within the City, the Company agrees to negotiate the sale of such street lights. The terms
and conditions of such a sale will include that the street lights will be purchased at a mutually
agreed price and on an as is, where is basis. Upon sale, City shall assume all risk and loss related
to the operation and maintenance of the purchased street lighting. Any agreement will require the
City to purchase all street lights in the corporate limits of the City that are owned by the Company.
114.15 NON-EXCLUSIVE. The Franchise granted by this Ordinance shall not be exclusive.
114.16 FUTURE AGREEMENTS. The Company, upon request of the City, shall explore with
the City agreements that are mutually beneficial, and economically feasible to both parties, for
interconnection of alternative energy electrical facilities, use of facilities and purchase of excess
alternatively produced power, in a timely manner, adhering to all Federal, State or local codes,
rules and regulations in effect at the time of agreement. The Company will work with the City for
fair regulatory treatment of such projects. Agreements are subject to generation reliability
requirements.
114.17 FRANCHISE FEE BILLING. There is hereby imposed a franchise fee of four percent
(4%) upon the gross revenue generated from sales of electricity by the Company within the
corporate limits of the City.
114.18 FRANCHISE FEE EXCEPTION. The franchise fee shall not be applied to any
account for the City of Marion or the City of Marion Water Department.
114.19 FRANCHISE FEE COLLECTION. The Company shall begin collecting the franchise
fee within 60 days of final approval of the city council of Marion and within statutory
requirements.
114.20 FRANCHISE FEE SHOWN SEPARATELY. The amount of the franchise fee shall
be shown separately on the utility bill to each customer.
114.21 FRANCHISE FEE REMITTANCE. The Company shall remit franchise fee receipts
to the City no more frequently than on or before the last business day of the month following each
calendar year quarter.
114.22 REFUND OF FRANCHISE FEE. The Company shall not, under any circumstances
be required to return or refund any franchise fees that have been collected from customers and
remitted to the City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or information in defense
of the City's imposition of franchise fees or the Company is required to assist the City in identifying
customers or calculating any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers the City
shall reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by the Company to provide such data or
information.
114.23 USE OF FRANCHISE FEE. The City shall be solely responsible for the proper use of
any amounts collected as franchise fees, and shall only use such fees as collected for a purpose as
allowed by applicable law.
114.24 NOTICE OF FRANCHISE FEE MODIFICATION. The City shall give the
Company reasonable, not less than 6 months, notice prior to the request to adjust the franchise fee
percentage to be collected pursuant to this Ordinance. The City agrees not to modify the amount
more than one time in a two-year period.
114.25 ADMINISTRATION COST. The costs of franchise fee administration are not charged
directly to the City. The City and Company agree that the Company may charge an administration
fee as in an amount not to exceed the limitation provided for in state statute.
114.26 ANNEXED PROPERTY. The City Clerk shall provide written notification by certified
mail to any officer of the Company or designee of any final order authorizing annexation or other
change in corporate limits of the City, and the Company shall apply the franchise fee to its
customers affected by the annexation or change in corporate limits, commencing on an agreed
date, which is not less than ninety (90) days from the receipt of the certified notice. The City shall
include with the notice a list of any utility accounts exempt from the franchise fee within the
annexed area.
114.27 TERM. The term of the franchise granted by this Ordinance and the rights granted
thereunder shall continue for the period of twenty (20) years from and after written acceptance by
the Company, subject to a right of cancellation at the end of the 10th and 15th years. The acceptance
shall be filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days from passage of this Ordinance.
114.28 SEVERABILITY. If any section or provision of this ordinance is held invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of any other provisions of this
ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or portions and to this end each
section and provision of this ordinance is severable.
114.29 PUBLICATION EXPENSE. The expense of the publication of this Ordinance shall be
paid by the Company.
114.30 ENTIRE AGREEMENT. This Ordinance sets forth and constitutes the entire
agreement between the Company and the City with respect to the rights contained herein, and may
not be supplemented, superseded, modified or otherwise amended without the written approval
and acceptance of the Company. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall the City enact
or maintain any Ordinance or place any limitations, either operationally or through the assessment
of fees other than those approved and accepted by the Company within this Ordinance, that create
additional burdens upon the Company, or which delay utility operations.
(Ch. 114 - Ord. 19-09 – May 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 115
CEMETERY
115.01 Definition 115.05 Perpetual Care
115.02 Cemetery Management 115.06 Vandalism in Cemetery
115.03 Records 115.07 Rates and Charges
115.04 Sale of Interment Rights 115.08 Rules and Regulations
115.01 DEFINITION.
1. The term "cemetery" means the Oakshade Cemetery, which is a municipal
cemetery under the provisions of chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa.
2. The terms "Cemetery Deed" and "Certificate of Cemetery Interment Rights" are
one in the same.
3. "Interment rights" means the rights to place remains in a specific location for use
as a final resting place or memorial.
4. "Interment rights agreement" means an agreement to furnish memorials,
memorialization, open and closing services, or interment rights.
115.02 CEMETERY MANAGEMENT. The Park Board shall be responsible for the
management of the Oakshade Cemetery and any other cemetery ground that may hereafter be
owned or operated by the City.
115.03 RECORDS. It is the duty of the Park Board to make and keep a permanent record of all
interments made in the cemetery, which record shall at all times be open to public inspection. The
record shall, among other things, include:
1. Plat. An accurate plat of the cemetery;
2. Certificates of Interment Right Holders. The names of the certificate holders of all
grave spaces that have been sold;
3. Grave Space Descriptions. The correct description of all grave spaces for sale and
the price thereof, as shall be fixed by the City Council;
4. Grave Locations. The exact location of each grave upon each cemetery lot.
115.04 SALE OF INTERMENT RIGHTS. The sale of transfer of interment rights in the
cemetery shall be evidenced by a certificate of interment rights or other instrument evidencing the
conveyance of exclusive rights of interment upon payment in full of the purchase price. The
agreement for interment rights shall disclose all information required by the Iowa Cemetery Act,
including the amount or percentage of money to be placed in the perpetual care cemetery fund.
115.05 PERPETUAL CARE.
1. Trustee. Pursuant to section 523I.502 of the Code of Iowa, the City of Marion
hereby states its willingness and intention to act as the trustee for the perpetual maintenance
of interment spaces in Oakshade Cemetery.
2. Establishment of Trust Fund. A perpetual trust is hereby established for Oakshade
Cemetery in accordance with Iowa Code chapter 523I, the Iowa Cemetery Act. A restricted
fund is created, to be known and designated as the "perpetual care cemetery fund," which
shall be funded by the deposit of an amount equal to or greater than twenty percent of the
gross selling price, or $50.00, whichever is more, for each sale of interment space within
the cemetery. The fund shall be administered in accordance with the purposes and
provisions of Iowa Code chapter 523I.
The perpetual care cemetery fund shall be maintained separate from all operating funds of
the cemetery and the principal of the fund shall not be reduced voluntarily except as
specifically permitted by the Iowa Cemetery Act and applicable administrative regulations.
3. Perpetual Care Registry. The cemetery shall maintain a registry of individuals who
have purchased interment rights in the cemetery subject to the care fund requirements of
the Iowa Cemetery Act, including the amounts deposited in the perpetual care cemetery
fund.
115.06 VANDALISM IN CEMETERY. Any person who destroys, injures or defaces any
grave, vault, tombstone, or monument, or any building, fence, tree, shrub, flower, or anything in
or belonging to any cemetery under the jurisdiction of the City shall be liable for any and all
damage, in addition to being subject to any other penalty imposed.
115.07 RATES AND CHARGES. The Park Board shall at such times as it deems appropriate
recommend changes in cemetery fees and charges to the City Council for its consideration and
adoption by resolution.
115.08 RULES AND REGULATIONS. The rules governing the use of public cemeteries of
the City are as follows:
1. Terms used in this section have the following meanings:
A. "Relative" means a great-grandparent, grandparent, father, mother, spouse,
child, brother, sister, nephew, niece, uncle aunt, first cousin, second cousin, third
cousin, or grandchild connected to a person by either blood or affinity.
B. "Lot" means an area containing more than one interment space identified
by a numeric system and in most cases contains twelve (12) spaces.
C. "Grave Space" means the space of ground used or intended to be used for
an in-ground burial.
2. Potted plants are allowed and shall be placed adjacent to the headstone. Plants
placed in the ground shall be prohibited on lots/grave spaces unless written permission has
been received from the Park Board or its authorized representatives. All decorations shall
be removed by March 1st for spring cleanup. New decorations may be placed after May 1st.
All decorations shall be removed by October 1st for fall cleanup. Blankets and wreaths are
permitted after Thanksgiving and may remain until March 1st. No breakable containers are
permitted at a grave space.
3. Burials without a concrete vault or equivalent structure that minimizes excessive
settling of a grave are prohibited.
4. Headstones, monuments, or markers must be set on foundations and shall be
constructed of concrete or granite, shall extend four (4) inches beyond the marker on all
sides, and shall be of an adequate depth to hold the stone upright. Placement of memorials
must be approved by the Cemetery and be completed by an approved memorial dealer.
5. The cemetery shall be open daily from eight o'clock (8:00) a.m. to sunset and no
one shall be present on the cemetery property except between those hours.
6. Cremated remains shall be interred at least eighteen (18) inches below the surface
of the ground. Scattering of cremated remains on the surface of the ground is prohibited in
the cemetery.
7. Interments shall be limited to, one traditional interment (full burial) or up to two
cremains interments in each interment space.
8. The Park Board is empowered to make special exceptions to the foregoing rules
upon a written request and a clear and definite showing that literal enforcement of the rule
would create an unreasonable hardship and that the exception would not defeat the public
interest served by the rule.
9. No interment space shall be sold or transferred without notifying the Cemetery at
which time the records shall be updated and a new Certificate of Interment Rights issued.
10. No person shall be interred in a grave space except the owner of interment rights or
their relative.
(Ord. 18-03 – May 18 Supp.)
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition 120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation 120.06 Location
120.01 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall manufacture for sale, import,
sell, or offer or keep for sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor control
license, wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 123 of the Code
of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171)
120.02 GENERAL PROHIBITION. It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep
for sale, possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms, conditions,
limitations and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa, and a license or permit
may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)
120.03 INVESTIGATION. Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer
permit, the Clerk shall forward the application to the Marion Police Department and Department
of Criminal Investigation, who shall conduct a background investigation and submit a written
report as to the truth of the facts averred in the application and qualifications to hold a license or
permit. The Marion Fire Department and Marion Building Department shall also inspect the
premises to determine if they conform to the requirements of the City Code. The Council shall
not approve an application for a license or permit for any premises which does not conform to the
applicable law and ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City. The City Clerk shall not
issue a license or permit under this chapter until the applicant has paid all fees required by the State
of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04 ACTION BY COUNCIL. The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance
of the liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its approval or
disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application, necessary fee and bond, if required,
shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce for
such further action as is provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32 [2])
120.05 PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS. A person or club holding a liquor license or retail
wine or beer permit and the person’s or club’s agents or employees shall not do any of the
following:
1. Sell, dispense or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating intoxication, any
alcoholic liquor, wine or beer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [1])
2. Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on the premises covered by
the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of two o’clock
(2:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of two o’clock
(2:00) a.m. on Sunday and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. on the following Monday; however, a
holder of a license or permit granted the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor, beer or wine
on Sunday may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, beer or wine between the hours of eight
o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00) a.m. of the following Monday, and
further provided that a holder of any class of liquor control license or the holder of a class
“B” beer permit may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the
premises between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00)
a.m. on Monday when that Monday is New Year’s Day and beer for consumption off the
premises between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. on Sunday and two o’clock (2:00)
a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is the day before New Year’s Day.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2b and 2k] & 123.150)
3. Sell alcoholic beverages, wine or beer to any person on credit, except with bona
fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its members nor to
sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2c])
4. Employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic
liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises where sold.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2f])
5. In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow the mixing or adding
of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine or any other beverage in or about the
permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2i])
6. Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or disorderly conduct
on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2a])
7. Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises covered by
the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2j])
8. Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic liquor in any
container except the original package purchased from the Alcoholic Beverages Division of
the State Department of Commerce and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the
premises for immediate consumption.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2d])
9. Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle used
originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the addition of any
substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor
or wine; or knowingly possess any original package which has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2e])
10. Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee or employees of the licensee or
permittee to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or other
container which is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except as allowed by
State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49 [2g])
11. Permit or allow any person under legal age as set by State law to enter or remain in
the place of business of any permit holder or license holder in which the selling beer, wine,
and/or alcoholic liquor constitutes more than fifty percent (50%) of the annual gross
business transacted therein after 7:00 p.m. on any day of the week, unless actually engaged
in a trade, occupation or business other than the serving of alcoholic liquor or beer, which
requires said person’s presence within or upon said premises and the person is at least 18
years of age.
12. Sell, give, or otherwise supply any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer to any person,
knowing or failing to exercise reasonable care to ascertain whether the person is under legal
age, or permit any person, knowing or failing to exercise reasonable care to ascertain
whether the person is under legal age to consumer any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer.
13. Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine which is used to vaporize an
alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized form.
120.06 LOCATION. The location of a building wherein there is sale of alcoholic liquor, wine,
or beer shall be in a properly zoned district under the City's Zoning Ordinance, except for the
following:
1. With regard to permits and licenses for consumption on premises:
A. Parties that make application and are approved for a 5 day Special Events
Liquor License; or
B. Parties that complete a Special Events Application and have an approved
Hold Harmless Agreement with the City may engage a caterer with a valid liquor
license with catering privilege to sell alcohol at said special event.
2. With regard to all permits and licenses, including retail locations:
A. A place of business of any permit holder or license holder in which the
selling beer, wine, and/or alcoholic liquor constitutes more than fifty percent (50%)
of the annual gross business shall not be located within 200 feet of a building
primarily used as a school, except:
(1) Permits or licenses in effect as of the date of the ordinance, or
renewals thereof;
(2) Permits or licenses in effect prior to the establishment or relocation
of the school within the 200 foot limitation;
(3) Businesses located within the Central Business District Zone (C2).
(Ch. 120 - Ord. 18-35 – Feb. 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE PERMITS
121.01 Definitions 121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required 121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application 121.08 Self-service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees 121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
121.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
1. “Carton” means a box or container of any kind in which ten or more
packages or packs of cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or
otherwise distributed to consumers.
2. “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco,
or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of
tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated or mixed with
any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or any
other material. However, this definition is not to be construed to include cigars.
3. “Package” or “pack” means a container of any kind in which cigarettes or
tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or otherwise distributed to consumers.
4. “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes are sold, stored or
kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
5. “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale for
consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption, cigarettes,
irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales.
6. “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement or
storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the
product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of the
retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access location.
7. “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars; cheroots;
stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking
tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other
chewing or dissolving tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and
sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such
manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both
chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
(Ord. 12-04 – Feb. 12 Supp.)
121.02 PERMIT REQUIRED. It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of a
retail permit, to sell cigarettes at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell or solicit the
sale of any cigarettes within the City without a valid permit for each place of business.
The permit shall be displayed publicly in the place of business so that it can be seen
easily by the public. No permit shall be issued to a minor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
121.03 APPLICATION. A completed application on forms provided by the State
Department of Revenue and Finance and accompanied by the required fee shall be filed
with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed at least five (5) days prior to the last
regular meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal application is not timely filed, and a
special Council meeting is called to act on the application, the costs of such special
meeting shall be paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
121.04 FEES. The fee for a retail cigarette permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING: FEE:
July, August or September $ 100.00
October, November or December $ 75.00
January, February or March $ 50.00
April, May or June $ 25.00
121.05 ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION. Upon proper application and payment of
the required fee, a permit shall be issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the
place of business for which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on
June 30 of each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit,
and any permit issued, to the Iowa Department of Public Health within thirty (30) days of
issuance.
(Ord. 00-27 – Aug. 00 Supp.)
121.06 REFUNDS. A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund
from the City, except during April, May or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13)
121.07 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. No person shall sell, give or otherwise
supply any tobacco, tobacco products or cigarettes to any person under eighteen (18)
years of age. The provision of this section includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing
cigarettes or tobacco products from a vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a
retailer violates the provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and
hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation, assess the
following:
1. For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the
amount of three hundred dollars. Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under
this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of
fourteen days.
2. For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars or the
retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty days. The retailer may
select its preference in the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
3. For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars and the
retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty days.
4. For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars and the
retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of sixty days.
5. For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s permit shall
be revoked.
The Chief of Police or designee shall give written notice as provided by state law to the
retailer by mailing a copy of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the
application for a permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and
the time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])
(Ord. 12-04 – Feb. 12 Supp.)
121.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED. Beginning January 1, 1999, except
for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as provided in Section
453A.36 (6) of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell or offer for sale cigarettes or
tobacco products, in a quantity of less than a carton, through the use of a self-service
display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09 PERMIT REVOCATION. Following a written notice and an opportunity for
a hearing, as provided by the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa
or any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be issued to
the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person for the place of
business at which the violation occurred, until one year has expired from the date of
revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown to the Council. The Clerk shall
report the revocation or suspension of a retail permit to the Iowa Department of Public
Health within thirty (30) days of the revocation or suspension.
(Ord. 00-27 – Aug. 00 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Definitions 122.11 Fees
122.02 License Required 122.12 Rebates
122.03 Application for License; Issuance 122.13 Bond
122.04 License Suspension 122.14 Insurance
122.05 License Revocation 122.15 Lights and Noisemakers
122.06 Restrictions 122.16 Hours of Operation
122.07 FDA Standard for Pushcart Operators and Vendors 122.17 Sales on Right-of-way
122.08 Hand-washing Facilities 122.18 Truck Sales Prohibited
122.09 Waste Retention and Refuse Disposal 122.19 Potentially Hazardous Foods
122.10 List of Approved Food and Beverage Items
122.01 DEFINITIONS. Terms used in this chapter have the following meanings:
1. “Peddler” means any person who goes from house to house, from place to
place, or from street to street, conveying or transporting goods, foods which are
not potentially hazardous foods, wares or merchandise or exposing the same for
sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers.
2. “Potentially hazardous food” means any food that consists in whole or in
part of milk or milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shellfish, edible
crustaceans or other ingredients, including synthetic ingredients, in a form capable
of supporting rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic
microorganisms. The term does not include clean, whole, uncracked, odor-free
shell eggs or foods which have a pH level of 4.6 or below or a water activity value
of 0.85 or less.
3. “Pushcart” means a non-motorized vehicle limited to serving foods which
are not potentially hazardous foods or commissary-wrapped food maintained at
proper temperatures. A motorized vehicle is not considered a pushcart.
4. “Solicitor” means any person who goes from house to house, from place to
place, or from street to street, soliciting or taking orders for sale or goods, foods
which are not potentially hazardous foods, wares or merchandise, including but
not limited to magazines, books, photographs, periodicals, or personal property,
for future delivery or for a service to be performed in the future.
5. “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary
business of selling and delivering goods, foods which are not potentially
hazardous foods, wares or merchandise within the City, who in furtherance of such
purpose leases, uses or occupies any vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad car, or other
place in the City for the exhibition and retail sale of such goods, wares or
merchandise. “Transient merchant” does not include the temporary sale of goods,
foods which are not potentially hazardous foods, wares, or merchandise, by a
permanent merchant or private property adjacent to the merchant’s permanent
place of business.
6. “Vendor” includes peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants.
122.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
1. No person shall engage in the business of peddler, solicitor, transient
merchant, pushcart operator or vendor in the City without first obtaining a license
as provided in this chapter, with the exception of those individuals and
organizations identified in subsection 7 of this section. Only one natural person
may engage in such activity under one license.
2. Each peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, pushcart operator and vendor
shall obtain the necessary licenses and/or permits as may be required by the
County, State, or Federal governing bodies. Each applicant shall comply with all
applicable County, State, or Federal laws, rules and regulations.
3. Each pushcart shall be separately licensed and may operate only at the
location specified in the license as approved by the Council or a duly authorized
representative of the City.
4. A license shall not be transferable from person to person or from an
approved location to another location without approval of the Council or a duly
authorized representative of the City.
5. Each transient merchant shall prominently display the merchant’s license at
all times while engaging in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods,
foods which are not potentially hazardous foods, wares, or merchandise within the
City.
6. The license issued pursuant to this chapter is to be carried at all times by
the licensee or a representative of the licensee, when the licensee or representative
is engaged in the particular activity for which the license was issued and shall,
upon the request of customers or City employees, exhibit the license as evidence
of compliance with all requirements of this chapter.
7. This chapter does not apply to the selling of personal property at wholesale
to dealers in such articles; to the sale of produce grown in Iowa; to newspaper
vendors; to merchants or their employees, in delivering goods in the regular course
of business; to drug retail persons calling on physicians, pharmacists, veterinarians
and hospitals; to vendors of milk and other products distributed or sold to regular
customers on established routes; or to nonprofit organizations defined and
authorized by Chapter 504A of the Code of Iowa, or authorized and organized
under statutes or regulations of the United States government, or approved by the
Internal Revenue Service, churches, public and private schools and colleges that
are located in Linn County, Iowa; nonprofit clubs and lodges when not ordinarily
conducted as a business, that do not meet the requirements of Chapter 504A of the
Code of Iowa and are located in Linn County, Iowa. This chapter does not
prohibit any auction sales required by statute or by order of any Court, or prohibit
any auction sales conducted pursuant to law. This section does not exempt any of
the above cited individuals, groups, and/or organizations from meeting the
requirements of Section 122.06(1).
(Ord. 04-07 – May. 04 Supp.)
122.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE.
1. An applicant for a license under this chapter shall provide to the Clerk
reliable individual identification as determined by the Clerk, and shall file with the
Clerk a sworn application in writing, which shall give all of the following
information:
A. The name and physical description of the applicant.
B. The permanent home address and also the local address of the
applicant.
C. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold.
D. The proposed location, address, route, and/or area in which the
business is to be operated.
E. The name and address of the applicant’s employer, if the applicant
has an employer.
F. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
G. If the applicant’s employer is a corporation, the state of its
incorporation; evidence it is authorized to do business in Iowa; evidence
that the corporation has designated a resident agent in the City upon whom
legal service may be made; and evidence that the corporation will be
responsible for the acts of its employees in the City.
H. A statement as to whether or not the applicant had been convicted of
any felony, aggravated or serious misdemeanor, or a violation of any
municipal ordinances other than a traffic ordinance. The applicant shall
provide information on each such offense or pending charges of each such
offense, including the nature of the offense, date of the offense, and penalty
imposed for the offense.
I. The names and locations of the last three municipalities where the
applicant carried on business immediately preceding this application, and
the addresses from which such business was conducted in these
municipalities.
J. A description of any motor vehicles to be used in conjunction with
the applicant’s operation and their respective license plate numbers.
K. A statement that the applicant agrees to leave private property
promptly when requested to do so by the owner, tenant, occupant, or person
in control of the property.
L. A statement that the applicant will not enter upon private property
where a sign is posted indicating no solicitation allowed, no solicitors, do
not disturb, or words of similar import of any of the phrases.
M. Other pertinent information requested by the Clerk; including but not
limited to employer identification and sales tax permit information.
2. In determining whether a license under this chapter should be granted or
denied, standards including but not limited to the following shall be taken into
consideration:
A. Whether the proposed activity is likely to cause undue congestion of
a public area.
B. The number and nature of past and present complaints against the
applicant for activities including but not limited to misrepresentation, fraud,
selling defective merchandise, entering property posted pursuant to Section
122.03(1)(L) or failure to promptly leave property when so requested.
C. Whether the applicant has been convicted of a violation of a similar
ordinance within the last five years.
D. Whether the applicant has been convicted within the last five years
of any felony, aggravated or serious misdemeanor, violation of any
municipal ordinance other than a traffic offense, that would relate to the
public health, welfare, safety and/or morals in the applicant’s conduct of
business under the license.
E. Whether the proposed activity is likely to cause excessive or unusual
noise in violation of this Code of Ordinances.
3. The Clerk, upon satisfaction that the application for license as provided for
in this chapter, is true, correct, and complete and upon payment of the license fee
and compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall issue the license. If the
Clerk refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall endorse the reasons upon the
application. The applicant then shall have the right to a hearing before the Council
at its next regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify or affirm the
decision of the Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present, if there is
a quorum, and the Clerk shall carry out the Council’s decision.
4. The Chief of Police shall conduct a background investigation of all
applicants including a check of the applicants background by the Department of
Criminal Investigation. (Ord. 02-05 – May. 02 Supp.)
122.04 LICENSE SUSPENSION. A license under this chapter may be temporarily
suspended by the Clerk or Police Chief when upon investigation the Clerk or Police Chief
finds any of the following:
1. The licensee has made fraudulent, false, or incorrect statements in the
application or in the conduct of the licensee’s business.
2. The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise conducted the
licensed business or activity in an unlawful manner, or contrary to the provisions
of this Code of Ordinances applicable thereto.
3. The licensee has conducted business in a manner endangering the public
welfare, health, safety, or morals.
4. The license may be temporarily suspended by serving notice on the licensee
by personal service or as required for personal service by the Iowa Rules of Civil
Procedure. The notice shall state the reasons for suspension and shall state that the
licensee has the right to appeal the suspension to the Council by filing an appeal
with the Clerk within five (5) days of the receipt of the notice. The appeal shall be
conducted pursuant to the procedure of Section 122.05(2) of this chapter but
conducted as an appeal of a suspension, not a revocation. The licensee shall not
conduct activity permitted by the license while the license is temporarily
suspended.
122.05 LICENSE REVOCATION.
1. The Clerk, after giving reasonable notice and a hearing, may revoke any
license for the following reasons:
A. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the application or in
the conduct of the licensee’s business.
B. The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise conducted the
business or activity in an unlawful manner or contrary to any applicable
provisions of this Code of Ordinances.
C. The licensee has conducted the business or activity in a manner
endangering the public welfare, health, safety, order or morals.
The notice shall be in writing and shall be served personally or as required for
personal service by Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure. The notice shall state the time
and place of the hearing and the reasons for the intended revocation.
2. Appeal. If the Clerk revokes a license, the Clerk shall immediately notify
the Council in writing, giving the reasons for the revocation. The licensee then
shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at it next regular meeting. The
Council may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the Clerk by a majority vote
of the Council members present, if there is a quorum.
3. Effect of Revocation. Revocation of a license shall bar such person from
being eligible for a license for a period of one year from the date of revocation.
122.06 RESTRICTIONS.
1. No person or other organization shall sell, display, or otherwise offer for
sale any merchandise or other materials on any sidewalk, street, public right-ofway,
or other public property, without first obtaining written approval by the Clerk
or by a duly authorized representative of the Clerk. Application for such license
shall be made in writing to the
Clerk. The Clerk may refer such application to appropriate City departments for
review and report. Said application along with the appropriate department reports
shall then be forwarded to the Clerk for action to approve or disapprove.
2. Persons having valid contracts with the City authorizing activities described
in subsection 1 above are excepted from the terms of said subsection for the
activities specifically authorized in the contract.
3. The Council reserves the right to require the relocation of any licensed
pushcart or transient merchant to a new location in the event public safety or
congestion so requires, based on the discretion of the Council.
4. Transient merchants who are engaging in business on private property may
only do so in the following zoning districts as defined in the Zoning Ordinance:
C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, and I-1 or I-2.
5. No transient merchant shall be permitted to operate from one location for
more than seven (7) consecutive days; and no other transient merchant shall be
permitted to operate another business at that location within the immediate 30 days
following the previous transient merchant.
6. The Council may by resolution, following a request by a pushcart operator,
vendor, or permanent merchant, grant exception to time constraints of Section
122.19(3) and Section 122.06(5), and the license requirements of Section 122.06,
based upon just cause.
7. All pushcart operators, transient merchants and vendors shall comply with
all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. However, transient merchants shall not
be required to provide off-street parking facilities except when off-street parking
facilities are provided in the design and maintenance of said facilities.
8. No vendor vending from a motor vehicle shall conduct the vendor’s
business in such a way as could restrict or interfere with the ingress or egress of
the abutting property owner or tenant, or create or become a public nuisance,
increase traffic congestion or delay, or constitute a hazard to traffic, life, or
property, or an obstruction to adequate access to fire, police, sanitation or
emergency vehicles. Furthermore, no vehicle shall remain in any one place for a
period longer than necessary to make a sale after having been approached or
stopped for that purpose. Notwithstanding the above, no such vehicle shall remain
stopped or parked for business purposes at any one location for a
period exceeding fifteen (15) minutes and if parked adjacent to a public park, shall
not operate any audible sound system while so parked.
(Ord. 03-18 – Nov. 03 Supp.)
9. No licensee under this chapter shall refuse to exhibit that license when
requested by a customer, potential customer, or City employee. No licensee under
this chapter shall refuse to leave private property when requested to do so by the
owner, tenant, occupant or person in control of the property. No licensee under
this chapter shall enter upon private property and contact the owner, tenant,
occupant or person in control of the property, when the private property has posted
thereon a sign indicating no solicitation allowed, no solicitors, do not disturb, or
words of similar import of any of these phrases.
10. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed under this chapter or
not, to sell, peddle, or solicit any person to purchase any article or service
whatsoever in a public park or on the sidewalks adjacent to said park on both sides
of the right-of-way, when that park has been rented by or reserved by a person or
organization for a specific event and that event is taking place. This subsection
does not apply to: the sale of newspapers, vendors approved to be in the park by
the Park Board, or approved by the person or organization having rented or
reserved the park. This subsection also does not apply to any business located
within the central business district that has a written encroachment agreement with
the City provided that its activities are restricted to the area directly adjacent to its
business; or to any business located within the central business district during a
City approved sidewalk sale provided that its activities are restricted to the area
directly adjacent to its business. Central business district, as used in this
subsection, means the area north of 6th Avenue, south of 8th Avenue, east of 9th
Street and west of 13th Street.
(Ord. 12-08 – May 12 Supp.)
122.07 FDA STANDARD FOR PUSHCART OPERATORS AND VENDORS. Each
pushcart operator and vendor shall meet the Food and Drug Administration Food Service
Sanitation standards and the Iowa Department of Agriculture Food Service Sanitation
Code, and applicable rules and/or regulation, for food storage, preparation, and
dispensing.
122.08 HAND-WASHING FACILITIES. Each pushcart operator and vendor shall
provide hand-washing facilities for the employee of the license, when required by the
Food and Drug Administration regulations.
122.09 WASTE RETENTION AND REFUSE DISPOSAL. Each pushcart operator
and vendor shall provide a waste retention tank when required by Food and Drug
Administration regulations. All waste liquids, garbage, litter and refuse shall be kept
covered with tight-fitting lids and appropriately disposed of at the permanent location.
No waste liquids, garbage, litter or refuse shall be dumped or drained onto sidewalks,
streets, gutters, drains, trash receptacles, or any other place except at the permanent
location of a pushcart. When leaving the sales area, the licensee or licensee’s employees
shall pick up all litter resulting from the licensee’s business, and shall deposit such litter
in an approved container in compliance with the Food and Drug Administration Food
Service Sanitation Code and regulations, located on the licensee’s cart. Failure to do so
shall be grounds for license revocation.
122.10 LIST OF APPROVED FOOD AND BEVERAGE ITEMS. The Food and
Drug Administration has published laws and regulations regarding approved food and
beverage items which may be sold by pushcart operators and vendors. No items of any
kind, other than those food and beverage items allowed in the Food and Drug
Administration regulations shall be sold or dispensed by pushcart operators and vendors.
122.11 FEES. Fees for all licenses issued under this chapter are as follows: $20.00 per
day, $35.00 per week, $65.00 per month, or $200.00 per year; and the applicant shall also
pay to the Marion City Clerk all of the costs associated with any background
investigation conducted pursuant to this chapter. Fees will not be prorated or refunded
unless the license is suspended or revoked by the Council.
(Ord. 05-16 – Nov. 05 Supp.)
122.12 REBATES. A licensee shall be entitled to a rebate of part of the fee paid for an
annual license upon surrender of the license to the City prior to expiration. The rebate
shall be pro rated based upon unexpired quarters. In all cases, at least fifteen dollars
($15.00) of the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover administrative costs.
Any license issued for a period of less than one year shall not be eligible for a rebate.
122.13 BOND. An applicant for a license under this chapter shall file with the Clerk a
surety bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned that the
applicant shall comply fully with all ordinances of the City and laws regulating the
licensee’s operation, and guaranteeing to any resident of the City that all money paid will
be accounted for and applied according to the representation of the licensee. The bond
shall continue in force as to any surety for not less than one year from the date of
execution of such agreement. Action on such bond may be brought by the person
aggrieved and for whose benefit, among others, the bond is given.
122.14 INSURANCE. All licensees under this chapter shall provide proof of general
liability insurance including products liability in the amount of $300,000 per occurrence
and $100,000 for property damage. A certificate of insurance shall be delivered to the
Clerk prior to the issuance of a license. The City and its employees shall be named as
additional insureds against any liabilities that may arise in connection with the operations
of the licensees.
122.15 LIGHTS AND NOISEMAKERS. No pushcart operator or vendor, nor
anyone on behalf of the pushcart operator or vendor, shall shout, make an outcry, blow a
horn, or use any other sound devices including but not limited to any loud speaking radio
or amplifying system which exceed the noise levels set forth in Chapter 53 of this Code
of Ordinances.
122.16 HOURS OF OPERATION. No pushcart operator or vendor shall operate
before eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. or after nine o’clock (9:00) p.m., on any day, unless
specifically approved by the Council.
122.17 SALES ON RIGHT-OF-WAY. The sale of any goods within any public rightof-
way by a person licensed under this chapter is prohibited unless the person has the
prior approval of the Clerk and has executed a hold harmless agreement with the City.
This provision shall not apply to the sale of newspapers.
122.18 TRUCK SALES PROHIBITED. A person licensed under this chapter shall
not operate a truck or semi-truck upon any street except those designated as truck routes.
However, this section does not apply to licensed persons selling milk or dairy products,
who may operate trucks upon any City street.
122.19 POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOODS.
1. Peddlers are prohibited from selling all potentially hazardous foods. If a
vehicle or pushcart is used by a peddler for the sale of any food items, all
requirements of this chapter relating to pushcarts, vehicles, and foodstuffs shall be
applicable. This provision does not prohibit the distribution of printed materials
door to door.
2. All potentially hazardous foods are prohibited from being sold from a
pushcart by a solicitor or by a transient merchant.
3. Temporary sale of goods, foods which are not potentially hazardous foods,
wares or merchandise by a permanent merchant on private property adjacent to the
merchant’s permanent place of business shall not exceed seven (7) days in
duration or take place more than once every thirty (30) days.
[The next page is 685]
CHAPTER 123 HOUSE MOVERS
CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS
123.01 Definitions 123.08 Safety
123.02 Permit 123.09 Equipment
123.03 Application for Permit 123.10 Sewer Connections
123.04 Issuance of Permit 123.11 Curb Protection
123.05 Restrictions 123.12 Utilities Connections
123.06 Display of Permit 123.13 Report
123.07 Insurance 123.14 Damages
123.01 DEFINITIONS. Terms used in this section have the following meanings.
1. “House mover” means any person who engages in the business or work of
house moving within the City.
2. “Housing moving” means the moving of any house, building, structure, or
any part or parts thereof, except structures or parts of structures less than twelve
(12) feet wide and less than twelve (12) feet high mounted, from one location to
another when the moving of such house, building, structure or part or parts of
structures requires traveling upon, across, along or over any street, alley, sidewalk
or other public ground in the City.
123.02 PERMIT. No person shall do any house moving without first obtaining a
permit from the City.
123.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. Any person desiring a house moving permit
shall file an application in the office of the Clerk at least seven (7) days prior to the
commencement of the work. Such application shall contain:
1. The date and time of moving the house, structure or building.
2. A detailed statement setting forth the proposed route to be followed in
moving the structure, the equipment to be used and specifying the person in charge
of the moving operation.
3. The location of the premises to which the structure is to be moved and the
corporate zoning classification.
4. The name of the owner of the structure and the name of the owner of the
premises to which it is being moved, showing that the applicant is entitled to move
the house.
5. A plot plan of the location to which the structure is to be moved, showing
the exact proposed location of the structure, the boundaries of the lot upon which
the structure is to be placed, and the dimensions of the lot.
CHAPTER 123 HOUSE MOVERS
6. A statement showing the maximum length and width including eaves and
loaded height of the structure to be moved.
7. An agreement that the house mover shall indemnify and hold the City
harmless from any claim or damages for injuries to persons or property resulting
from the moving of the structure for which the permit is requested.
8. An agreement that the applicant shall immediately report any damage done
by the moving operation to any street, sidewalk, alley, curb, tree or other public
property and that the applicant will upon demand pay to the City the cost of repair
occasioned by the damage.
9. The applicant shall file with the application the consent of the power and
light company and the telephone company to use the proposed route.
The fee for a house moving permit shall be as stated in the Building Code.
123.04 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT. Upon the filing of the application with required
consents and insurance certificate and payment of the fee, before and upon the approval
of the City Building Inspector, City Forester, Police Chief, Fire Chief, City Engineer, and
City Manager, a house moving permit shall be issued by the City.
123.05 RESTRICTIONS. A permit may be restricted where, in the judgment of the
City Manager, the moving operations would create undue traffic congestion or hazards;
the City Manager may require police escorts or temporary removal of traffic control
devices for the moving operations, or the City Manager may restrict or specify the hours
during which the moving operation must be accomplished. The cost of these
requirements shall be borne by the house mover.
123.06 DISPLAY OF PERMIT. The City permit shall be plainly displayed at all
times on the front of the structure.
123.07 INSURANCE. Before any permit for house moving work shall be issued by
the City, the house mover shall have filed with the City a Certificate of Insurance, written
by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Iowa. The Certificate
of Insurance shall be in limits of not less than $250,000 liability for personal injury to any
one person, and not less than $500,000 liability for personal injury to more than one
person for any single occurrence, and not less than $500,000 liability for property
damage. The certificate shall be written on a standard form carrying an endorsement
naming the City and its employees as additional insured as its interest may appear and
conditioned upon the faithful performance of all duties required of such house mover by
this chapter. It shall be a further condition of the Certificate of Insurance that the
obligator will hold the City harmless from any and all damages sustained by reason of
neglect or incompetence on the part of the house mover, the house mover’s agents or
employees in the performance of the work done, or any negligent guarding of hazardous
areas or by reason of any other cause growing out of the negligence or carelessness of
CHAPTER 123 HOUSE MOVERS
such house mover, the house mover’s agents or employees, or the issuance of the permit.
The Certificate of Insurance shall not expire prior to the completion of the work under the
house moving permit. No permit for house moving work shall be valid if the Certificate
of Insurance has expired or been terminated for any reason unless renewal or replacement
coverage is provided. It is the intent and purpose of the Certificate of Insurance also to
cover the individual, company, firm, association, corporation or partnership with which
the house mover is associated.
123.08 SAFETY. At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon
any street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain flagmen at the
closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic ahead, to the sides and behind
the building or structure. At all times when the building or structure is at rest upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, or public property, the permittee shall place barricades and
maintain adequate warning signs or flares at the intersections or channels of traffic ahead,
to the sides and behind the building or structure.
123.09 EQUIPMENT. All equipment used in the moving operation must be equipped
with adequate warning flares and lights. The house mover shall at all times comply with
the provisions of the statutes of the State of Iowa pertaining to wheel loadings. The
house mover shall not use any equipment which travels upon the streets, alleys, sidewalk,
or other-public grounds that is not equipped with rubber tires.
123.10 SEWER CONNECTIONS. The building sewer shall be disconnected from the
public sewer at the property line and the portion of the sewer running to the public sewer
shall be sealed watertight. This work shall be done in the presence of the City Sewer
Inspector.
123.11 CURB PROTECTION. The house mover shall protect the curbing from
damage when loads pass over the curb. In the event that the curbs are damaged, the
house mover shall be responsible for repairing the curb to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer.
123.12 UTILITIES CONNECTIONS. Arrangements shall be made with all
concerned utility companies to have their utilities disconnected from the building to be
moved.
123.13 REPORT. The house mover shall report any damage done to any street, alley,
sidewalk, curb, tree, telephone or light poles or wires, or to any other public or private
property, except property owned by the house mover of the structure being moved, to the
City Manager within twelve (12) hours and after the occurrence.
123.14 DAMAGES. The house mover shall upon demand pay any damages resulting
from any injury to any person or property, which injury is required to be reported to the
CHAPTER 123 HOUSE MOVERS
City Manager under Section 123.13 of this chapter. Nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the house mover from contesting any claim in good faith in any court.
CHAPTER 124
LICENSING OF ELECTRICIANS
124.01 Title and Purpose 124.03 Violations
124.02 Licensing Required
124.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE. This chapter shall be known as the City of Marion,
Iowa, Electrical Licensing Code. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the
licensing and insuring of electrical apprentices, journeymen and contractors in order to
protect public health, safety and welfare.
124.02 LICENSING REQUIRED. No person shall install, alter, and add to, repair,
relocate, replace, or maintain any electrical system within the City unless such person
meets the requirements of rules for State of Iowa licensing as established by the State of
Iowa Electrical Examining Board, and has obtained a permit for said electrical work from
the Building Official according to the provisions of the Marion Electrical Code.
124.03 VIOLATIONS. Violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in
Section 1.06 of the Code of Ordinances or may be cited as a municipal infraction under
Chapter 4 of the Code of Ordinances.
(Ch. 124 - Ord. 11-08 – May 11 Supp.)
CHAPTER 125
LICENSING OF PLUMBERS
125.01 Title and Purpose 125.03 Violations
125.02 Licensing Required
125.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE. This chapter shall be known as the City of Marion,
Iowa, Plumbing Contractors, Journeyman Plumbers and Pipe Layers Licensing Code.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing and insuring of plumbing
contractors, journeymen and pipe layers in order to protect public health, safety and
welfare.
125.02 LICENSING REQUIRED. No person shall install, alter, and add to, repair,
relocate, replace, or maintain any plumbing system within the City unless such person
meets the requirements of licensing rules as established by the Iowa Department of
Public Health, Plumbing and Mechanical Systems Examining Board, and has obtained a
permit for said plumbing work from the Building Official according to the provisions of
the Marion Plumbing Code.
125.03 VIOLATIONS. Violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in
Section 1.06 of the Code of Ordinances or may be cited as a municipal infraction under
Chapter 4 of the Code of Ordinances.
(Ch. 125 - Ord. 11-07 – May 11 Supp.)
CHAPTER 126
LICENSING OF MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS
126.01 Title and Purpose 126.03 Violations
126.02 Licensing Required
126.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE. This chapter shall be known as the City of Marion,
Iowa, Mechanical Heating/Cooling Licensing Code. The purpose of this chapter is to
provide for the licensing and insuring of heating/cooling apprentices,
journeymen/installers and contractors in order to protect public health, safety and
welfare.
126.02 LICENSING REQUIRED. No person shall install, alter, and add to, repair,
relocate, replace, or maintain any mechanical system within the City unless such person
meets the requirements of licensing rules as established by the Iowa Department of
Public Health, Plumbing and Mechanical Systems Examining Board, and has obtained a
permit for said mechanical work from the Building Official according to the provisions of
the Marion Mechanical Code.
126.03 VIOLATIONS. Violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in
Section 1.06 of the Code of Ordinances or may be cited as a municipal infraction under
Chapter 4 of the Code of Ordinances.
(Ch. 126 - Ord. 11-06 – May 11 Supp.)
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 127
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
127.01 Purpose and Intent 127.13 Nonconforming Uses
127.02 Definitions 127.14 Additional Regulations for Adult Motels
127.03 Classification and Standards of Conduct 127.15 Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of
and Operation Sexually Explicit Films or Videos
127.04 Permit Required 127.16 Exterior Portions of Sexually Oriented Businesses
127.05 Issuance of Permit 127.17 Signage
127.06 Fees 127.18 Persons Younger Than Eighteen Prohibited
127.07 Inspection 127.19 Massages or Baths Administered by Person of
127.08 Expiration of Permit Opposite Sex
127.09 Suspension 127.20 Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited
127.10 Revocation 127.21 Notices
127.11 Transfer of Permit 127.22 Injunction
127.12 Location Restrictions 127.23 Exemptions
127.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate
sexually oriented businesses and related activities to promote the health, safety, morals,
and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the City. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor
effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of
this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by
the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this
ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.
127.02 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1. “Adult arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
2. “Adult bookstore” or “adult video store” means a commercial
establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or
rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
A. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
B. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as
an adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not
serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an
adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business
purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials
which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
A principal business purpose need not be a primary use of an establishment, so
long as it is a significant use based upon the visible inventory or commercial
activity of the establishment.
3. “Adult cabaret” means a commercial establishment that regularly features:
A. Persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity; or
B. Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
C. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
D. Persons who engage in lewd, lascivious or erotic dancing or
performances that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an
audience or customers.
4. “Adult motel” means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
that:
A. Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration
and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions
that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible from the
public right-of-way that advertises the availability of these adult types of
photographic reproductions; or
B. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
twenty-four (24) hours; or
C. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room
for a period of time that is less than twenty-four (24) hours.
5. “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment where,
for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
6. “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear in a state of
nudity or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
7. “Director” means the Police Chief and such employees of the police
department as the Police Chief may designate to perform the duties of the Director
under this chapter.
8. “Escort” means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
9. “Escort agency” means a person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
10. “Establishment” means and includes any of the following:
A. The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as
a new business;
B. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
C. The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
11. “Licensed day-care center” means a facility licensed by the State, whether
situated within the City or not, that provides care, training, education, custody,
treatment or supervision for more than twelve (12) children under fourteen (14)
years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to
the owner or operator of the facility, of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day,
regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the
services it offers.
12. “Permittee” means a person in whose name a permit to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant
on the application for a permit.
13. “Nude model studio” means any place where a person who appears in a
state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by other
persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
14. “Nudity” or “state of nudity” means the appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast without a fully
opaque, complete covering of the breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
15. “Semi-nude” means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than
the human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast
without a fully opaque, complete covering of the breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.
16. “Sexual encounter center” means a business or commercial enterprise that,
as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
A. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
B. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is seminude.
17. “Sexually oriented business” means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center.
18. “Specified anatomical areas” means the male genitals in a state of sexual
arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals.
19. “Specified sexual activities” means and includes any of the following:
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections A through C above.
20. “Substantial enlargement” of a sexually oriented business means the
increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty-five (25%)
from the original premises.
21. “Transfer of ownership or control” of a sexually oriented business means
and includes any of the following:
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
B. The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
C. The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device that
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control.
127.03 CLASSIFICATION AND STANDARDS OF CONDUCT AND
OPERATION.
1. Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
A. Adult arcades;
B. Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
C. Adult cabarets;
D. Adult motels;
E. Adult motion picture theaters;
F. Adult theaters;
G. Escort agencies;
H. Nude model studios; and
I. Sexual encounter centers.
2. The following standards of conduct must be adhered to by entertainers and
employees of any sexually oriented business while on the premises:
A. No employee or entertainer shall be unclothed or in such less than
opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any
specified anatomical area, except when such entertainer or employee is
separated from any and all customers by a window or other partition which
is maintained free of holes or other structural openings which would permit
physical contact between such entertainer and employee and any customer
within the viewing area and customers are not permitted within four (4) feet
of the window or other partition. However, a single opening in such
window or partition, allowing for payment for entertainment, by a customer
to the entertainer, shall be permitted and at this point customers are
permitted within two (2) feet of the window or other partition to allow
customers to reach the opening.
B. No employee or entertainer shall perform:
(1) Any specified sexual activities; or
(2) The displaying of any specified anatomical area, except as
provided for in paragraph A of this subsection.
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
C. No employee or entertainer who is either not separated from any and
all customers as provided in paragraph A of this subsection, or in an area of
the premises not open to customers shall be unclothed or in less than
opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing as described in paragraph
A of this subsection.
D. No employee or entertainer shall knowingly touch any specified
anatomical area of another person, or knowingly permit another person to
touch any specified anatomical area of such employee or entertainer; or no
employee or entertainer shall knowingly fondle or caress any specified
anatomical area of another person, whether such area is clothed, unclothed,
covered or exposed, or knowingly permit another person to fondle or caress
any specified anatomical area of such employee or entertainer, whether
such area is clothed, unclothed, covered or exposed.
E. No entertainer shall be visible from any public place during the
hours of his or her employment, or apparent hours of his or her
employment, while such entertainer is unclothed or in such attire, costume
or clothing to expose to view any specified anatomical area or while
performing any entertainment, either while clothed or unclothed.
F. No entertainer shall solicit, demand or receive any payment or
gratuity from any customer for any act prohibited by this chapter.
G. No entertainer shall receive any payment or gratuity from any
customer, except through an opening in the window or partition separating
such entertainer from a customer, as described in paragraph A of this
subsection.
3. At any sexually oriented business, the following are required:
A. A sign, on which upper-case letters are at least two (2) inches high
and lower-case letters are at least one (1) inch high, shall be conspicuously
displayed in the common area at the principal entrance and shall read as
follows:
THIS ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS
IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF MARION, IOWA.
ENTERTAINERS ARE:
1. Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct on the premises or in
prostitution;
2. Not permitted to be unclothed or in such less than opaque and complete attire,
costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the breasts below the
top of the areola, or any portion of the pubic region, buttocks and/or genitals,
except when separated from customers by the window or partition between the
entertainer and customers.
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
3. Not permitted to receive any payment or gratuity from any customer, except
through an opening in the window or partition separating such entertainer
from a customer.
B. Neither entertainment nor any photograph, drawing, sketch or other
pictorial or graphic representation thereof displaying any specified
anatomical area shall be visible from a public place.
C. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access
at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle as measured at the floor
level, and such illumination must be maintained at all times that any
customer is present in or on the premises.
127.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. It is unlawful for a person to operate a sexually oriented business without a
valid permit issued by the Director.
2. An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the City.
The application must be accompanied by a sketch or a diagram showing the
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied
by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
3. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter
and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by
the Health Department, Fire Department, Building Official and Zoning Official.
4. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a person who
wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each
individual who has a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in the business must
sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of
a sexually oriented business or as the entity that wishes to operate such a business,
each individual having a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in the corporation
must sign the application for a permit as applicant.
5. The fact that a person possesses other types of State or City permits and/or
licenses does not exempt said person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually
oriented business permit.
6. Applications for a permit, whether original or renewal, must be made to the
Director by the intended operator of the enterprise. Applications must be
submitted by hand delivery to the office of the Director during regular working
hours. Application forms shall be supplied by the Director. The intended operator
shall be required to give the following information on the application form:
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
A. The name, street address (and mailing address if different) and Iowa
driver’s license number of the intended operator;
B. The name and street address (and mailing address if different) of the
owner;
C. The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a
general description of the services to be provided;
D. The telephone number of the establishment;
E. The address and legal description of the tract of land on which the
establishment is to be located;
F. If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner
acquiring the establishment began operations as a sexually oriented
business at the location for which the permit is sought; and
G. If the establishment is not in operation, the expected start-up date
(which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of
the permit). If the expected start-up date is to be more than ten (10) days
following the date of issuance of the permit, then a detailed explanation of
the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected
delay and a statement of the owner’s time schedule and plan for
accomplishing the same.
H. Statement that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or
released from confinement for conviction of a felony, whichever event is
later, within five (5) years immediately preceding the application, or has
not been convicted of a misdemeanor or released from confinement for
conviction of a misdemeanor, whichever event is later, within two (2) years
immediately preceding the application, where such felony or misdemeanor
involved sexual offenses, prostitution, sexual abuse of a child or
pornography and related offenses, as defined in the Code of Iowa, Federal
law, or the statutes of any other state, or controlled substance or illegal
drugs or narcotics offenses, as defined in the Code of Iowa, Federal law or
the statutes of any other state, or has not been convicted of a municipal
ordinance violation or released from confinement for conviction of a
municipal ordinance violation, whichever event is later, within two (2)
years immediately preceding the application, where such municipal
ordinance violation involved indecent exposure, prostitution or the
possession or sale of controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics.
7. The application shall be accompanied by the following:
A. Payment of the application fee in full.
B. If the establishment is an Iowa corporation, a certified copy of the
articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto.
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
C. If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the
certificate of authority to transact business in the State, together with all
amendments thereto.
D. If the establishment is a partnership formed under the laws of the
State, a certified copy of the certificate of partnership, together with all
amendments thereto.
E. If the establishment is a foreign partnership, a certified copy of the
certificate of partnership and the qualification documents, together with all
amendments thereto.
F. Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the
establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed.
G. If the persons identified as the fee owners of the tract of land in item
F are not also the owners of the establishment, then the lease, purchase
contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other document
evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owners or proposed owners
of the establishment to have or obtain the use and possession of the tract or
portion thereof that is to be used for the establishment for the purpose of the
operation of the establishment.
H. Any of items B through G above shall not be required for a renewal
application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished
the Director with the original application or previous renewals thereof
remain correct and current.
8. The application shall contain a statement under oath that:
A. The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained
in the application and that the information contained therein and furnished
therewith is true and correct; and
B. The applicant has read the provisions of this chapter.
9. A separate application and permit shall be required for each sexually
oriented business.
127.05 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
1. The Director shall approve the issuance of a permit to an applicant within
thirty (30) days after receipt of an application unless the Director finds one or
more of the following to be true:
A. An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
B. An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in the payment to
the City of taxes, fines or penalties assessed against said applicant or
spouse or imposed in relation to a sexually oriented business.
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
C. An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
D. An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit
by the City to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding
twelve (12) months, or residing with a person whose permit to operate a
sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve
(12) months.
E. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not
been approved by the Health Department, Fire Department, Building
Official and Zoning Official as being in compliance with applicable laws
and ordinances.
F. The permit fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
G. An application of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
2. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to
whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the sexually oriented
business. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance
to the sexually oriented business that it may be easily read at any time.
3. The Health Department, Fire Department, Building Official and Zoning
Official shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not
in compliance within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application by the
Director. The certification shall be promptly presented to the Director.
4. In the event that the Director determines that an applicant is not eligible for
a permit, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial
within forty-five (45) days after the receipt of the application by the Director,
provided that the applicant may request, in writing, that such period be extended
for an additional period of not more than ten (10) days at any time before the
notice is issued in order to make modifications necessary to comply with this
chapter.
5. An applicant may appeal the decision of the Director regarding a denial to
the Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the Clerk within fifteen (15)
days after the applicant is given notice of the Director’s decision. The notice of
appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing setting out fully
the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The Director
may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the applicant
on appeal to the Council. After reviewing such memoranda, as well as the
Director’s written decision, if any, and exhibits submitted to the Director, the
Council shall vote either to uphold or overrule the Director’s decision. Such vote
shall be taken within twenty-one (21) calendar days after the date on which the
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Clerk receives the notice of appeal. However, all parties shall be required to
comply with the Director’s decision during the pendency of the appeal.
6. The Chief of Police shall conduct a background investigation of all
applicants including a check of the applicants background by the Department of
Criminal Investigation. (Ord. 02-05 – May. 02 Supp.)
127.06 FEES. The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is five hundred
dollars ($500.00). This fee is to be used to pay for the cost of the administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
127.07 INSPECTION. An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the
Police Department or other City or State department or agencies to inspect the premises
of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at
any time it is occupied or open for business.
127.08 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
1. Each permit shall expire one year after the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided herein. Application for renewal
should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date and when made
less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit
will not be affected.
2. When the Director denies renewal of a permit, the applicant shall not be
issued a permit for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to the denial,
the Director finds that the basis for denial of the renewal permit has been corrected
or abated, the applicant may be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days has
elapsed since the date the denial became final.
127.09 SUSPENSION. The Director shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days if it is determined that the permittee or an employee of a permittee has:
1. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
2. Become impaired or intoxicated through the use of alcoholic beverages or
controlled substances while on the sexually oriented business premises;
3. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises
as authorized by this chapter;
4. Knowingly permitted illegal gambling by any person on the sexually
oriented business premises.
127.10 REVOCATION.
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
1. The Director shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension in Section
127.09 occurs and the permit has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12)
months.
2. The Director shall also revoke a permit if it is determined that:
A. A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process.
B. A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use
or sale of controlled substances on the premises.
C. A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on
the premises.
D. A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually
oriented business during a period of time when the permittee’s permit was
suspended.
E. A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sexual conduct
to occur in or on the premises.
F. A permittee is delinquent in the payment to the City or State for any
taxes or fees past due.
G. The owner or operator of the establishment knowingly allowed a
person under eighteen (18) years of age to enter an establishment.
H. There was a change of owner or operator for which a transfer
application was not filed in a timely manner.
3. When the Director revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for one
year, and the permittee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business permit for
one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation,
the Director finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated,
the applicant may be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days has elapsed since
the date the revocation became effective.
127.11 TRANSFER OF PERMIT. A permittee shall not transfer the permit to
another, nor shall a permittee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
permit at any place other than the address designated in the application.
127.12 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS. Sexually oriented business shall be permitted
in any C-3 zoned commercial district, provided that:
1. The sexually oriented business may not be operated within 1,000 feet of:
A. A church, synagogue or regular place of religious worship;
B. A public or private elementary or secondary school;
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
C. A boundary of any residential district;
D. A public park;
E. A licensed day-care center; or
F. Another sexually oriented business.
2. A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same building,
structure or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented business.
3. For the purpose of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of
the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented
business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church,
synagogue, regular place of worship or public or private elementary or secondary
school or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district or
residential lot, or licensed day-care center.
4. For purposes of subsection 3 of this section, the distance between any two
sexually oriented business uses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure
in which each business is located.
127.13 NONCONFORMING USES.
1. Any business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter that is in violation of the configuration requirements with
regard to structure and location contained in this chapter shall be deemed a
nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a
period not to exceed two years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or
voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such
nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except
that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented
businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible
location, the sexually oriented business that was first established and continually
operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established
business is nonconforming.
2. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not
rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal
of the sexually oriented business permit, of a church, synagogue or regular place
of religious worship, public or private elementary school or secondary school,
licensed day-care center, public park, or residential district within 1,000 feet of the
sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid
permit and does not apply when an application for a permit is submitted after a
permit has expired or has been revoked.
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
127.14 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS.
1. Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or a similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time
that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the
establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
2. It is unlawful if a person, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a
hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually
oriented business permit, rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and,
within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, rents or sub-rents the same
sleeping room again.
For purposes of subsection 2 of this section, the term “rent” or “sub-rent” means the act
of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
127.15 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY
EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS. A person who operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video
cassette, or other video reproduction that depicts “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”, shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Upon application for a sexually oriented permit, the application shall be
accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the
location of one or more manager’s stations and the location of all overhead
lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will
not be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet
of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will
be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the
nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however,
each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object
and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to
show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to
an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The Director may waive the
foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that
was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.
2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
3. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station may be
made without the prior approval of the Director.
4. It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at
least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station at all times
that any patron is present inside the premises.
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
5. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there
is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to
which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms.
Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has
two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall
be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least
one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be by
direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
6. It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty
of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area
specified in Subsection 5 remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise,
display racks or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in
which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection
1 of this section.
7. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
8. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access to an
illumination of not less than one foot-candle as measured at the floor level.
9. It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty
of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in
the premises.
127.16 EXTERIOR PORTIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
1. It is unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to
allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point
outside the establishment.
2. It is unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to
allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights,
or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial
representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of
this chapter.
3. It is unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to
allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a
single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented
business if the following conditions are met:
A. The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center; and
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
B. The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial
multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted
the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a
component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial
multi-unit center.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the painting of
an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business.
127.17 SIGNAGE.
1. Notwithstanding any other City ordinance, code or regulation to the
contrary, it is unlawful for the owner or operator of any sexually oriented business
or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually
oriented business other than the one primary sign and one secondary sign, as
provided herein.
2. Primary signs shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. Each such
display surface shall:
A. Not contain any flashing lights;
B. Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
C. Not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area; and
D. Not exceed ten (10) feet in height or ten (10) feet in length.
3. Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or
pictorial representations in any manner, and may contain only the name of the
enterprise.
4. Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid color and
each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The background
behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform
and solid color.
5. Secondary signs shall have only one display surface. Such display surface
shall:
A. Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
B. Not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area;
C. Not exceed five (5) feet in height and four (4) feet in width; and
D. Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise.
6. The provisions of paragraph A of subsection 2 and of subsections 3 and 4
shall also apply to secondary signs.
127.18 PERSONS YOUNGER THAN EIGHTEEN PROHIBITED.
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
1. It is unlawful to allow a person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of
age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time that
the sexually oriented business is open for business.
2. It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to
ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually
oriented business at all times during regular business hours. It shall be the duty of
the attendant to prohibit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years from
entering the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant
knew a person was under the age of 18 unless such attendant asked for and was
furnished:
A. A valid operator’s commercial operator’s or chauffeur’s driver’s
license; or
B. A valid personal identification certificate issued by the State
reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older.
127.19 MASSAGES OR BATHS ADMINISTERED BY PERSON OF OPPOSITE
SEX. It is unlawful for any establishment, regardless of whether it is a public or private
facility, to operate a massage salon, massage parlor or any similar type of business where
any physical contact with the recipient of such services is provided by a person of the
opposite sex unless licensed by the State of Iowa.
127.20 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED. The
permittee of a sexually oriented business shall not allow the possession or consumption
on premises by any person of any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer. No person shall
possess or consume any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on the premises of any sexually
oriented business.
127.21 NOTICES.
1. Any notice required or permitted to be given by the Director or any other
City office, division, department or other agency under this chapter to any
applicant, operator or owner of an establishment may be given either by personal
delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for
the permit, or transfer application that has been received by the Director, or any
notice of address change that has been received by the Director. Notices mailed as
above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the United States mail. In the
event that any notice given by mail is returned by the postal service, the Director
shall cause it to be posted at the principal entrance to the establishment.
2. Any notice required or permitted to be given to the Director by any person
under this chapter shall not be deemed given until and unless it is received in the
office of the Director.
CHAPTER 127 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
3. It is the duty of each owner who is designated on the permit application and
each operator to furnish a notice to the Director in writing of any change of
residence or mailing address.
127.22 INJUNCTION. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business without a valid permit or otherwise violates this chapter is subject to a
suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations.
127.23 EXEMPTIONS. It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated by:
1. A proprietary school licensed by the State of Iowa or a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
2. A private college or university that maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation.
CHAPTER 128 HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
CHAPTER 128
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
128.01 Tax Imposed 128.04 Collection
128.02 Definitions 128.05 Restrictions on Use of Revenues
128.03 Effective Date of Tax
128.01 TAX IMPOSED. There is imposed a seven percent (7%) hotel and motel tax
upon the gross receipts from the renting of any and all rooms, apartments or sleeping
quarters in any hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming house or tourist court or
in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent,
whether with or without meals, except the gross receipts from the renting of sleeping
rooms in dormitories and memorial unions of all universities and colleges located in the
State.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 422A.1)
128.02 DEFINITIONS. “Renting” and “rent,” as used in this chapter, include any
kind of direct or indirect charge for the use of rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters.
However, the tax imposed in this chapter does not apply to the gross receipts from the
renting of a room, apartment or sleeping quarters while rented by the same person for a
period of more than thirty-one (31) consecutive days.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 422A.1)
128.03 EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX. The hotel and motel tax as set forth in this
chapter shall be imposed on all gross rent receipts received after April 1, 1989.
128.04 COLLECTION. The tax imposed in this chapter shall be remitted by the
person or company liable for same to the Iowa State Director of Revenue in the manner
required by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 422A.1)
128.05 RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF REVENUES. The revenue derived from the
tax imposed by this chapter shall be accounted for as follows:
1. All revenue received by the City from the imposition of the hotel and motel
tax shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City.
2. At least fifty percent (50%) of the revenue derived from the hotel and motel
tax shall be spent for the acquisition of sites for, or constructing, improving,
enlarging, equipping, repairing, operating or maintaining recreational, convention,
cultural or entertainment facilities, including, but not limited to, memorial
buildings, halls and monuments, civic centers, convention buildings, auditoriums,
coliseums and parking areas or facilities located at those recreational, convention,
CHAPTER 128 HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
cultural or entertainment facilities, or the payment of principal and interest on
bonds or other evidence of indebtedness issued by the City for those recreational,
convention, cultural or entertainment facilities, or for the promotion and
encouragement of tourist and convention business in the City and surrounding
areas.
3. The remaining revenues may be spent by the City for any lawful purpose
for which revenues derived from ad valorem taxes may be expended.
CHAPTER 129 SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS AND
BURGLAR ALARMS
CHAPTER 129
SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS AND BURGLAR ALARMS
129.01 Definitions 129.04 Video Recording Equipment
129.02 Surveillance Camera Required 129.05 Burglar Alarms
129.03 Exemptions
129.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Consumer products” means all food which is subject to sales tax and all
food which is not subject to sales tax under Chapter 422 of the Code of Iowa,
except foods prepared for immediate consumption.
2. “Convenience store” means any business which sells at retail both gasoline
and more than 20 consumer products and which routinely remains open for
business 20 to 24 hours a day or anytime between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00)
p.m. and five o’clock (5:00) a.m.
3. “Gun shop” means any person, firm or corporation who, under the laws of
the State of Iowa and/or the United States, is engaged in the business of supplying
those authorized to possess an offensive weapon as defined in Chapter 724 of the
Code of Iowa or the sale of pistols or revolvers, or shotguns or rifles and is
operating out of a retail business location and not in the owner’s residential
dwelling.
4. “Surveillance camera” means a video camera or similar video recording
device.
129.02 SURVEILLANCE CAMERA REQUIRED. Every convenience store and
gun shop in the City shall be equipped with a functioning surveillance camera twentyfour
(24) hours a day or seven (7) days a week. The surveillance camera shall be
positioned so as to view all persons entering the establishment and all persons
approaching within five feet of the cash register, or both, or elsewhere if so directed by
the Police Chief. All proposed installations of surveillance cameras shall be approved in
advance by the Police Department as in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter prior to actual installation. The Police Chief shall develop departmental rules and
regulations setting forth the minimum specifications for surveillance cameras. The
specifications shall be developed with the intent to require surveillance cameras which
are functionally capable of recording and reproducing visual activities with sufficient
quality to aid the Police Department in the apprehension of lawbreakers. Surveillance
cameras installed prior to July 1, 1990, will be deemed to be in compliance with this
chapter.
CHAPTER 129 SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS AND
BURGLAR ALARMS
129.03 EXEMPTIONS. A business which is required to install a surveillance camera
or burglar alarm may apply to the Police Chief for exemption from the provisions of this
chapter. The Police Chief may exempt a business if the Police Chief finds that the
business has or will undertake alternate security procedures which are substantially equal
to or more effective in preventing criminal activity and in assisting in the apprehension of
the perpetrators of crime or for the protection of employees, or the Police Chief may
authorize alternate procedures on an experimental basis. The Police Chief may also
authorize temporary extensions of time for installation when a business demonstrates that
it is temporarily unable to comply for good cause shown.
129.04 VIDEO RECORDING EQUIPMENT. A business which is required to have
a surveillance camera under this chapter shall have video recording equipment capable of
storing at least 30 days of camera activity.
129.05 BURGLAR ALARMS. Every gun shop in the City shall be equipped with a
functioning burglar alarm for those hours of each day when the store is not open to
business. The burglar alarm shall be connected to the premises as directed by
departmental rules. All proposed installations of burglar alarms shall be approved in
advance by the Police Department as in conformance with the requirements of the
departmental rules prior to actual installation. The Police Chief shall develop
departmental rules and regulations setting forth the minimum specifications for burglar
alarms, for their connection to the premises and such other matters as the Police Chief
deems necessary or desirable to carry out the objectives of this section. The
specifications shall be developed with the intent to require burglar alarms which are
functionally capable of alerting authorities of unauthorized activities with sufficient
rapidity as to aid the Police Department in the apprehension of lawbreakers. Burglar
alarms installed prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 00-40 will be deemed to be
in compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 06-13 – Aug. 06 Supp.)
CHAPTER 130
BUSINESS LICENSES
130.01 Definitions 130.13 Term of License
130.02 License Required 130.14 Exhibition of Certificate
130.03 Exemptions 130.15 Bill Posters
130.04 Persons Entitled to License 130.16 Junk Dealers
130.05 Application; Fee 130.17 Scavengers
130.06 Refusal and Appeal 130.18 Pawnbrokers
130.07 Power to Inspect and Investigate 130.19 Auctioneers
130.08 Revocation 130.20 Dealers in Used Articles
130.09 Appeal 130.21 Purchases from Minors
130.10 Effect of Revocation 130.22 Snow Plowers for Hire
130.11 Rebates 130.23 Practice of Massage Therapy - State License
130.12 Transfer Required
130.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Bill” means any notice, poster, placard, announcement or advertisement
except notices required by law.
2. “Junk” means articles or materials that, because of age, deterioration or use,
have lost their original utility or desirability but that by alteration, restoration or
salvage may furnish an item or items of value.
3. “Junk dealer” means any person engaged in collecting, storing, buying or
selling junk.
4. “Pawnbroker” means any person whose business consists primarily of
buying personal property subject to the right of repurchase or redemption, or of
receiving actual possession of personal property as security for loans with or without
a mortgage or bill of sale. This definition does not mean or include banks, trust
companies, building and loan associations and similar businesses.
5. “Scavenger” means any person who transports, upon the public streets,
alleys, sidewalks or property, any refuse except refuse directly from the person’s
own property.
6. “Snow plower for hire” means any person that hires out to remove snow from
driveways and/or privately owned parking lots by means of a motor vehicle
equipped for snow plowing. (Ord. 08-20 – Nov. 08 Supp.)
130.02 LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall engage in any trade, profession or
business in the City for which a license is required by the provisions of this chapter without
first obtaining such license from the City in the manner provided in this chapter, unless
otherwise specifically provided.
130.03 EXEMPTIONS. This chapter shall not be construed to require a license of each
employee or agent of one engaged in a licensed occupation. Only the owner, manager or
agent of such an occupation need possess the license.
130.04 PERSONS ENTITLED TO LICENSE. Any person who satisfies the
conditions prescribed by this chapter for a particular license and satisfies the Clerk that
such occupation does not and will not endanger the public welfare, order, safety, health or
morals, shall be entitled to a license upon filing a proper application and paying the full fee
required.
130.05 APPLICATION; FEE. Application for any license or permit shall be in writing
on forms furnished by the Clerk. Every application shall include the applicant’s full name,
the address of the applicant’s place of residence, the address of the applicant’s business
establishment or office (if any) and the applicant’s local address (if any). If the applicant
is a corporation or other association, it shall also list the names and addresses of its principal
officers. The application shall be filed with the Clerk. If the Clerk determines that the
application is in proper form and that all of the prescribed conditions for the issuance of
the license have been satisfied, the Clerk shall issue the license bearing the Clerk’s
signature and the signature of the Mayor and the time of issue. The title of the license shall
contain the name of the occupation licensed. All fees required shall be paid to the Clerk,
who shall give the applicant a written receipt showing the sum received and the time of
receipt.
130.06 REFUSAL AND APPEAL. If the Clerk refuses to issue a license, the Clerk
shall endorse the reasons upon the application. The applicant then shall have the right to a
hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify
or affirm the decision of the Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present, if
there is a quorum, and the Clerk shall carry out the Council’s decision.
130.07 POWER TO INSPECT AND INVESTIGATE. The Clerk shall have power to
inspect and investigate the conduct of the occupations licensed by the City or to cause such
an inspection or investigation to be made by the police.
130.08 REVOCATION. The Clerk, after giving reasonable notice and a hearing, may
revoke any license for the following reasons:
1. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the application or in the
conduct of the licensee’s business.
2. The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise conducted the
business or activity in an unlawful manner, or contrary to any applicable provisions
of this Code of Ordinances.
3. The licensee has conducted the business or activity in a manner endangering
the public welfare, health, safety, order or morals.
The notice shall be in writing and shall be served personally or as required for personal
service by the Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure. The notice shall state the time and place of
the hearing and the reasons for the intended revocation.
130.09 APPEAL. If the Clerk revokes a license, the Clerk shall immediately notify the
Council in writing, giving the reasons for the revocation. The licensee then shall have a
right to a hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may reverse,
modify or affirm the decision of the Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members
present, if there is a quorum.
130.10 EFFECT OF REVOCATION. Revocation of a license shall bar such person
from being eligible for any license for a period of one year from the date of revocation.
130.11 REBATES. Any licensee, except in the case of a revocation, shall be entitled to
a rebate of part of the fee paid upon surrender of the license to the City prior to expiration.
The rebate shall be pro rated based upon unexpired quarters. In all cases, at least fifteen
dollars ($15.00) of the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover administrative
costs. Any license issued for a period of less than one year shall not be eligible for a rebate.
130.12 TRANSFER. A license shall not be transferable to another person, nor shall it
be used for a purpose other than that for which it was issued.
130.13 TERM OF LICENSE. Unless otherwise provided, licenses expire one year
from the date of issue.
130.14 EXHIBITION OF CERTIFICATE. Every licensee shall carry the license
certificate upon his or her person at all times when engaged in the activity for which the
license was granted, except that where such activity is conducted at a fixed place or
establishment, the license certificate shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous
place in the place of business. The licensee shall exhibit the license certificate when
applying for a renewal and upon demand of any police officer or person representing the
City.
130.15 BILL POSTERS. The following regulations and fees apply to licensing of bill
posters:
1. An application for a bill poster’s license shall contain a description of the
boundaries of the areas of the City in which the distribution is to be made. The
license shall limit distribution of bills in the City to these areas.
2. Bill posters shall not attach bills to any tree, pole, sidewalk, building or other
structure.
3. Bills shall not be distributed in such a manner that they may be blown down
or scattered.
4. Bills larger than 9 x 12 inches in size shall not be handed to persons on the
sidewalks or streets or public property or attached to automobiles parked on any
streets, alleys or public property.
5. The fee for a bill poster’s license is five dollars ($5.00) per day, and the
license shall expire 24 hours after issue.
130.16 JUNK DEALERS. The following regulations and fees apply to licensing of junk
dealers:
1. A junk dealer shall maintain a permanent record book that shows a
description of each item received, the name and address of the person from whom
it was received, the quantity or weight of each item, the amount paid, and the time
and date of the transaction.
2. A junk dealer shall segregate each day’s collection for a period of forty-eight
(48) hours. During this period, no item shall be disposed of or altered in any manner.
3. A junk dealer shall not purchase or receive junk from a minor unless the junk
dealer first receives the written consent of the parents or guardian of the minor. This
consent shall be attached to the record book as a part of the permanent record.
4. In order to discover stolen property, police officers shall be permitted at all
times to inspect the junk dealer’s yard, store or establishment without a warrant to
search the premises.
5. A junk dealer’s yard shall be enclosed with a six-foot fence that hides the
contents of the yard from public view.
6. The fee for a junk dealer’s license is fifty dollars ($50.00) per year.
130.17 SCAVENGERS. The following regulations and fees apply to licensing of
scavengers:
1. An application for a scavenger’s license shall contain a detailed list
describing each of the places from which the scavenger collects or intends to collect
refuse.
2. The licensee shall keep this list up to date by reporting immediately to the
Clerk any changes of places of collection. Refuse shall be collected only from the
places reported as places of collection.
3. Refuse shall not be carried upon any street, alley, sidewalk or property of the
City in containers that permit leaking or spilling of the refuse.
4. The fee for a scavenger’s license is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year.
130.18 PAWNBROKERS. The following regulations and fees apply to licensing of
pawnbrokers:
1. Bond. An applicant for a license under this section shall file a bond executed
by a surety bonding company in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00)
conditioned that the applicant will comply with all the conditions and regulations of
this section, and that the applicant will pay all fines, costs or penalties imposed for
failure to do so; and also conditioned that all damages any person may sustain by
reason of the applicant’s taking in pledge or purchasing any stolen property, and
that if the stolen property is sold by the applicant so that it cannot be returned to the
owner, then the applicant will pay the owner the value thereof, or if the property
still remains in the applicant’s possession, the applicant will deliver the same to the
owner, together with all costs and charges sustained by the owner in recovering
possession thereof.
2. Record. A pawnbroker shall secure from the Police Chief a form sheet in
which the pawnbroker shall accurately and intelligibly enter in ink and in the
English language at the time of purchasing or receiving any personal property all of
the following:
A. The name of the person from whom the property was purchased or
received, the person’s place of residence and the person’s drivers license
number which shall be visually verified by the pawnbroker from inspection
of the person’s drivers license. If the person has no driver’s license the
pawnbroker shall visually verify the persons name from a passport or other
photo identification. (Ord. 05-41 – Feb. 06
Supp.)
B. A particular, detailed and accurate description of each article;
C. The estimated value of each article;
D. The amount paid, advanced or loaned;
E. The date and hour of transaction;
F. The time when the article is to be redeemed or bought back;
G. What, if any, mortgage or bill of sale was taken, or receipt or pawn
ticket given;
H. When, and by whom, said article was bought back or redeemed;
I. When, to whom and how said article was disposed of, if not redeemed.
The form sheets shall be open to examination by any police officer at any time.
Copies of the form sheets shall be delivered by a pawnbroker to the Police
Department at such times as the Police Department shall prescribe.
3. Memorandum of Loan. A pawnbroker shall, at the time of each loan, deliver
to the person pawning any article or goods a memorandum or note, signed by the
pawnbroker. The memorandum or note shall contain the substance of the entry
required to be made on the pawnbroker’s form sheets. No charge shall be made by
a pawnbroker for such entry or memorandum or note.
4. Sale of Pawned Articles. No pawnbroker shall sell any pawned or pledged
article until it shall have remained ninety (90) days in the pawnbroker’s possession
after the time for the payment of the amount loaned has expired. Such sale shall be
at public auction, unless otherwise agreed by consent in writing of the person
pawning the article.
5. The fee for a pawnbroker’s license is fifty dollars ($50.00) a year, or twentyfive
dollars ($25.00) for the remainder of the fiscal year if the license is issued
during the last six months of the fiscal year of the City.
6. Items Taken in Trade or Purchased. Whenever a pawnbroker purchases an
item of personal property from a customer or receives an item of personal property
in trade towards the purchase of an item in the pawnshop, the pawnbroker shall
make a record of the item in the same manner as required in subsection 2 above and
shall retain the purchased or traded in item for a minimum of five (5) days before
re-selling or re-trading or melting down the item.
(Ord. 15-21 – Nov. 15 Supp.)
130.19 AUCTIONEERS.
1. No person shall conduct an auction sale at any location within the City
without first obtaining a license.
2. An application for a license for an auctioneer’s sale shall contain a general
description of the goods or property to be sold, including their approximate values
and the time and place at which the sale will be held.
3. An auctioneer shall not use any part of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks
or places as a location for conducting a sale.
4. The provisions of this section concerning sales by auctioneers shall not apply
to any sales made by a person required by law to sell real or personal property.
5. The license fee for an auction sale at a special location is twenty dollars
($20.00) for the first day, and ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each day thereafter.
An auctioneer may purchase an annual license for a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per
year. If an auctioneer purchases an annual license, the auctioneer is still required to
submit an application for each auction sale at a specified location as set forth in
subsection 2 of this section but is not required to pay any additional fees.
130.20 DEALERS IN USED ARTICLES. Any person in the business of buying,
selling or exchanging used articles shall keep a record of all such articles purchased or
traded in towards a purchase. This record shall contain a detailed and accurate description
of the articles so purchased, including the number or numbers, if any, or any marks of
identification on the articles together with name and address and general physical
description of the person from whom such articles were purchased or received, and the
name and address and physical description of the person to whom such articles were sold
and delivered. Such records, together with the stock of such articles on hand, shall be open
to inspection by any police officer at any reasonable time of the day or night. Any person
in the business of buying, selling or exchanging used articles shall retain all purchased
items and traded in items for a minimum of five (5) days before re-selling or re-trading or
melting down the item.
(Ord. 15-21 – Nov. 15 Supp.)
130.21 PURCHASES FROM MINORS. Persons engaged in the business of buying,
selling or exchanging used articles, junk dealers and pawnbrokers shall not purchase or
receive any such articles from any minor without the written consent of the minor’s parent
or guardian, nor shall any such person sell or deliver any such article to any minor without
written consent of the minor’s parent or guardian. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to the purchases and sale of used books and clothing.
130.22 SNOW PLOWERS FOR HIRE.
1. No person shall conduct snow plowing for hire at any location within the
City without first obtaining an annual license from the City Clerk. The license fee
is twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
2. An application for a license as a snow plower shall contain the name, address
and telephone number of the applicant and shall be accompanied by a separate list
of all addresses where the applicant currently has written or oral contracts to plow
snow from driveways or privately owned parking lots. The Director shall treat the
list of addresses as a trade secret and keep the same under his personal locked
control. The list shall be kept confidential and is not available for inspection as a
public record under Iowa Code Section 22.7(3). The application form will contain
a statement that the applicant and all of the applicants snow plow drivers have read
and will obey the provisions of Section 140.11 of the Marion Code of Ordinances.
3. Every person licensed to plow snow for hire shall supplement the customer
list submitted with the license application within ten (10) days of adding or deleting
a customer by filing said information with the Director in writing.
(Ord. 08-20 – Nov. 08 Supp.)
130.23 PRACTICE OF MASSAGE THERAPY - STATE LICENSE REQUIRED.
The practice of massage therapy as defined in section 152C.1 of the Iowa Code is
prohibited by unlicensed individuals. It is unlawful for a person to engage in or offer to
engage in the practice of massage therapy, or use in connection with the person's name, the
initials "L.M.T." or the words "licensed massage therapist", "massage therapist" "masseur"
"masseuse", or any other word or title that implies or represents that the person practices
massage therapy, unless the person possesses a license issued under the provisions of
section 152C.3 of the Code of Iowa. The Chief of Police shall placard, as unsafe for entry,
any building where any person has established a practice of massage therapy without a
state license and shall keep the premises placarded until a state license has been obtained
or some other legal use has been established.
(Ord. 13-11 – Aug. 13 Supp.)
CHAPTER 132
TAXICAB AND LIMOUSINE CODE
132.01 Adoption and Scope 132.08 No Smoking Allowed
132.02 Definitions 132.09 Rates
132.03 Taxicab and Limousine Business License 132.10 Illegal Use/Illegal Operation
132.04 Vehicle License 132.11 Solicitation
132.05 Taximeters 132.12 Revocation for Violations and Injunctive Remedy
132.06 City Taxi/Limo Driver’s License 132.13 Duty to Carry Orderly Passengers
132.07 Information
132.01 ADOPTION AND SCOPE. This chapter shall be known as the Marion
Taxicab and Limousine Code and shall apply to the operation of taxicab and limousine
services originating within the city limits of the City of Marion.
132.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Courier service” means transportation for hire of anything other than
human cargo. To run without the taximeter, a courier service must be registered
with the Iowa Department of Transportation and have proper IDOT numbers on
the side of the vehicle signifying that it is registered to be a courier.
2. “Exceptions” means those motor vehicles owned and operated by hotels,
motels and other boarding places for the purpose of transporting patrons between
the hotel, motel, or boarding place and another point (must be a free courtesy
shuttle service), auto repair shops for the purpose of transporting patrons between
the auto repair shop and another point (must be a free courtesy shuttle service),
volunteer services that utilize volunteer drivers and vehicles, ambulances and
other emergency vehicles, and public transit vehicles which are excluded from the
provisions of this chapter.
3. “Limousine” means a motor vehicle with a passenger rated capacity of
more than three, exclusive of the driver, and not regulated by the Office of Motor
and Carrier Services of the Iowa Department of Transportation, including but not
limited to standard size limo and 7 passenger van. A motor vehicle with a
passenger rated capacity of more than 16 including the driver, and regulated by the
Office of Motor and Carrier Services of the Iowa Department of Transportation to
include but not limited to large vans, stretch limos, converted buses
(rentertainment vehicle). The vehicle and driver are engaged in transportation of
passengers for hire in a limousine service. The vehicle shall be operated on a fixed
route or have reservations 24 hours in advance for their service, operate without a
meter installed in the vehicle and charge for services on an hourly basis or longer
periods of time, with a minimum of 1 hour required.
4. “Limousine business” means a firm that provides limousine services
originating within the corporate limits of the metropolitan area.
5. “Metropolitan area” means the area within the corporate limits of the cities
of Cedar Rapids, Hiawatha and Robins.
6. “Passenger” means any tangible item being transported including human
cargo. All fares charged by the owner, operator, or driver of any taxicab shall be
determined by the taximeter from the fare recorded on the face thereof when
transporting passengers.
7. “Rentertainment vehicle” means a motor vehicle with a passenger rated
capacity of more than 17 including driver, and regulated by the Office of Motor
and Carrier Services of the Iowa Department of Transportation. The vehicle and
driver are engaged in transportation of passengers for hire. The vehicle shall be
operated on a fixed route or have reservations 24 hours in advance for their
service, operated without a meter installed in the vehicle and charge for services
on an hourly basis or longer periods of time, with a minimum ·of 1 hour required.
For definition purposes rentertainment vehicle will be considered a limousine
throughout this chapter.
8. “Taxicab” means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of
carrying passengers for hire and not operated on a fixed route or schedule and
operating with a meter but excluding vehicles that are exceptions.
9. “Taxicab business” means a firm that provides taxicab services originating
within the corporate limits of the metropolitan area. Activities to be conducted
include, but are not limited to: receiving calls and dispatching of taxicabs,
transferring driver's and/or vehicles, parking and storage of vehicles, storage of
lost or misplaced baggage, maintenance and storage of business records, the
conducting of employee meetings and related personnel matters.
132.03 TAXICAB AND LIMOUSINE BUSINESS LICENSE.
1. Required. Every person owning, operating or controlling a taxicab or
limousine within the city limits of Marion shall be associated with a taxicab or
limousine business, and each taxicab and limousine business shall obtain a
business license. However, if the business has a valid business license issued by
the City of Cedar Rapids, City of Hiawatha or City of Robins no license need be
obtained for Marion and reciprocity will be granted for the license issued within
the metropolitan area and the vehicles and drivers shall be deemed to comply with
the provisions of this chapter unless the license or reciprocity is suspended or
revoked.
2. Any person seeking a taxicab or limousine business license from Marion
shall make an application to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall cause an
investigation of the application and of the background of the applicant to be made
through the Iowa Department of Criminal Investigations. The City Clerk shall also
cause an investigation to be made to determine that all requirements of this chapter
have been satisfied and that the applicant has fully complied with all applicable
ordinances and regulations relating to buildings and zoning. The applicant will pay
for all costs associated with any background investigations.
3. Qualifications for Taxicab Business License. Each company filing
applications with the office of the City Clerk shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
A. Provide an office within the metropolitan area which must be
accessible 24 hours a day, seven days a week and upon request of the Chief
of Police or their authorized representative.
B. Provide taxicab service to the public 24 hours a day, seven days a
week and have a business telephone that is answered 24 hours a day, seven
days a week so that any individual may request the services of the taxicab
company. The business shall have a listed telephone number.
C. Provide a minimum of three qualified licensed taxicab drivers.
D. Provide a minimum of two qualified licensed taxicab vehicles of
which a minimum of one vehicle shall be in operation at all times. All
taxicab vehicles covered under the business license must have the same
paint color and design (existing vehicles will be grandfathered - all new
vehicles must comply). The selected taxicab business paint color and
design must be noticeably different than other existing taxicab businesses.
E. Meet all applicable zoning ordinance regulations and other
applicable City regulations.
F. Activity Log. Each business must keep a daily activity log listing
the date, time, trip origination address and trip destination address. The
activity logs must be available for inspection by and upon the request of the
Chief of Police or designee. The logs must be maintained by the taxicab
business for a period of one year.
4. Qualifications for Limousine Business License. Each company filing
applications with the office of the City Clerk for a Limousine Business License
shall meet the following minimum requirements:
A. Provide a minimum of one qualified licensed driver.
B. Provide a minimum of one qualified licensed vehicle.
C. Meet all applicable zoning ordinance regulations and other
applicable City regulations.
D. Activity Log. Each business must keep a daily activity log listing the
date, time, trip origination address and trip destination address. The activity
logs must be available for inspection by and upon the request of the Chief
of Police or designee. The logs must be maintained by the limousine
business for a period of one year.
5. The business license application shall contain the following:
A. The full name of the taxicab or limousine business, the street address
of the premises for which the application is being made, all telephone
numbers where the taxicab or limousine business will be conducted, and the
paint color and design of the vehicles (taxicabs only).
B. The full name, address, telephone number, date of birth and social
security number of the applicant, whether the applicant has been convicted
of a felony as well as any aliases by which the applicant has been or is
currently known.
C. The type of business entity such as sole proprietorship, partnership
or corporation and, in the case of a corporation, the names and residence
addresses of all officers and directors of the corporation and of each
stockholder holding ten percent or more of the stock of said corporation; in
the case, of a partnership, the names and residence addresses of all partners
including limited partners of the partnership.
D. The name of the owner of the building where such taxicab or
limousine business will be located.
E. Copies of any lease or rental agreement governing the applicant's
right in said building.
F. A sworn statement that the contents of the application are true and
that the applicant is of good moral character.
G. The signature of the applicant or applicants or, if the application is in
the name of a corporation, the signature of each officer of the corporation;
if the application is in the name of a partnership, the signature of each
partner, including limited partners, of the partnership.
6. If the City Clerk finds that the applicant has fully complied with all
requirements of this chapter and with all other applicable ordinances and codes,
the City Clerk shall authorize the issuance of a license to conduct a taxicab or
limousine business at the location designated in the application. Such license shall
commence on July 1, or the date the operations are started, if later, and shall
terminate on the following June 30.
7. Fees. The annual business license fee shall be as set by resolution of the
City Council. Said fees shall be prorated quarterly and paid to the City Clerk.
8. Each taxicab and limousine business shall have a separate license for each
place of business, which shall be valid only for the business conducted at that
location.
9. Each taxicab or limousine business shall display its license conspicuously
where all persons entering such premises may readily observe such license.
10. No taxicab or limousine business license shall be sold or transferred. The
purchaser or purchasers of any business or of the majority of the stock of any
corporation operating a business shall obtain a new taxicab or limousine business
license before operating such business at the location for which the license has
been issued or at any other location.
132.04 VEHICLE LICENSE.
1. Required. No person shall operate any taxicab or limousine where service
originates on the streets of the City of Marion without a license therefore for each
taxicab or limousine except by the grant of reciprocity under Section 132.03
above. Taxicabs and limousines shall also have such licenses or certificates as may
be required by the Iowa Department of Transportation. All vehicle licenses shall
be turned into the City Clerk within 5 business days of the vehicle being taken offline
and/or out of service.
2. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to furnish for each qualified taxicab
and limousine which meet minimum requirements as set forth in this chapter a
license, giving the make and complete vehicle identification number (VIN) of the
vehicle, vehicle license plate number, and other information deemed necessary by
the City Clerk. The owner of the vehicle shall cause the vehicle license to be
placed in such vehicle and produced upon request, during the continuance of the
license. Upon the expiration of the license, the owner shall cause the vehicle
license to be removed from the vehicle. Immediately after the expiration of the
license, all markings shall be removed from the exterior of the vehicle.
3. License Fees. The license fee for each taxicab and limousine shall be as set
by resolution of the City Council, per vehicle per fiscal year and paid to the City
Clerk. The license for each taxicab and limousine shall commence on July 1, or on
the date the operations are started, if later, and shall terminate on the following
June 30.
4. Insurance. No license for a taxicab or limousine shall be issued, renewed
or extended without the owner thereof first filing in the office of the City Clerk an
insurance policy or certificate acceptable to the City Attorney issued by a
company authorized to do business in the State of Iowa.
A. The minimum limits of liability of the insurance for taxis shall be as
follows unless other regulations or provisions of law require higher limits.
(1) To cover the insured's legal liability for personal injury or
death resulting therefrom, for each vehicle, for any recovery by one
person as a result of anyone accident or other cause, $500,000.00;
and for all persons receiving personal injury as a result of anyone
accident or other cause, $500,000.00, and shall also comply with all
state and federal requirements, if greater, and to cover the insured's
legal liability for damage to or destruction of any property other than
that of, or in charge of the insured as a result of anyone accident or
other cause, $500,000.00, or
(2) The option of submitting an insurance certificate with a
combined single limit coverage of a minimum of $500,000.00 will
be accepted.
B. The minimum limits of liability of the insurance for limousines and
rentertainment vehicles shall be as follows unless other regulations or
provisions of law require higher limits.
(1) To cover the insured's legal liability for personal injury or
death resulting therefrom, for each vehicle, for any recovery by one
person as a result of anyone accident or other cause, $1,000,000.00;
and for all persons receiving personal injury as a result of anyone
accident or other cause, $1,000,000.00, and shall also comply with
all state and federal requirements, if greater, and to cover the
insured's legal liability for damage to or destruction of any property
other than that of, or in charge of the insured as a result of any one
accident or other cause, $1,000,000.00, or
(2) The option of submitting an insurance certificate with a
combined single limit coverage of a minimum of $1,000,000.00 will
be accepted.
C. Before a policy may be suspended or canceled, the City Clerk's
office must receive a minimum of 10 days prior written notice of such
proposed suspension or cancellation.
D. The insurance policy shall be issued for a period to cover the life of
the license applied for and shall commence either on the date of issuance of
the license, or, July 1, and in each case be valid until the following June 30.
Failure to keep such insurance policy in full force and effect shall be cause
for revocation of the license.
E. The cancellation or other termination of any insurance policy or
certificate shall automatically revoke and terminate the licenses issued for
the taxicab or limousine business and the vehicles covered by such
insurance policy, unless another policy, complying with this chapter, shall
be provided and in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination.
The City Clerk shall immediately issue written notification of the
revocation of all licenses for the taxicab or limousine business and the
vehicles covered by such insurance which is canceled or terminated.
F. No driver or owner of a taxicab or limousine shall drive or permit to
be driven a vehicle without an insurance policy or certificate acceptable to
the City Attorney being filed as herein provided.
G. The name of the insured on the certificate must contain the insured's
street address.
5. Condition of Vehicles - Inspection. Every taxicab or limousine shall be
inspected before being put in service, and thereafter taxis shall be inspected semiannually
and limos shall be inspected annually for such period of time as the same
continues to be operated as a taxicab or limousine, such inspections to be
conducted by the Chief of Police or their authorized representative. Vehicle
inspections may also be required more frequently on an as-needed basis as
determined by the Chief of Police or their authorized representative. No vehicle
shall obtain a license, or be operated as a limousine or taxicab without passing
such inspections. Each vehicle passing such inspection shall obtain a sticker to be
placed in a conspicuous place on each vehicle by the Police Department. Each
taxicab and limousine shall meet all of the following requirements:
A. The vehicle in all respects shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa.
B. The vehicle shall be in a safe and sanitary condition.
C. Each vehicle shall be equipped with a working air conditioner and
heater of adequate capacity for such vehicle.
D. All taxicabs shall be marked on the outside, on both sides, with the
name of the company, phone number, unit number and base rates. The
markings shall be painted or affixed by decal in letters or figures at least 2-
1/2 inches in height, except the rate letters or figures which must be at least
1-1/2 inches in height. (Existing vehicles will be grandfathered - all new
vehicles must comply.)
E. No person shall operate a vehicle marked as a taxicab unless
licensed pursuant to this chapter.
F. All vehicles and equipment shall be clean on the exterior and interior
at any time the vehicle is in service.
G. All vehicle exteriors shall be maintained in good condition with
parts intact and properly painted.
H. All vehicles shall be in excellent mechanical operating condition free
from all known defects. No vehicle shall be used in passenger-carrying
service with a known mechanical problem which could cause
inconvenience or a safety hazard to the passenger.
I. Unsafe tires shall not be used on any vehicle.
J. No taxicab shall be operated without a sign permanently affixed to
the rooftop of the vehicle that designates the vehicle as a taxicab.
K. Taxicabs may have a 3 sided advertising sign affixed to the roof of
the vehicle. The sign must be a professionally manufactured illuminated
sign that is permanently affixed to the roof of the taxicab. It can be no
larger than 42 inches wide, 18 inches high, and 38 inches long. The sign
must be made of fiberglass, polycarbonate, or similar materials that will
withstand the elements. There can be no workmanship shown inside of the
cab where the sign is affixed to the roof. Approval for the sign and the
artwork on the sign must be made by the Chief of Police or designee.
L. No taxicab shall transport more than 4 passengers at anyone time
with 1 passenger in the front seat and 3 passengers in the rear seat to ensure
each passenger would have a working seatbelt available and so that no one
is seated in such a way as to interfere with the drivers operation of the
taxicab. All vehicles, when applicable, are required to abide by all city and
state laws governing child restraints and whenever needed, the passenger is
responsible to provide the appropriate child seat.
6. Transferring Drivers and/or Vehicles. The transferring of drivers and/or
vehicles in a residential district is restricted to a maximum of one vehicle per
residential building address.
7. Reciprocity - Exception. A license revoked in the city of origin in the
metropolitan area will not thereafter be recognized in Marion. A business whose
application or license has been denied, revoked, or suspended by any other city in
the metropolitan area will not be issued a license by the City of Marion until such
time all requirements of this chapter are met.
132.05 TAXIMETERS.
1. Required. Every taxicab operating on the streets of the metropolitan area
shall have installed and be equipped with a taximeter of standard size and design,
approved by the Chief of Police or designee. All fares charged by the owner,
operator or driver of any taxicab shall be determined by the taximeter from the
fare recorded on the face thereof when transporting passengers.
2. Inspection. No vehicle license shall be issued to any taxicab owner or
operator until the meter installed in any such taxicab shall have been inspected by
the Police Department and found to be accurate.
3. Operation. Only meters operated from the transmission shall be used on
taxicabs.
4. Inaccuracy. No person shall use, or permit to be used, upon any taxicab
owned or operated by such person a meter which shall be in such condition as to
be over 5 percent inaccurate for every unit of measurement used to determine fare.
5. Illumination of Dial. No meter shall be used between sunset and sunrise
unless the face of the meter is illuminated by a suitable light, or if the meter has
digital numbers they must be lighted at all times.
6. Sealed Case. No person shall use, or permit to be used, or drive for hire, a
taxicab equipped with a meter, the case of which is unsealed, and which does not
have its cover and gear intact.
7. False Signal. No driver or operator of a taxicab equipped with a taximeter
and while carrying passengers, or under employment, shall display the signal
affixed to such taximeter in such position as to denote that such vehicle is not
employed, or in such a position as to denote that the driver is employed at a rate of
fare different from that to which the driver is entitled under the provisions of this
chapter.
132.06 CITY TAXI/LIMO DRIVER'S LICENSE.
1. Required. No person shall drive a taxicab or limousine for the purpose of
carrying passengers for hire without first obtaining a city taxi/limo driver's license
except for the reciprocity granted by Section 132.03 above. Any driver with a City
of Marion taxi/limo driver's license must surrender it to the City Clerk within 5
business days of terminating their employment with a taxi/limo company licensed
to operate in Cedar Rapids, Hiawatha, or Robins unless driving for a business with
a Marion license.
2. Qualifications. A current licensee or an applicant for a city taxi/limo
driver's license must:
A. Be of the age of 18 years or older.
B. Possess such current license as may be required by the state and
federal authorities to operate the particular vehicle type.
C. Have complied with all requirements with the State of Iowa for
obtaining a Class "D" chauffeur's license or CDL license as required.
D. Be able to speak, read and write the English language.
E. Be clean in dress and person and not be addicted to intoxicating
liquor, drugs, or other chemical substances. No person shall drive a taxicab
or limousine unless the person shall at all times be attired in the uniform
consisting of trousers and shirt or other uniform so designated by the City
of Marion's authorized representative. Walking shorts shall be allowed
provided that they are no shorter than 2 inches above the knee.
F. Fill out a form provided by the city, a sworn statement, giving the
applicant's full name, residence, places of residence for five previous years,
birth date, age, height, weight, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, driver's
license number, social security number, places of previous employment in
the last five years, whether the applicant has within the last five years been
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and if so, whether the applicant has
been convicted of an offense involving sex abuse within the five years
immediately preceding the date of application, whether applicant has been
convicted of more than one violation of Iowa Code 321J.2 (OWl) within
three years of the date of application or convicted of any moving violation
which resulted in a suspension of an operator's or chauffeur's license
pursuant to Chapters 321, 321A, or 321B of the Code of Iowa.
G. Not have been convicted within the past five years of a felony, or of
a crime involving sexual abuse, nor shall the applicant's name appear on a
current sexual abuse registry. Shall not have been convicted within the past
three years of a crime involving violence against others, including assault
and domestic abuse. Shall not have been convicted within the past three
years of one or more violations of Iowa Code 321J.2 (OWl); nor be
convicted in the previous three years of any moving traffic violation which
resulted in an automatic suspension of an operator's or chauffeur's license
pursuant to Chapters 321, 321A or 321B of the Code of Iowa.
3. Revocation or Suspension. An application or license denied, revoked, or
suspended by any other city within the metropolitan area will not be issued in
Marion until such time all requirements of this chapter are met.
A. Upon finding by the Chief of Police or their designee that any of the
requirements set forth in this chapter have been violated subsequent to the
filing of the application, the city taxi/limo driver's license or grant of
reciprocity may be suspended or revoked after notice and hearing. The
license may also be suspended or revoked if the applicant provides false
information on the license application. A license revoked in another city in
the metropolitan area will not be issued in Marion until the revocation
period has expired.
B. If a complaint is received about a driver or a driver is charged with a
criminal offense other than a simple misdemeanor moving violation while
on duty, the driver is subject to a hearing and a possible revocation or
suspension of his/her taxi/limo driver's license or reciprocity.
4. Term and Fee. Each city taxi/limo driver's license will be for a term of one
year and the license fee shall be as set by resolution of the City Council.
5. Photograph. Each applicant for a city taxi/limo license shall file with the
applicant's application three recent photographs, acceptable to the City Clerk, of
the applicant of a size designated by the City Clerk. Said photographs shall be in
color, taken against a solid colored background, and shall show the applicant's full
face and shoulders. One of the photographs shall be attached to the license when
issued, one shall be filed with the Police Department and one shall be filed with
the City Clerk. The photograph shall be so attached to the license that it cannot be
removed and another photograph substituted without detection. Where the
application for license is denied, the City Clerk shall return two of the photographs
to the applicant. The Police Department will retain one photo.
6. Background Investigation. A background investigation of the applicant will
be initiated through the Iowa Department of Criminal Investigations. The
applicant will pay for all costs associated with any background investigations.
7. Display of Taxi/Limo Driver's License. There shall be properly displayed
within the vehicle the city taxi/limo driver's license of the person driving such
vehicle. The city taxi/limo driver's license shall be affixed to such place in the
vehicle designated by the Chief of Police or their designee and produced upon
request. The license shall be covered with transparent material and must be kept
clear and clean.
132.07 INFORMATION. The owner, driver, or operator of any licensed taxicab or
limousine shall, upon request, give any person the number of said vehicle, the name of
the owner, driver, or operator thereof, and the address of their place of business
132.08 NO SMOKING ALLOWED. Passengers and drivers are not allowed to
smoke in taxicab or limousine vehicles. Decals or signs must be conspicuously displayed
on the inside of vehicles that read "NO SMOKING ALLOWED IN THIS VEHICLE."
132.09 RATES.
1. Every person owning, operating or controlling a taxicab and the driver of a
taxicab within the metropolitan area shall charge for transportation of a person or
persons, from one point within the metropolitan area to another, the fares that are
set by resolution by the City Council within the metropolitan area where licensed.
2. “Waiting time” shall be deemed to mean the time consumed while standing
at the direction of the passenger, or while waiting the arrival of the passenger at
the point of call, but no charge shall be made for the time consumed or lost
because of the operator's premature response to a call.
3. Every person owning, operating or controlling a limousine and under
contract with the Cedar Rapids Airport Commission shall charge the prescribed
rate as determined by the Airport Commission.
4. After the original passenger or passengers have engaged the services of a
taxicab, no additional passenger shall be accepted by the operator of a taxicab
without the express verbal permission of the original passenger or passengers.
5. The base rates prescribed shall be painted or affixed by decal in letters and
figures at least 1-1/2 inches in height in a prominent place on either the outside
metal surface of a door or similar surface on both sides of each taxicab. Each
limousine vehicle shall have their rates printed and located in the vehicle and
available upon request.
6. No person shall charge, or attempt to charge, a passenger a higher or lower
fare than that specified by the city resolution.
7. Any person who shall have hired a taxicab/limousine for the purpose of
transporting passengers and who shall refuse to pay the specified fare shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
132.10 ILLEGAL USE/ILLEGAL OPERATION.
1. The owner, driver or operator of a taxicab or limousine shall not permit any
person to occupy or use such vehicle for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or
assignation with knowledge or reasonable cause to know that the same is, or is to
be used for such purpose, or direct, take or transport, or offer or agree to direct,
take or transport any person to any place, or to any other person, with knowledge
or reasonable cause to know that the purpose of such directing, taking, or
transportation is prostitution, lewdness or assignation.
2. Alcohol use in any taxi, limousine, or rentertainment vehicle will be
governed by the laws of the State of Iowa and the City of Marion pertaining to
alcohol consumption in vehicles.
3. The owner, driver or operator of a taxicab or limousine shall not:
A. Deceive any passenger as to destination, route, or authorized taxicab
rates or take a circuitous route or any route other than the most direct
without the express consent of the passenger.
B. Overcharge or fail to provide a receipt upon request nor drop a
passenger at a location other than the location requested.
C. Be in possession of or consume any controlled substance or
alcoholic beverage while on duty or consume any alcoholic beverage within
four hours before beginning a work shift.
D. Transfer drivers and/or vehicles in a residential district in excess of
one vehicle per residential building address.
132.11 SOLICITATION.
1. Solicitation of Passenger by Drivers. No owner, operator, or driver of a
taxicab or limousine, while conducting business and accepting passengers for hire
on a public street or any other public place, shall solicit passengers for hire for a
taxicab or limousine except when sitting in the driver's compartment or while
standing immediately adjacent to the curbside thereof except, in connection with
limousine counters leased at The Eastern Iowa Airport, and shall remain in the
driver's compartment or immediately adjacent to drivers vehicle at all times.
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit a driver from alighting for the purpose of
assisting passengers into or out of the vehicle or from complying with the
directions of the person engaging the taxicab or limousine regarding the loading or
unloading of any baggage, goods, wares or merchandise.
2. Prohibited Soliciting.
A. No owner, operator, or driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or
annoying tone of voice or by sign or in any manner annoying any person,
nor by obstructing the movement of any person or following any person for
the purpose of soliciting patronage.
B. It shall be unlawful for any operator of a taxicab or limousine to
solicit a passenger or passengers for hire when said passenger or passengers
have engaged another taxicab or limousine and are awaiting the arrival of
such vehicle.
3. Solicitation of Other Common Carrier Passengers. No owner, operator, or
driver shall solicit passengers within the terminal of any other common carrier nor
at any immediate points along any established routes of any common carrier. This
section is not intended to preclude a response to any call for taxicabs or limousines
made by telephone or signal from a pedestrian or from soliciting patronage of a
debarking passenger of any common carrier.
4. Manner of Progress in Line.
A. When a taxicab conducting business by transporting or soliciting
passengers for hire at public buildings leaves the line upon the taxicab
stand, those behind it shall immediately move up and a taxicab seeking a
place on the taxicab stand shall approach the same only from the rear of the
stand and shall stop as near as practicable to the last cab in the line.
B. All limousines conducting business by transporting or soliciting
passengers for hire at public buildings shall stop and stand in the area
designated for limousines if there is a marked area.
132.12 REVOCATION FOR VIOLATIONS AND INJUNCTIVE REMEDY. Any
violation of this chapter or of the laws of Iowa may be sufficient grounds for a hearing to
consider revoking any license issued to or reciprocity granted to any owner, driver or
operator of any taxicab or limousine. In addition to the criminal penalties set out in the
ordinance codified in this chapter, the city may also pursue injunctive or other relief to
prohibit or regulate a taxicab or limousine not complying with the provisions of this
chapter.
132.13 DUTY TO CARRY ORDERLY PASSENGERS. No taxicab driver shall
refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons, upon request, unless
previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so. The
driver shall, however, not be obligated to convey any person who is incapable of entering
the taxicab unassisted due to intoxication or convey any person with objectionable
personal hygiene.
(Chapter 132 – Ord. 12-11 – Aug. 12 Supp.)
[The next page is 805]
CHAPTER 133 AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES
CHAPTER 133
AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES
133.01 Purpose 133.12 Application for Attendant-Driver Permits
133.02 Definitions 133.13 Standards for Attendant-Driver Permits
133.03 Ambulance Service License Required 133.14 Renewal of Ambulance Service License
133.04 Exemptions 133.15 Revocation
133.05 Application for License 133.16 Reports
133.06 Criteria for License 133.17 Inspection Reports
133.07 Standards for Ambulance Service 133.18 Prohibited Activities
133.08 Equipment and Supplies 133.19 Liability Limitations
133.09 Medical Director 133.20 Following Ambulance Prohibited
133.10 Liability Insurance 133.21 Interference with Duties of Attendant-Driver
133.11 Procedures for License Application 133.22 Enforcement
133.01 PURPOSE. It is the purpose of the City Council in enacting this chapter to
establish local standards for the provision of state of the art clinical quality, efficient,
timely and professional ambulance service and pre-hospital emergency medical services
in the areas of licensure, certification and permits for ambulance service providers and
pre-hospital emergency medical services care providers.
133.02 DEFINITIONS. Terms used in this chapter have the following meanings.
Other words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings attributed to them
in Iowa Code Chapter 147A (2005) and 641 Iowa Administrative Code Chapter 132
(2005) unless a different meaning is plainly required by the context.
1. “Ambulance” means any motor vehicle that is specifically designed,
modified, constructed, equipped, staffed and used regularly to transport patients.
2. “Ambulance Service” means any service program that utilizes ambulances
to provide emergency medical services and emergency or non-emergency ground
transport of patients to or from a health care facility or between health care
facilities.
3. “Attendant-Driver” means an individual holding a valid attendant-driver
permit issued pursuant to this chapter responsible for the operation and driving of
an ambulance.
4. “Chief of Police” means the duly appointed Marion Chief of Police or
his/her authorized representative.
5. “Fire Chief” means the duly appointed Marion Fire Chief or his/her
authorized representative.
6. “EMS” means pre-hospital emergency medical services.
7. “Medical Direction” means direction, advice or orders provided by a
Medical Director (as defined under this chapter) or a supervising physician or
CHAPTER 133 AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES
physician designee (as defined in 641 Iowa Administrative Code 132.1) in
accordance with written parameters and protocols to ambulance service personnel.
8. “Medical Director” means any duly licensed physician(s) appointed by an
ambulance service licensed under this chapter to be responsible for overall
medical direction of the ambulance service and who meets the qualifications for a
medical director of an ambulance service as the term is defined under 641 Iowa
Administrative Code 132.1.
9. “Patient” or “Patients” means any living individual(s) who is (are) injured,
sick or otherwise incapacitated and in need of emergency medical services or
ground transport to or from health care facilities or between health care facilities
in an ambulance.
10. “Person” means an individual, partnership, association, corporation
(governmental or private), limited liability company or any other legal entity
including any receiver, trustee, assignee or similar representative.
11. “Physician” means an individual licensed under Iowa Code Chapter 148,
150 or 150A.
133.03 AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSE REQUIRED.
1. No person shall operate an ambulance service within the limits of the City
unless such person holds a current and valid license for such ambulance service
pursuant to this chapter.
2. Every ambulance service retained by any person to provide prospective or
standby service at designated events and gatherings within the limits of the City
shall comply fully with every requirement of this chapter.
3. No ambulance service license shall be transferable. In the event of a
change of ownership, the new owner shall be required to obtain a license pursuant
to this chapter and to comply in all respects with all applicable statutes,
ordinances, rules, and regulations relating to the operation of an ambulance service
in the City at that time.
4. Each license issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period of one year
unless earlier suspended, revoked or terminated.
5. Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter prior to the
adoption of the amendments contained in this chapter shall remain in full force
and effect until the time heretofore prescribed for its expiration. At the time of
issuing of a license or renewal under this chapter, the applicant shall meet all of
the provisions of this chapter.
133.04 EXEMPTIONS. This chapter shall not apply to:
CHAPTER 133 AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES
1. Vehicles being used in an emergency when a lack of transporting resources,
such as when no ambulance is available or in a disaster situation, would cause an
unnecessary delay in patient care;
2. Vehicles owned or controlled by the United States government or the
government of the State of Iowa;
3. Vehicles operated only on private property or within the confines of
institutional grounds;
4. Vehicles or aircraft responding at the request of a licensed ambulance
service pursuant to a mutual aid agreement approved by the City;
5. Persons or vehicles providing ambulance service for patient transports
originating outside of the limits of the City, or nonstop patient transports through
the City;
6. First responders who provide EMS care but are not engaged in the transport
of patients;
7. Persons not regularly engaged in the business of ambulance or medical
transportation services who provide incidental emergency assistance to family
members and acquaintances, including transportation to a medical facility in a
private vehicle;
8. Persons or vehicles of the Linn County Sheriff's Department, Marion Police
Department, or other law enforcement agencies transporting persons in custody to
or from health care facilities.
133.05 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. Applications for licenses hereunder shall
be made upon such forms as may be prepared by the Fire Chief. Applicants shall file with
the City Clerk a sworn application in writing that shall give the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant and the owner of the ambulance
service and ambulance.
2. The trade or other name, if any, under which the applicant does business
and proposes to do business.
3. The training and experience of the applicant in the transportation and care
of patients.
4. A description of each ambulance, including the make, model, year of
manufacture, motor and chassis number, current state license number, the length
of time the ambulance has been in use; and the color scheme, insignia, name,
monogram or other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate
applicant's ambulance.
5. The location and descriptions of the place or places from which the
applicant intends to operate.
CHAPTER 133 AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES
6. Description of system of providing medical direction.
7. An accompanying license fee in an amount as may be set from time to time
by resolution of the Council. Fees set prior to the adoption of the ordinance
codified in this chapter shall continue in effect until such time as the Council
adopts a subsequent resolution establishing fees.
8. Evidence of its current ability to meet the eligibility criteria for an
ambulance service license set forth in Section 133.06, along with a statement of its
agreement to continuously meet such criteria during the period covered by the
license.
9. A statement acknowledging and agreeing to follow the standards for
licensed ambulance services set forth in Section 133.07 and the requirements for
ambulances, equipment and supplies set forth in Section 133.08 during the period
covered by the license.
10. Such other information as the Council shall deem reasonably necessary to a
fair determination of compliance with this chapter.
11. Nothing in this chapter precludes or prohibits the Council from granting a
reciprocal license to any ambulance service licensed by the City of Cedar Rapids.
133.06 CRITERIA FOR LICENSE. In order to be eligible to receive a license to
operate an ambulance service within the limits of the City, an applicant shall meet the
following criteria at the time of application for such license and, if such license is
granted, shall continue to meet such criteria during the licensure period:
1. An ambulance service must hold and maintain a valid certificate of
ambulance service authorization issued by the Iowa Department of Public Health
pursuant to 641 IAC 132 to operate at the paramedic specialist level in the City.
2. An ambulance service must have available for operation within the City at
all times an adequate number of ambulances and qualified personnel to provide
twenty-four (24) hour per day, seven (7) day per week ambulance service,
including a minimum of three (3) advanced life support ambulances each to be
staffed by at least one paramedic specialist, plus one other EMS provider. The
Council shall determine what constitutes an adequate number of ambulances and
qualified personnel.
3. An ambulance service must have available for operation within the City at
all times a minimum of one (1) non-transporting supervisory vehicle, equipped at
the advanced life support level staffed by at least one (1) paramedic specialist
supervisor twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week.
4. An ambulance service must have the capability to continuously operate an
ambulance dispatch center equipped with a geographically reference computeraided
dispatch system covering the entire service area of the ambulance service.
CHAPTER 133 AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES
The ambulance dispatch center shall be equipped with telephone equipment
capable of receiving and passing to the computer-aided dispatch system location
information for both wireline and wireless requests for service. The ambulance
dispatch center shall be capable of communicating on the City of Cedar Rapids
800 MHz public safety radio system, the Linn County/Marion VHF radio system,
and the State of Iowa regional and statewide medical communications frequencies.
An ambulance service shall notify the Marion Fire Department promptly of all
emergency dispatches. A joint dispatch arrangement with another organization
that meets the requirements of this section is permitted.
5. An ambulance service must have and maintain its own multiple-patient
response capability within the limits of the City or a contiguous city with the
capacity to simultaneously immobilize and treat a minimum of ten (10) patients in
addition to the capacity of those ambulances staffed and in service within the
system.
133.07 STANDARDS FOR AMBULANCE SERVICE. Once licensed, every
ambulance service shall:
1. Conform to the standards, requirements, and regulations provided for in this
chapter, Chapter 147A, Code of Iowa, 641 Iowa Administrative Code Chapter 132
and any other statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the operation of
ambulance services and ambulances.
2. Conform to any additional rules and regulations as determined by the
Council or contained in this chapter.
3. Utilize only ambulances licensed under this chapter that meet the
requirements for ambulances set forth in section 133.08.
4. On every call, provide at least one paramedic specialist plus one other EMS
provider.
5. Ensure that personnel duties are consistent with each ambulance service
employee's level of certification and the level of care authorized under this chapter
and any applicable statute, rule or regulation.
6. Maintain accurate and current personnel rosters and files on ambulance
service employees. These rosters on file shall include the names and addresses of
all personnel and descriptions of each individual employee's most up-to-date
qualifications.
7. Notify the Council, in writing, of its intent to discontinue operations at least
30 days prior to the effective date of the intended discontinuance of ambulance
service.
8. The exemptions from liability in certain circumstances, now codified at
Section 147A.10 of the Iowa Code, and as the same may be hereafter amended or
CHAPTER 133 AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES
revised, are extended to all ambulance services and personnel properly licensed
under this chapter.
133.08 EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES. Once licensed, every ambulance service
shall meet the following requirements for its ambulances, equipment and supplies:
1. In the event an ambulance service wishes to include a new or different
ambulance under an ambulance service license, the new or different ambulance
must conform in all respects to this chapter and all State statutes and regulations
relating thereto.
2. No ambulance shall be driven, permitted to be driven, operated, or used in
or on any street, alley, or public way in the City, which does not have as
permanent equipment such permanently mounted lights, sirens and special
markings to designate it as an ambulance as may be prescribed by the Council.
3. All ambulances covered by an ambulance service license shall be equipped
with radios that shall allow two-way communication between the ambulance, the
Marion Fire Department, and both Cedar Rapids hospitals.
4. Every ambulance covered by an ambulance service license, its equipment,
and the principal place of business as designated on the license application; and all
records relating to the maintenance and operation of the ambulance and ambulance
service shall be open to inspection by the Council or its designated representatives.
5. Incidents of fire or the destructive or damaging occurrences affecting the
ambulance service or the theft of an ambulance, equipment or drugs, shall be
reported to the Council and the Chief of Police immediately upon the discovery of
same by any ambulance service personnel.
6. If an ambulance is involved in a motor vehicle accident, a copy of the
motor vehicle accident report required under Iowa Code Section 321.266(2)
relating to the reporting of an accident resulting in personal injury, death, or
property damage shall be submitted to the appropriate authority as provided by
law.
7. Every ambulance service shall submit all ambulances in its fleet to an
inspection to be held not less than once a year, with said inspection to be
conducted by the Council or its designated representative. The inspection shall
consist of a thorough investigation and inspection of each ambulance pursuant to
uniform criteria as established by the Council. The granting of a reciprocal license
shall operate to waive this requirement.
133.09 MEDICAL DIRECTOR. Every ambulance service shall have a Medical
Director who shall be a duly licensed physician, and who shall be responsible for the
overall medical direction of the ambulance service. The responsibilities of the Medical
CHAPTER 133 AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES
Director may be delegated by the Medical Director to a qualified individual of equivalent
or higher training than the service being offered by the ambulance service.
1. The responsibilities of the Medical Director shall include but are not
limited to:
A. Maintaining liaison with other physicians and hospital personnel.
B. Monitoring and evaluating the clinical activities of the ambulance
service.
C. Coordinating and assessing continuing education programs for
ambulance service personnel.
D. Providing individual evaluation and consultation to the ambulance
service personnel.
E. Developing, updating, and recommending to the ambulance service
clinical protocols for the ambulance service.
F. Ensuring that medical direction is available and provided twentyfour
(24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week.
2. The Medical Director shall be currently certified in advanced cardiac life
support as defined by the American Heart Association or American Red Cross.
133.10 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
1. No ambulance service license shall be issued under this chapter, nor shall
such license be valid after issuance, nor shall any ambulance be operated in the
City, unless there is at all times in force and effect insurance coverage issued by an
insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Iowa for the ambulance
service and for each and every ambulance owned and/or operated by or for the
applicant or licensee, and also naming the City and its officers and employees as
additional insureds. The minimum limits of liability of the insurance policy will be
as follows:
A. To cover the insured’s legal liability for personal injury or death
resulting therefrom, for each ambulance, for any recovery by one person as
a result of any one accident or cause, one million dollars ($1,000,000); and
for all persons receiving personal injury, as a result of any one accident or
other cause, three million dollars ($3,000,000).
B. To cover the insured’s legal liability for damage to or destruction of
any property as a result of any one accident or other cause, three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000).
2. Certificates evidencing said insurance policies shall be submitted to the
Council for approval prior to the issuance of each license. The certificates shall be
subject to all requirements as the Council may adopt from time to time.
CHAPTER 133 AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES
3. Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a provision (i) for
continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any
recovery thereon, (ii) that the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the
insolvency or the bankruptcy of the insured, and (iii) that, until the policy is
revoked, the insurance company will not be relieved from liability on account of
nonpayment of premium, failure to renew license at the end of the year, or any act
of or omission of the named insured.
4. Every insurance policy required hereunder shall extend for the period to be
covered by the license applied for and the notice to the City and to the insured
before any cancellation or termination of the policy earlier than its expiration date,
and the cancellation or other termination of any such policy shall automatically
revoke and terminate the licenses issued for the ambulances covered by such
policy unless another insurance policy complying with the provisions of this
section shall be provided and be in effect at the time of such cancellation or
termination.
133.11 PROCEDURES FOR LICENSE APPLICATION.
1. The City Clerk shall, within 20 days after receipt of an application for an
ambulance license as provided for herein, cause such investigation as he/she
deems necessary to be made of the applicant and of its proposed operations and
the vehicles, equipment, and premises designated in the application. That upon
completion thereof, the Chief of Police shall submit his/her report and
recommendation to the Council.
2. Upon receipt of the aforestated report and recommendation from the Chief
of Police, the Council will then review the same and issue a license for a specified
ambulance to be valid for a period of one year unless earlier suspended, revoked
or terminated if the Council finds the following conditions have been met:
A. The public convenience and necessity require the proposed
ambulance service.
B. Each such ambulance, its required equipment and the premises
designated in the application comply with the requirements and standards
prescribed in this chapter and with the regulations promulgated under such
chapter.
C. The applicant is a responsible and proper person to conduct or work
in the proposed business.
D. Only drivers, attendants and attendant-drivers are employed in such
capacities, holding valid permits hereafter provided.
E. All the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable laws and
ordinances have been met.
CHAPTER 133 AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES
133.12 APPLICATION FOR ATTENDANT-DRIVER PERMITS. Applications for
attendant-driver permits hereunder shall be made upon such forms as may be prescribed
by the Chief of Police. Applicants shall file with the City Clerk a sworn application in
writing which shall give the following information:
1. The applicant's full name, current residence, places of residence for two
years previous to moving to his/her present address, and length of time he/she has
resided in the Cedar Rapids metropolitan area.
2. The applicant’s date of birth, place of birth, Social Security number,
driver’s license number, height, color of eyes and hair.
3. Whether the applicant has, within the past five years, been convicted of a
felony or misdemeanor and, if so, when, where and for what cause.
4. The applicant’s training and experience in the transportation and care of
patients, and whether he/she has previously held a permit or license as a driver,
chauffeur, attendant or attendant-driver and, if so, when, where, and whether
his/her permit or license has ever been revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction
and for what cause.
5. Such other information as the Chief of Police or the Council shall deem
reasonably necessary for a fair determination of compliance with this chapter.
6. An accompanying fee in an amount as may be set from time to time by
resolution of the Council.
133.13 STANDARDS FOR ATTENDANT-DRIVER PERMITS.
1. The Chief of Police shall cause an investigation of the application and of
the background of the applicant to be made through the Iowa Department of
Criminal Investigations.
2. The Chief of Police shall issue a permit to an attendant-driver hereunder,
valid for a period of two years, unless earlier suspended, revoked or terminated
when he/she finds that:
A. The applicant has such standing and good reputation as will satisfy
the Council that he/she will comply with all laws, ordinances, and
regulations applicable to such permit, that the applicant is not prohibited by
the provisions of any applicable law or regulation from obtaining and
holding an attendant-driver permit and is, otherwise, morally fit for the
position;
B. The applicant is able to speak, read and write the English language;
3. No one shall be given a permit as an attendant-driver unless he/she holds a
currently valid chauffeur’s license from the State of Iowa.
CHAPTER 133 AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES
4. A permit as an attendant-driver issued hereunder shall not be assignable or
transferable.
5. No official entry made upon a permit may be defaced, removed or
obliterated.
6. The same procedure as above provided shall be followed for renewals.
133.14 RENEWAL OF AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSE. Renewal of any
ambulance service license hereunder, upon expiration for any reason or after revocation,
shall require conformance with all the requirements of this chapter that may exist at the
time of any renewal.
133.15 REVOCATION.
1. Any violation of this chapter or of regulations promulgated hereunder shall
be sufficient grounds for revoking any license or permit issued pursuant to this
chapter.
2. Upon suspension, revocation or termination of any license hereunder,
operations as an ambulance service shall cease; and no person shall permit further
operation with such ambulances as such. Upon suspension, revocation or
termination of an attendant-driver permit hereunder, such attendant-driver shall
cease to drive or attend an ambulance; and no person shall employ or permit such
individual to drive or attend an ambulance.
133.16 REPORTS.
1. Each licensee hereunder shall maintain accurate records upon such forms as
may be prescribed and containing such information as may be required by the
Chief of Police concerning the transportation of each patient within the City or
from one place herein to another place within or beyond its limits. Such records
pertaining to injury on public property shall be available for inspection by the
Chief of Police at any reasonable time.
2. The provisions of subsection 1 of this section shall apply with equal force
in case the patient shall die before being so transported in such ambulance or dies
while being transported therein or at any time prior to the acceptance of the patient
into the responsibility of the hospital or medical or other authority if the patient is
still under the care or responsibility of the ambulance service licensee.
133.17 INSPECTION REPORTS. A copy of each initial, annual or other ambulance,
equipment and premises inspection report by the Police Chief under the provisions of this
chapter shall be promptly transmitted to the applicant or licensee to whom it refers.
CHAPTER 133 AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES
133.18 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES. Except as provided in Section 133.04, it shall
be unlawful for any person, including any ambulance service provider, its agents or
employees, to intentionally, knowingly or recklessly:
1. Make a false statement of a material fact, or omit disclosure of a material
fact, in any application or report required under this chapter.
2. Perform or allow the performance of first responder, EMT or trainee
services by any first responder, EMT or trainee who currently has his/her
certification suspended, revoked or terminated by the State of Iowa.
3. Perform the services of a first responder or EMT unless in full conformity
with State law, this chapter and the administrative rules established hereunder.
4. Provide ambulance service within the City limits unless authorized by this
chapter.
5. Falsify, deface or obliterate any license, certificate or permit issued under
this chapter
6. Transport a patient for compensation in any vehicle other than an
ambulance except as provided herein.
7. Wear any badge or device while providing emergency medical care that
does not accurately represent the certification level or affiliation of the individual
wearing it.
8. Deny or delay the provision of ambulance service or other EMS care to any
individual on account of race, creed, religion, age, sex, national origin, physical or
mental disability, place of residence, financial condition, or the presence or
absence of medical insurance, provided that it shall not be a violation of this
chapter for ambulance service personnel to obtain at the time of service,
information required for effective billing, to comply with state or federal
regulations pertaining to patient care and transport or to comply with special
benefit eligibility procedures established by medical insurers or medical service
providers.
9. Charge for any service, equipment or supplies not provided to or for the
benefit of the patient.
10. No ambulance shall be operated, and no individual shall drive, attend or
permit it to be operated, on the streets, alleys, or any public way or place of the
City, unless it shall be under the immediate supervision and direction of an
attendant-driver.
133.19 LIABILITY LIMITATIONS. Nothing in this chapter is intended to create a
cause of action, claim or any third-party beneficiary rights in favor of specific individuals
against the City, any hospital, an ambulance service licensed hereunder or their officials,
CHAPTER 133 AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES
employees or agents. Any duty created by this chapter is a general duty running in favor
of the public.
133.20 FOLLOWING AMBULANCE PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle, other than the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle as
defined in Iowa Code Section 321.1(6) (2005) as amended, to follow closer than three
hundred feet of an ambulance when such ambulance is operating with lights and sirens.
133.21 INTERFERENCE WITH DUTIES OF ATTENDANT-DRIVER. It is
unlawful for any person to proceed to the scene of an accident or other emergency, or to
stop or park any vehicle or congregate in the vicinity thereof so as to interfere with
attendant-driver(s) or other persons performing their duties at the scene of such an
accident or other emergency, or for the purpose of advertising or offering any service for
hire; nor shall any person thereat solicit gainful employment of any nature.
133.22 ENFORCEMENT. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the Fire
Chief or the Police Chief.
(Chapter 133 – Ord. 06-24 – Nov. 06 Supp.)
CHAPTER 134
ALARM BUSINESSES AND USERS
134.01 Purpose and Definitions 134.12 Direct Connections to Police Department
134.02 License for Alarm Business 134.13 Central Stations – Standards
134.03 Action on Business License Applications 134.14 Modified Central Stations – Standards
134.04 License Renewals 134.15 Inspection of Alarm Devices and Businesses
134.05 Revocation of Alarm Licenses 134.16 Statistical Data
134.06 Alarm Agents; Identification Cards 134.17 Testing of Equipment
134.07 Action on Alarm Agent Applications 134.18 Notice of Disruption in Service
134.08 Revocation of Identification Cards 134.19 False Alarms
134.09 Identification Cards; Form; Return of Cards 134.20 Service by Mail
134.10 Administrative Rules 134.21 Judicial Review
134.11 Automatic Dialing Devices 134.22 False Fire Alarms
134.01 PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS. The purpose of this chapter is to provide
minimum standards and regulations applicable to burglar and holdup alarm systems,
alarm businesses, alarm agents and alarm users as defined in this chapter. For the
purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall
have the meaning given herein.
1. “Alarm agent” means any person employed by an alarm business whose
duties include the altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing,
leasing, servicing, responding to, or causing others to respond to an alarm device.
2. “Alarm business” means any business which engages in the activity of
altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing or
responding to a burglar or holdup alarm system, or which causes any of these
activities to take place.
3. “Alarm system” means an assembly of equipment and devices (or a single
device such as a solid state unit), arranged to signal the presence of a hazard
requiring urgent attention, and to which police or alarm agents are expected to
respond. In this chapter, the term “alarm system” includes the terms “automatic
holdup alarm system,” “burglar alarm systems,” “holdup alarm systems” and
“manual holdup alarm systems,” as those terms are hereinafter defined. Alarm
systems which monitor temperature, humidity, or any other condition not directly
related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a premises are
specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter.
4. “Alarm user” means any person or business on whose premises an alarm
system is maintained within the City, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles
or proprietary systems. If, however, an alarm system on a
motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system at a premises (other than a
proprietary system), the person or business using such a system is an alarm user.
Also excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this chapter are
persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons within the premises in
which the alarm system is located, of an attempted unauthorized intrusion or
holdup attempt. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal, emitting
sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the
premises, such system is within the definition of an alarm system and shall be
subject to this chapter.
5. “Answering service” refers to a telephone answering service providing
among its services the service of receiving on a continuous basis through trained
employees emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter, immediately
relaying the message by live voice to the communications center of the Police
Department.
6. “Automatic dialing device” refers to an alarm system which automatically
sends over regular telephone lines by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded
voice message or coded signal, indicating the existence of the emergency situation
that the alarm system is designed to detect.
7. “Automatic holdup alarm system” means an alarm system in which the
signal transmission is initiated by the action of a person.
8. “Burglar alarm system” refers to an alarm system signaling an entry or
attempted entry into the area protected by the system.
9. “Central station” means an office to which alarm systems are connected,
where human operators supervise the circuits, and where guards are maintained
continuously to investigate signals.
10. “Central station equipment” refers to the signal receiving, recording,
retransmitting equipment installed in the central station.
11. “Central station system” means a system in which the operation of alarm
systems are signaled automatically to, recorded in, maintained, and supervised
from a central station having trained operators and guards in attendance at all
times.
12. “Direct connect” means an alarm system which has the capability of
transmitting system signals to and receiving them at an agency maintained by the
local government, for example, a police communications center.
13. “Direct line” means a telephone line leading directly from a central station
to the communications center of the Police Department that is for use only to
report emergency signals on a person-to-person basis.
14. “False alarm” means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the owner or lessee
of an alarm system or of his employees or agents. Such terminology does not
include, for example, alarms caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or other
violent conditions.
15. “Holdup alarm system” refers to an alarm system signaling a robbery or
attempted robbery.
16. “Interconnect” means to connect an alarm system to a voice-grade
telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a
standard telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an
emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system.
17. “Local alarm system” refers to a signaling system which, when activated,
causes an audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated in or on the
premises within which the system is installed.
18. “Manual holdup alarm system” refers to an alarm system in which the
signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked, or by an
observer of the attack.
19. “Modified central station” means an office to which alarm systems are
connected, where operators supervise the circuits. Such modified central station is
not listed by Underwriters’ Laboratories.
20. “Primary trunkline” means a telephone line leading directly into the
communications center of the Police Department that is for the purpose of
handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis, and which is identified as
such by a specific number included among the emergency numbers listed in the
telephone directory issued by the telephone company, and covering the service
area within the Police Department’s jurisdiction.
21. “Proprietary system” means an alarm system sounding and/or recording
alarm signals at a control center located within the protected premises, the control
center being under the supervision of the proprietor of the protected premises. If a
proprietary system includes a signal line connected directly or by means of an
automatic dialing device to a police communication center, a central station,
modified central station or answering service, it thereby becomes an “alarm
system” as defined in this chapter.
22. “Remote signaling system” means an alarm signaling system which when
activated by an alarm device transmits a signal from an alarm signaling device to a
central location, other than the Police Department, where appropriate action is
taken to investigate and respond to the signal.
23. “Signal line” refers to the transmission line through which the signal passes
from one of the elements of the signal transmission to another.
24. “Special trunkline” means a telephone line leading into the communication
center of the Police Department and having the primary purpose of handling
emergency signals or messages originating either directly or through a central
location from automatic dialing devices.
25. “Subscriber” means a person who buys and/or leases or otherwise obtains
an alarm signaling system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business
to monitor and/or service the alarm device.
26. “Telephone company” means the utility that furnishes telephone services to
the City.
27. The abbreviation “ANSI” stands for the American National Standards
Institute.
28. The abbreviation “UL” stands for Underwriter’s Laboratories.
134.02 LICENSE FOR ALARM BUSINESS.
1. Any person intending to commence operation of an alarm business in the
City shall, prior to the commencement of any such operation, apply to the Clerk
for a license to operate on a form to be furnished by the Clerk. Businesses which
sell only those alarm systems excluded from the definition of alarm systems in
Section 134.01 of this chapter are not required to obtain a license under this
section. Such application shall be signed by the individual proprietor of such
business, or by a partner, or by the proper corporate official, as is appropriate for
the form of the business seeking the license, and shall include:
A. The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm business, and
the type of business organization it is (individual, partnership, or
corporation). If the business is an individual proprietorship, the name,
Social Security number, address, and telephone number of the owner; if a
partnership, the name, Social Security number, address, and telephone
number of each partner (general, limited, silent, etc.); if a corporation, the
names and addresses of the directors, principal officers and stockholders
(any stockholder holding more than 20 percent of the corporation’s
authorized and issued stock), and the state where incorporated.
B. Certification, upon receipt of notice of approval of a license
application, of a complete list of names and addresses of all persons in the
City to whom systems have been leased, installed, or who are currently
under contract to the alarm business for services shall be maintained for
inspection by the Police Chief during the course of his/her official business.
C. A complete list of criminal convictions, if any, except for minor
traffic offenses, of the applicant, or a list of criminal convictions, if any,
except for minor traffic offenses, of each partner, officer, or local office
manager, if the applicant is other than an individual.
D. A statement that the applicant will inform the Clerk within ten (10)
days after any substantial change of the information required by this
section.
2. License applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee to be set
by resolution of the Council to cover the costs to the City of processing the
application and investigating the applicant. Prior to obtaining a license, every
applicant shall file in the office of the Clerk, an indemnity bond with a corporate
surety authorized to do business in the State of Iowa or an insurance policy issued
by a company authorized to do business in the State. Minimum limits of liability
of said bond or insurance shall be as provided by resolution of the Council, and
said bond or insurance policy shall be issued for a period to cover the life of the
license applied for. Failure to maintain such bond or insurance in full force and
effect shall be grounds for revocation of the license.
3. If an alarm business is operating or intends to operate a central station, a
modified central station, or a telephone answering service, the license application
shall so specify. An alarm business which commences operation of a central
station, a modified central station, or a telephone answering service, after the
effective date of this chapter, must comply with the applicable standards set forth
in Sections 134.13, 134.14 and 134.15 of this chapter, and be inspected for such
compliance by an appropriate City official (or private professional engineer),
before a license may be issued.
4. Alarm businesses which are operating a central station, modified central
station, or telephone answering service on the effective date of this chapter shall
have two years after such date to conform to the standards required by Sections
134.13, 134.14 and 134.15.
134.03 ACTION ON BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
1. The Police Chief shall cause a report on the applicant to be prepared, based
upon the information contained in the application, together with such other
relevant information as may be obtained pertaining to the applicant or his/her
business.
2. On the basis of this report, the Police Chief shall within sixty (60) days
after the receipt of an application for an alarm business, license or an application
for renewal, either approve or deny the issuance or renewal of a license. Upon
making a decision, he/she shall:
A. In case of approval, notify the applicant in writing of the approval,
and inform him/her that upon the presentation of the writing to the Clerk,
and the payment of the required fee set by resolution of Council, the
applicant will be issued a license to operate.
B. In the case of denial, notify the applicant, in writing, of the denial
and of the basis for the denial, which may be in nonconformance with any
part of this chapter. If the basis for the denial can be corrected, the writing
shall so state and shall explain how these corrections may be made. The
notice of denial shall inform the applicant that he/she may appeal the denial
and set forth the procedure for appeal. The procedure for appeal shall be as
follows:
(1) Within 10 days after receipt of the notice of denial, the
applicant shall file a notice of appeal with the Clerk, addressed to the
Council, and stating the basis of the appeal.
(2) The Clerk shall cause the applicant to be given notice of the
time and the place of hearing before the Council, by mail, at least
seven (7) days in advance of the date of the hearing. Notice of such
hearing shall also be posted as part of the Council’s agenda for that
meeting. The applicant may appear before the Council and the
applicant or his/her designated representative may make an oral
presentation of his/ her appeal, or he/she may make the appeal
through a written statement, or both. The Council shall rule on the
appeal within seven (7) days after it is heard, and such ruling shall
be final.
134.04 LICENSE RENEWALS. Each year by July 1, each alarm business having a
license to do business in the City shall make application with the Clerk to renew its
license by filing an application for renewal on an appropriate form provided by the City.
The application for renewal shall list any changes in the information contained on its
application for a license or since its last renewal. The application for renewal shall be
accompanied by a fee to be set by resolution of the Council. No refunds of license fees
provided in this chapter shall be made.
134.05 REVOCATION OF ALARM LICENSES.
1. In addition to any penalties which may be imposed for the violation of
certain provisions of this chapter, the City may, pursuant to the provisions of this
section, revoke the license of an alarm business on any of the following grounds:
A. Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statement
made in an application for a license.
B. Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statement
made in the conduct of an alarm business.
C. Failure to correct any deficiencies in equipment or operation within
thirty (30) days after receipt of notice of same from the Police Chief.
D. Failure to comply with any order or notice issued by the Police Chief
after the licensee’s rights to hearing and appeal have been exhausted or
failure after reasonable notice to permit the Police Chief to inspect any lists
which he/she is authorized to inspect under this chapter or failure to comply
with the standards imposed by this chapter within thirty (30) days after
notice or order from the Police Chief.
2. No alarm business license shall be revoked until a hearing is held by the
Police Chief. Written notice of the time and the place of the hearing shall be
served on the holder of the license at least ten (10) days before the date set for the
hearing. The notice shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced as the basis
for the revocation of the license.
3. At the hearing before the Police Chief, the holder of the license or his or her
authorized representative shall be given an opportunity to confront and examine
any adverse witness and to present evidence on his/her own behalf. After the
hearing, the Police Chief shall either dismiss the revocation proceeding or shall
forward the matter to the Council with his/her recommendation that the license be
revoked.
4. Any person whose license is revoked pursuant to this section shall have the
right to file a written appeal with the Council within ten (10) days after receiving
notice in writing of the revocation recommendation from the Police Chief. Such
appeal shall set forth in detail the specific ground or grounds on which it is based.
The Council shall hold a hearing on the appeal and shall cause the appellant to be
given at least seven (7) days’ written notice of such hearing. At the hearing, the
appellant or his/her authorized representative shall have the right to present a
written or oral argument, or both, in support of his/her appeal. The determination
of the Council on the appeal shall be final.
5. Within ten (10) days after an alarm business receives notice of revocation
of its license, or after it has exhausted all appeals with respect to such revocation,
it shall notify all persons for whom it is required to maintain a list pursuant to
Section 134.02(1)(C) of such revocation, and the notice shall advise such persons
that the alarm business must cease providing service for or selling burglar and
holdup alarm systems to such persons. When the notice required by this
subsection has been completed, the alarm business shall submit a sworn certificate
to the Police Chief that it has met the requirements of this section.
6. After notice of revocation has been given, an alarm business licensee may
continue to operate the business until all rights of appeal under this chapter have
been exhausted.
134.06 ALARM AGENTS; IDENTIFICATION CARDS. (Repealed by Ord. 13-24 –
Nov. 13 Supp.)
134.07 ACTION ON ALARM AGENT APPLICATIONS. (Repealed by Ord. 13-24 –
Nov. 13 Supp.)
134.08 REVOCATION OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS. (Repealed by Ord. 13-24 –
Nov. 13 Supp.)
134.09 IDENTIFICATION CARDS; FORM; RETURN OF CARDS. (Repealed by
Ord. 13-24 – Nov. 13 Supp.)
134.10 ADMINISTRATIVE RULES. The Police Chief shall promulgate such rules
as may be necessary for the implementation of this chapter and for determination of
grounds for clerical suspension or revocation of any license or permit required by this
chapter. The rules shall be approved by the Mayor and Council and shall be open to
inspection by the public.
134.11 AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICES.
1. No automatic dialing device shall be interconnected to a primary trunkline.
2. At such time and under such conditions as the Council may approve,
automatic dialing devices designed to transmit signals directly to the Police
Department may be interconnected to a special trunkline into the department.
Before such a device is interconnected to a special trunkline, the person
performing this operation shall first obtain instructions from the Police
Department concerning the procedure to be followed. The Police Department
shall designate the number to be used for this purpose.
3. The owner or lessee of any automatic dialing device which is
interconnected to a special trunkline transmitting directly into the Police
Department shall pay the City a monthly fee to be set by resolution of the Council.
4. Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device may have the device
interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly to:
A. A central station;
B. A modified central station; or
C. A licensed answering service.
5. The relaying of messages by such intermediate services to the Police
Department shall be over a special trunkline and only under the conditions set
forth in subsection 2, except that operators at the central stations may relay
messages over a direct line.
6. Automatic dialing devices may also be interconnected to one or more
telephone numbers available to the owner or lessee of the devices or their
designated representatives, at another location which has been established to
receive alarms by a licensed alarm business.
7. Automatic dialing devices interconnected to a telephone line that transmit
directly to a central station, modified central station, or licensed answering service
and result in the alarm being referred to the Police Department for response shall
be subject to a monthly monitoring fee as set by resolution of the Council. Set
fees shall be paid by the owner or lessor of said automatic dialing device as may
be the case.
8. Failure to pay the monthly fee or any false alarm charges assessed as
provided for in this chapter shall be cause for termination of Police Department
response.
9. Thirty (30) days’ notice in writing shall be given to all licensed alarm
businesses prior to the establishment of special trunklines. Every alarm business
which interconnects any automatic dialing device in the City to a special trunkline
in the communication center of the Police Department shall maintain a current list
of such installations for inspection by the Police Chief during the course of his/her
official duties and include in such list:
A. The name, home address and telephone number of the device’s
owner or lessee;
B. The address of the location where the device is installed and the
telephone number at that location;
C. The name and telephone number of at least one other person who
can be reached at any time, day or night, and who is authorized to respond
to an emergency signal transmitted by the automatic dialing device, and
who can open the premises wherein the device is installed.
10. The information contained in the lists required by this section shall be
restricted to inspection only by the Police Chief and authorized employees of the
Police Department in the course of their official duties.
11. Automatic dialing devices installed on any premises within the City which
are interconnected to a special trunkline transmitting signals into the Police
Department that will be responded to by members of the Police Department shall
meet the following minimum standards, as determined by the Police Chief:
A. The contents of the recorded message to be transmitted by such
device must be intelligible and in a format approved by the Police Chief as
appropriate for the type of emergency being reported.
B. Upon a single stimulus of the alarm device, an automatic dialing
device may place two separate calls to the Police Department via the
special trunkline. No such call shall be longer than one minute and fifteen
seconds in duration. There must be at least three minutes between the
completion of the first call and the initiation of the second, and the second
call must be clearly identified as a second call.
C. All such devices shall be capable of transmitting an emergency
message to two or more separate locations, so that upon activation any
message may be sent not only on a special trunkline but also to a location
where an authorized person is available to respond to the emergency
message, and to open the premises on which the device is installed.
D. The sensory apparatus and hardware comprising such devices shall
be maintained by the owner or lessee in such physical condition that false
alarms will be minimized.
E. This section shall apply only to those automatic dialing devices
interconnected to the communication center of the Police Department.
12. Every alarm business selling or leasing to any person an automatic dialing
device which is installed on such person’s premises in the City shall furnish that
person with instructions that provide adequate information to enable persons using
such device to operate it properly and, if the device is to be serviced or maintained
by another alarm business, shall furnish such other alarm business with a manual
or other information necessary to enable it to service or properly maintain such
device. Copies of such manuals or other information shall be made available to
the Police Chief by the alarm business at all reasonable times.
13. If the Police Chief reasonably finds such information to be incomplete or
unclear, or inadequate to explain how the device operates and is constructed, the
Police Chief may require the alarm business to revise the information to meet the
standards contained herein, and then to distribute the revised information to
persons who have had such devices installed as well as to persons subsequently
having such devices installed.
14. Every alarm business selling or leasing to any person an automatic dialing
device which is installed on such person’s premises in the City shall provide or
make available at all times service to repair such device, should it malfunction,
and shall furnish to the person buying or leasing such device written information
concerning how service may be obtained at any time, including the telephone
number to call for service.
134.12 DIRECT CONNECTIONS TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.
1. Subject to there being sufficient board space available, the Council may
authorize alarms from installations in the City to be terminated in the Police
Department.
2. Any said alarm shall be installed at the Police Department by or at the
direction of authorized personnel of the Police Department and the maintenance
and repair of any portion of said alarm located at or connected to the Police
Department shall be at the direction and under the control of authorized personnel
of the Police Department.
3. The owner or lessee of any said alarm shall pay a monthly fee set by the
resolution of the Council. Failure to pay the monthly fee, any false alarm charges
assessed as provided for in this chapter, or failure to pay to assist the Police
Department in maintenance and repair of said alarm, shall be cause for
disconnection of the alarm.
134.13 CENTRAL STATIONS – STANDARDS. In addition to any other
requirements imposed by this chapter, an alarm business shall not be granted a license to
operate a central station unless the Police Chief finds that the central station, if operated,
will meet the following minimum requirements:
1. Compliance with Standard for Central Station Burglar Alarm Units and
Systems (UL 611-1972) issued by Underwriters’ Laboratories or American
National Standards Institute (ANSI SEZ.2-1972). Such standards are hereby
adopted and made a part of this chapter and a copy of such standards shall be kept
on file at the Police Department and be available for public inspection. The
service provided may correspond to any of the several grades of service listed in
the standards, but the owner, alarm agent or other person in responsible control of
the premises wherein such alarm system is located must be present at such
premises as soon as is reasonably possible after being requested to do so by a
representative of the Police Department. A central station may also be licensed as
a modified central station or licensed telephone answering service.
2. If a central station is currently registered with Underwriters’ Laboratories
as a “UL” listed central station, or if it is listed as such in Underwriters’
Laboratories publication, The Quarterly Supplement, such registration or listing
shall be sufficient evidence of compliance with this section.
134.14 MODIFIED CENTRAL STATIONS – STANDARDS. In addition to any
other requirements imposed by this chapter, an alarm business shall not be granted a
license to operate a modified central station unless the Police Chief finds that the
modified central station, if operated, will meet the following minimum standards.
1. The premises from which the services are performed must meet any
applicable fire regulations.
2. The premises from which the services are performed must be secured in a
manner approved by the Police Chief to prevent entry by unauthorized persons.
3. A sufficient number of operators must be on duty at all times to assure that
adequate response shall be made to all emergency messages received.
4. As soon as possible after notifying the Police Department of any
emergency messages received, the operator concerned shall notify the subscriber
involved of such action and the nature of such emergency message received. If,
however, the alarm business has written instructions from its subscriber not to
make such notification during certain hours, the alarm business may comply with
such instructions.
5. The modified central station shall certify that all equipment supervised by
the modified central station shall be tested at least once a year as specified by the
Police Chief. Where a test result is unsatisfactory, the cause thereof shall be
corrected within 24 hours or such time as shall be provided by the Police Chief.
134.15 INSPECTION OF ALARM DEVICES AND BUSINESSES.
1. Before hookup into the Police Department monitoring board, inspection at
the option of the Police Chief, or his/her authorized representative, may be made.
2. If such inspection reveals any violations of the provisions of this chapter, a
written report detailing such violations shall be promptly sent to the Council and
to the owner, lessee, or other person responsible for the alarm system or business.
Such report shall require the correction within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
notice of the violation discovered, and shall state that a failure to comply may
result in the revocation of the alarm business license to operate in accordance with
provisions of this chapter relating to the revocation of licenses and permits.
134.16 STATISTICAL DATA. In addition to any other information that may be
required to be supplied by the provisions of this chapter, the Police Chief may require an
alarm business to furnish certain statistical data which may be reasonably available to
specified periods of operation after the effective date of this chapter. Any operational
data so furnished shall be for use only by the Police Chief or authorized representative.
134.17 TESTING OF EQUIPMENT. No alarm system designed to transmit
emergency messages directly to the Police Department shall be tested or demonstrated
without first obtaining permission from the Police Department. Permission is not
required to test or demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting emergency messages
directly to the Police Department unless the messages are to be relayed to the Police
Department.
134.18 NOTICE OF DISRUPTION IN SERVICE. When an alarm business service
to its subscribers is disrupted for any reason by the alarm business, or the alarm business
becomes aware of such disruption, it shall promptly notify its subscriber that protection is
no longer being provided. If, however, the alarm business has written instructions from
its subscriber not to make such notification by telephone during certain hours, the alarm
business may comply with such instructions.
134.19 FALSE ALARMS.
1. An alarm user will be charged a fee for each false alarm pursuant to the
false alarm charge schedule adopted by resolution of the Council.
2. If any alarm user fails to pay a false alarm charge within thirty (30) days
after being billed, the Police Chief may issue written notice by first class mail of
his/her intention to disconnect the alarm user’s alarm from its connection to the
Police Department, or of his/her intentions to refuse to authorize response by
Police Department personnel to future alarm user’s alarm system. An alarm user
who is disconnected shall be entitled to a hearing.
3. Written notice of the time and place of hearing shall be served on the alarm
user by the Police Chief by first class mail at least ten (10) days prior to the date
set for hearings.
4. At the hearing before the Police Chief, the alarm user or his/her authorized
representative shall have the right to confront and examine witnesses and to
present evidence as to his/her delinquency. After the hearing, the Police Chief
may order disconnection, may refuse to respond to future alarms from that alarm
user’s alarm system, or may withdraw the notice if he/she is satisfied there is no
delinquency.
5. Any alarm user whose alarm system has been disconnected or to whose
alarm system the Police Chief has determined no future response will be made
pursuant to this section shall have the right within ten (10) days after receiving
notice of said action from the Police Chief to file a written appeal by first class
mail or hand delivery with the Council, and no alarm user shall be required to
discontinue use of his or her alarm system prior to the expiration of such 10-day
period. Such appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is
based. The Council shall hold a hearing on the appeal and shall cause the
appellant to be given at least seven (7) days’ written notice of such hearing. At the
hearing, the appellant or his/her designated representative shall have the right to
present written or oral argument, or both, in support of the appeal. The Council
shall issue its decision within seven (7) days after the hearing.
6. If an alarm user files an appeal pursuant to subsection 5 of this section,
he/she shall not be required to discontinue the use of the alarm system, until a final
decision is made on the appeal.
7. Any alarm user whose alarm system has been disconnected from Police
Department facilities is not precluded under this section from applying for a new
connection. The Police Chief, however, is not required to allow a new connection
unless past delinquencies have been satisfied, the Police Chief is satisfied that the
applicant will meet the obligations proposed under this chapter in the future, and
sufficient board space is available at the Police Department for the connection.
134.20 SERVICE BY MAIL. Whenever any person is required to make a delivery by
first class mail, delivery, in lieu thereof, may be made by hand by any person 18 years of
age or older.
134.21 JUDICIAL REVIEW. Nothing herein shall be deemed to deny to any person
claiming to be aggrieved by any determination hereunder any applicable judicial
remedies provided for by the laws of the State of Iowa, including the right to appeal to
the District Court.
134.22 FALSE FIRE ALARMS.
1. As used in this section, the term “alarm system” means an assembly of
equipment or devices, or a single device such as a solid state unit, arranged to
signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention, and to which fire
personnel or alarm agents are expected to respond. The term “alarm user” means
any person or business on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within
the City.
2. An alarm user will be charged a fee for each false alarm to which the Fire
Department responds beyond two in a calendar year. The fee for false alarms shall
be established by City Council resolution.
(Ord. 02-02 – Feb. 02 Supp.)
3. If any alarm user fails to pay a false alarm charge within thirty (30) days of
billing, the Fire Chief may issue written notice by First Class Mail of the Fire
Chief’s intention to disregard all future alarms relating to the premises of the
alarm user. An alarm user who is so notified shall be entitled to a hearing before
the Fire Chief.
4. Written notice of the time and place of hearing shall be served on the alarm
user by the Fire Chief by First Class Mail at least ten (10) days prior to the date set
for hearing.
5. At the hearing before the Fire Chief, the alarm user or the alarm user’s
authorized representative shall have the right to confront or examine witnesses and
to present evidence as to the delinquency of payment and number of false alarms.
After the hearing, the Fire Chief may order notice of refusal to respond to future
alarms to remain in full force and effect or may withdraw the notice if the Fire
Chief is satisfied that there is no delinquency or that deficiencies in the alarm
system have been corrected.
6. Any alarm user that the Fire Chief has determined not to respond to upon
future alarms shall have the right within ten (10) days after receiving notice of the
action from the Fire Chief to file a written appeal, by First Class Mail or hand
delivered, with the Council. This appeal shall set forth the specific ground or
grounds on which it is based. The Council shall hold a hearing on the appeal and
shall cause the appellant to be given at least seven (7) days’ written notice of the
hearing. At the hearing, the appellant or the appellant’s designated representative,
shall have the right to present written or oral argument, or both, in support of the
appeal. The Council shall issue its decision within thirty (30) days after the
hearing.
7. Whenever the Fire Chief’s decision not to respond to fire alarms is made
pursuant to this section and the same is appealed, the appeal shall operate as a stay
of the Chief’s decision. The Fire Department shall respond to fire alarms during
this stay. Should additional false alarms occur during a stay, the alarm user will
be subject to additional fees as set forth in this section.
CHAPTER 135 REGISTRATION AND SALE OF KEG BEER
CHAPTER 135
REGISTRATION AND SALE OF KEG BEER
(Repealed by Ord. 07-16 – Aug. 07 Supp.)
CHAPTER 140
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
140.01 Removal of Warning Devices 140.08 Burning Prohibited
140.02 Obstructing or Defacing 140.09 Maintenance of Parking or Terrace
140.03 Placing Debris On 140.10 Failure to Maintain Parking or Terrace
140.04 Playing In 140.11 Dumping of Snow
140.05 Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley 140.12 Access on Public Streets; Variances
140.06 Use for Business Purposes 140.13 Encroachments
140.07 Washing Vehicles
140.01 REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES. It is unlawful for a person to willfully
remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction,
guard or other article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed
thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street
or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
140.02 OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct,
deface, or injure any street or alley in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
140.03 PLACING DEBRIS ON. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on
any street or alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish,
litter, offal, leaves, grass or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm sewer and
clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
140.04 PLAYING IN. It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, skateboard, roller
blade or play games on streets or alleys, except in the areas blocked off or otherwise
designated by the City for such purposes. It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled,
skateboard, roller blade or play games on a City sidewalk within the Business District as
defined in section 60.02(1) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 02-27 – Feb. 03 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
140.05 TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY. It is unlawful for
any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or alley temporarily closed by
barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed thereon by the authority or permission of any City
official, police officer or member of the fire department.
140.06 USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES. It is unlawful to park, store or place,
temporarily or permanently, any machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and
merchandise of any kind upon any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale
or offering same for sale, without permission of the Council.
140.07 WASHING VEHICLES. It is unlawful for any person to use any public
sidewalk, street or alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck
equipment, or any vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business.
This does not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or
equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
140.08 BURNING PROHIBITED. No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish or
other combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or
alley.
140.09 MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE. It shall be the
responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain all property outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines upon the public streets, except that the abutting
property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly
owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes timely mowing, trimming trees and
shrubs and picking up litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
140.10 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PARKING OR TERRACE. If the abutting
property owner does not perform an action required under the above section within a
reasonable time, the City may perform the required action and assess the cost against the
abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
140.11 DUMPING OF SNOW. It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place
or cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks,
or driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters, or impede
the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a hazardous condition therein;
except where, in the cleaning of large commercial drives in the business district it is
absolutely necessary to move the snow onto the street or alley temporarily, such
accumulation shall be removed promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements
for the prompt removal of such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
140.12 ACCESS ON PUBLIC STREETS; VARIANCES. The City Engineer shall
not authorize any public or private access to a public street, except in accordance with the
provisions of the latest edition of SUDAS as approved by the City Council. Variances and
appeals from the access standards referenced in this section may be taken to the Council.
Variances may be granted where the exercise of sound and reasonable judgment indicates
that the literal enforcement of the criteria would cause an undue hardship to any interested
party. The nonrefundable fee for applying for an access permit shall be established by
Council resolution to reflect the current costs of issuing the permit and supervising,
regulating, and inspecting the work.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
140.13 ENCROACHMENTS.
1. Permit Required. No person shall create, construct, use or maintain upon,
over or under the surface of any publicly owned real property or right-of-way within
the City any structure or animate thing or other encroachment of a private character,
unless and until City permission is granted and a written permit has been issued
therefor according to the following procedure. Exception: Standard mailboxes may
be installed without an encroachment permit if they are designed to bend or fall
away when struck by a vehicle and constructed in accordance with the specifications
for mailboxes erected on highways published by the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials. For the purpose of this subsection, a
standard mailbox consists of a lightweight sheet metal box meeting the
specifications of the United States Postal Service. Any person installing a mailbox
that is more expensive than a standard mailbox assumes all of the risk that it may
be damaged by the weight or force of a snowplow plowing snow. Mailboxes of any
kind not designed to bend or fall away when struck by a vehicle are strictly
prohibited and are a nuisance that may be subject to abatement.
(Ord. 06-19 – Nov. 06 Supp.)
2. Application. An application for an encroachment permit shall be made in
writing to the Council and accompanied by a complete plan in detail of the proposed
encroachment.
3. Approval. The Council may, after investigation, approve, modify or reject
an application for an encroachment permit. It may require as a condition precedent
to the issuance of a permit that the property owner enter into a contract with the City
and furnish a corporate surety bond in an amount fixed by the Council conditioned
to hold the City harmless from any damages or expense of any nature sustained by
the City or any person or persons by reason of the encroachment for which the
permit is issued.
4. Revocation. All encroachment permits shall expire one year from the date
of issuance but shall automatically renew each year for an additional one year,
unless the City provides a written notice to the permit holder, by ordinary mail, that
the permit will not be automatically renewed. All permits are subject to revocation
prior to expiration provided that the City provides at least 20 days notice of its intent
to revoke the permit and provides the opportunity for a hearing thereon. The
Council shall revoke a permit previously issued hereunder whenever it finds that the
permit conflicts or interferes with the City's current need to use its street or property.
5. Issuance of Permit. Upon approval of an application for an encroachment
permit by the Council, the Clerk shall, upon filing of a bond, if required, collect the
payment of the nonrefundable permit issuance fee and issue the permit and retain a
record thereof.
(Ord. 08-14 – Aug. 08 Supp.)
6. This section does not apply to encroachments carried out under the
provisions of Chapter 146 of this Code of ordinances nor to utility companies
performing work in the right-of-way under their franchise agreement.
(Ord. 02-01 – Feb. 02 Supp.)
CHAPTER 141
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
141.01 Purpose 141.10 Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
141.02 Definitions 141.11 Encroaching Steps
141.03 Removal of Snow, Ice and Accumulations 141.12 Openings and Enclosures
141.04 Responsibility for Maintenance 141.13 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
141.05 City May Order Repairs 141.14 Defacing
141.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered 141.15 Debris on Sidewalks
141.07 Sidewalk Standards 141.16 Merchandise Display
141.08 Barricades and Warning Lights 141.17 Sales Stands
141.09 Failure to Repair or Barricade 141.18 Sidewalks
141.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens
on sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair, replacement or
reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner and to minimize the liability
of the City.
141.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the
particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
2. “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete is
placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
3. “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any
sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification required
herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
4. “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
5. “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or
suburban areas.
6. “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
141.03 REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE AND ACCUMULATIONS. It is the
responsibility of the abutting property owners to remove snow, ice and accumulations
promptly from sidewalks. If a property owner does not remove snow, ice or accumulations
within twelve (12) hours after the accumulation, the City may do so and assess the costs
against the property owner for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])
141.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE. It is the responsibility of the
abutting property owners to maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk
outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or traveled portion of the public
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2c])
141.05 CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS. If the abutting property owner does not
maintain sidewalks as required, the Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified
mail, requiring the owner to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable
time and if such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council
may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d & e])
141.06 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED. The Council may order the
construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street or court in the City and may specially
assess the cost of such improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
141.07 SIDEWALK STANDARDS. Sidewalks repaired, replaced or constructed under
the provisions of this chapter shall be in accordance with the latest edition of SUDAS.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
141.08 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS. Whenever any material of any
kind is deposited on any street, avenue, highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk
improvements are being made or when any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall
be the duty of all persons having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner,
agent, or lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be deposited,
or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at each end of such
sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in the street, a sufficient number
of approved warning lights or flares, and to keep them lighted during the entire night and
to erect sufficient barricades both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party
or parties using the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable
for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act or
negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any misuse of the
privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply with provisions hereof.
141.09 FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE. It is the duty of the owner of the
property abutting the sidewalk, or the owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City
immediately in the event of failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements
or to install or erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
141.10 INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS. No person shall
knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of any sidewalk or approach
thereto while in the process of being improved or upon any portion of any completed
sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or
approach thereto, or shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or
destroy, mar, remove or deface any notice provided by this chapter.
141.11 ENCROACHING STEPS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any
stairs or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by
resolution of the Council.
141.12 OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES. It is unlawful for a person to:
1. Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any cellar
or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any portion of a
sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the Council.
2. Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on any
sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public.
3. Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on
or within six (6) feet of any sidewalk.
141.13 FIRES OR FUELS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to make a
fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
141.14 DEFACING. It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or
writing on any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
141.15 DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on
any sidewalk any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
141.16 MERCHANDISE DISPLAY. It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above
any sidewalk, any goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to
interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case
shall more than three (3) feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such
purposes.
141.17 SALES STANDS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending
machine or stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on
any sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
141.18 SIDEWALKS. The following provisions govern the installation of sidewalks
when the same is not covered by an existing memorandum of agreement. Whenever a
building permit is issued for a new principal structure, for remodeling or repairs equal to
or exceeding 50% of the assessed value of an existing principal structure, or for the
installation of a new driveway, it shall be a requirement for the issuance of the permit that
the applicant agree that concrete sidewalks shall be constructed on all of the street frontage
in conformance with the Design Standards Manual. The Council may defer the
requirement for the installation of required sidewalks if it determines that there is no current
public need for sidewalks and if there is a written agreement with the owner to install
sidewalks within a specified time or at such time in the future as the Council may pass a
resolution of necessity for said sidewalks.
(Ord. 03-05 – Feb. 03 Supp.)
[The next page is 891]
CHAPTER 142 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
CHAPTER 142
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
142.01 Power to Vacate 142.04 Findings Required
142.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 142.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys
142.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing 142.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
142.01 POWER TO VACATE. When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in
the best interest of the City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds,
the Council may do so by ordinance or resolution in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.23 & 364.12 [2a])
142.02 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. Any proposal to vacate a
street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds shall be referred by the Council to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for its study and recommendation prior to further
consideration by the Council. The Commission shall submit a written report including
recommendations to the Council within thirty (30) days after the date the proposed
vacation is referred to the Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
142.03 NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING. The Council shall cause to be
published a notice of public hearing of the time at which the proposal to vacate shall be
considered.
142.04 FINDINGS REQUIRED. No street, alley, portion thereof or any public
grounds shall be vacated unless the Council finds that:
1. Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof or any public ground
proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore, its
maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.
2. Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of
property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
142.05 DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS. When in the
judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the City to dispose of a vacated
street or alley, portion thereof or public ground, the Council may do so in accordance
with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
142.06 DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED. The City may not dispose of real property
by gift except to a governmental body for a public purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7[3])
CHAPTER 142 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
142.07 PART OF AN OFFICIAL PLAT. The Council may vacate part of an official
plat that had been conveyed to the City or dedicated to the public, which is deemed by the
Council to be of no benefit to the public, by resolution following public hearing or by
ordinance, and the vacating instrument shall be recorded. The Council may convey the
vacated property by deed or through the vacation instrument in accordance with the
provisions of Section 354.23 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.23)
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public grounds
and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
Those vacations listed in Title IV, Chapter 3 of the 1962 Code
62-3 April 23, 1962 67-13 August 14, 1967
62-4 August 13, 1962 68-7 April 29, 1968
62-5 September 4, 1962 68-12 May 20, 1968
62-7 September 18, 1962 68-15 June 10, 1968
62-8 October 15, 1962 68-18 June 17, 1968
63-2 February 4, 1963 68-22 July 29, 1968
63-21 October 14, 1963 68-23 August 19, 1968
63-22 December 9, 1963 68-32 December 9, 1968
64-3 March 16, 1994 69-10 May 19, 1969
64-9 August 17, 1964 71-1 February 15, 1971
64-12 October 19, 1964 72-13 August 3, 1972
65-19 September 7, 1965 72-19 September 21, 1972
66-2 January 24, 1966 72-22 December 21, 1972
66-6 February 14, 1966 73-8 April 5, 1973
66-7 April 18, 1966 74-1 January 17, 1974
66-14 May 16, 1966 74-13 May 16, 1974
66-19 July 11, 1966 74-20 July 3, 1974
66-28 October 17, 1966 74-24 September 12, 1974
66-32 November 28, 1966 75-12 April 23, 1975
67-6 April 3, 1967 75-26 December 18, 1975
CHAPTER 142 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
76-13 June 17, 1976
76-20 July 15, 1976
76-33 January 6, 1977
77-9 May 5, 1977
77-27 September 15, 1977
77-31 October 11, 1977
79-15 May 17, 1979
79-38 January 17, 1980
80-2 March 6, 1980
80-19 August 7, 1980
80-20 September 4, 1980
80-29 October 2, 1980
80-30 October 16, 1980
82-11 June 3, 1982
83-15 June 2, 1983
84-14 September 20, 1984
86-3 March 20, 1986
86-11 May 15, 1986
87-6 May 7, 1987
87-10 July 2, 1987
87-21 December 3, 1987
88-1 January 7, 1988
88-6 May 5, 1988
88-25 July 7, 1988
88-35 September 1, 1988
88-40 October 6, 1988
89-26 August 17, 1989
89-27 July 27, 1989
89-28 August 17, 1989
89-32 October 19, 1989
89-34 December 7, 1989
90-2 February 1, 1990
90-14 May 17, 1990
90-17 August 2, 1990
90-24 December 6, 1990
91-5 June 20, 1991
CHAPTER 142 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
CHAPTER 143 STREET GRADES
CHAPTER 143
STREET GRADES
143.01 Established Grades 143.02 Record Maintained
143.01 ESTABLISHED GRADES. The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks,
which have been heretofore established by ordinance are hereby confirmed, ratified and
established as official grades.
143.02 RECORD MAINTAINED. The Clerk shall maintain a record of all
established grades and furnish information concerning such grades upon request.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and remain
in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
63-10 June 17, 1963
64-1 March 16, 1964
65-4 February 15, 1965
66-15 May 16, 1966
67-4 April 3, 1967
68-8 1968
69-9 May 5, 1969
70-13 June 22, 1970
72-7 April 20, 1972
73-6 March 29, 1973
74-2 February 7, 1974
75-7 April 22, 1975
76-14 June 17, 1976
77-11 May 19, 1977
78-07 March 2, 1978
86-24 December 11, 1986


CHAPTER 145
DRIVEWAYS
145.01 Definitions 145.05 Excavations
145.02 Permit Required 145.06 Revocation of Permit
145.03 Fee for Permit 145.07 Inspection and Approval
145.04 Driveway Construction
145.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:
1. “Driveway” means that part of any approach for motor vehicles to private
property that lies between the property line and the roadway of the public street and
which is paved.
2. “Paving” means any kind of hard dust-free surfacing including but not
limited to concrete, bituminous concrete or brick on stabilized gravel, crushed stone
or combinations of such materials, with the necessary base. Paving does not include
surfacing with oil, gravel, oil and gravel or chloride.
145.02 PERMIT REQUIRED. Before any person shall construct or repair a driveway,
the person shall obtain a written permit from the City Engineer. A written application for
the permit shall be filed with the City Engineer. The application shall include a legal
description of the property, the name of the property owner, the name and address of the
person who will do the work, and the proposed plan of construction or repair which shall
include the depth, width and type of surfacing material to be used. No other plan shall be
followed except by written permission of the City Engineer, who may allow amendments
to the application or permit that do not conflict with this section. The City Engineer shall
issue the permit, bearing the Engineer’s signature and date of issuance, if the proposed plan
meets all of the requirements of this section, if the required fee has been paid, and if the
construction or repair as planned will not create any substantial hazard in the use of the
street or sidewalk for public travel or drainage, or create any defect. Each permit shall
expire six months from the date of issuance.
145.03 FEE FOR PERMIT. Before any permit for a driveway is issued, the person who
makes the application shall pay a nonrefundable permit application fee. The fee for
applying for an access permit shall be established by Council resolution to reflect the
current costs of issuing the permit and supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work. If
the applicant intends to install the driveway in connection with other construction on the
premises for which a building permit has been issued, no fee for the driveway permit shall
be charged. (Ord. 08-14 – Aug. 08 Supp.)
145.04 DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION. All driveways shall be constructed in
conformance with the latest edition of SUDAS as approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
145.05 EXCAVATIONS. Excavations to do work under this section shall be dug as to
occasion the least possible inconvenience to the public and to provide for the passage of
water along the gutter. All such excavations shall have proper barricades at all times,
pursuant to latest edition of SUDAS as approved by the City Council. Any street, sidewalk
or other public property that is affected by the work shall be restored to as good a condition
as it was previous to the excavation. The affected area shall be maintained in good repair
to the satisfaction of the Council for four years.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
145.06 REVOCATION OF PERMIT. The City Engineer may at any time revoke the
permit for any violation of this chapter and may require that the work be stopped.
145.07 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL. The driveway must be inspected and
approved prior to placement of the pavement.
CHAPTER 146
EXCAVATIONS
146.01 Definitions 146.16 Cleanup
146.02 Excavation Permit 146.17 Protection of Water Courses
146.03 Application 146.18 Construction Standards
146.04 Fees 146.19 City’s Right to Restore Surface
146.05 Surety Bond 146.20 Prompt Completion of Work
146.06 Routing of Traffic 146.21 Urgent Work
146.07 Clearance for Fire Equipment 146.22 Emergency Action
146.08 Protection of Traffic 146.23 Noise, Dust and Debris
146.09 Removal and Protection of Utilities 146.24 Preservation of Monuments
146.10 Protection of Adjoining Property 146.25 Inspections
146.11 Sidewalk Excavations 146.26 Maintain Drawings
146.12 Protective Measures 146.27 Not Applicable to City Work
146.13 Care of Excavated Material 146.28 Insurance
146.14 Damage to Existing Improvements 146.29 Liability of City
146.15 Property Lines and Easements
146.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Applicant” means any person making written application to the Clerk for an
excavation permit under this chapter.
2. “Excavation work” means the excavation and other work permitted under an
excavation permit and required to be performed under this chapter.
3. “Permittee” means any person who has been granted and has in full force and
effect an excavation permit issued under this chapter.
4. “Street” means any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue or other public
right-of -way or public grounds in the City.
146.02 EXCAVATION PERMIT. It is unlawful for any person to dig up, break, cut,
excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner break up any street or to make or cause to
be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose or to place,
deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated material obstructing or
tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such person shall first have
obtained an excavation permit therefor from the Clerk as provided in this chapter.
146.03 APPLICATION. No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written
application for the issuance of an excavation permit is submitted to the Clerk on forms
provided by the Clerk. The application shall be accompanied by plans showing the extent
of the proposed excavation work, the dimensions and elevations if required, of both the
existing ground prior to the excavation and of the proposed excavated surfaces, the location
of the excavation work, and such other information as may be reasonably related to the
above and location of the excavation work, and such other information as prescribed by
the City Engineer.
146.04 FEES. A permit fee shall be charged by the Clerk for the issuance of an
excavation permit which shall be in addition to all other fees for permits or charges relative
to any proposed construction work. The excavation permit fee shall be in an amount
varying with the type of surface to be opened, dug or excavated under the permit issued
per opening as follows: The nonrefundable fee for applying for an excavation permit shall
be established by Council resolution to reflect the current costs of issuing the permit and
supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work. (Ord. 08-14 – Aug. 08
Supp.)
146.05 SURETY BOND. Before an excavation permit is issued pursuant to this chapter,
each applicant, except public utility companies, shall deposit with the Clerk a surety bond
in the amount of $5,000 payable to the City. The required surety bond must be:
1. With good and sufficient surety;
2. By a surety company authorized to transact business in the State;
3. Satisfactory in form and substance to the City Attorney;
4. Conditioned upon the permittee’s compliance with this chapter and to secure
and hold the City and its officers harmless against any and all claims, judgments, or
other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by the excavation
permit or for which the City, the Council or any City officer may be made liable by
reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the
permittee either in not properly guarding the excavation or for any other injury
resulting
from the negligence of the permittee, and further conditioned to fill up, restore and
place in good and safe condition as near as may be to its original condition, and to
maintain any street where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of
four (4) years after said work shall have been done, usual wear and tear excepted,
as it was in before the work shall have been done.
Any settlement of the surface within said 4-year period shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to require the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the City if
such repairs should prove defective. Any owner of real estate, repairing or engaging
another to repair his or her own sidewalk, shall not be required to give such bond. Recovery
on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond but it shall in its entirety
cover any or all future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is
given. In the event of any suit or claim against the City by reason of the negligence or
default of the permittee, upon the City’s giving written notice to the permittee of such suit
or claim, any final judgment against the City requiring it to pay for such damage shall be
conclusive upon the permittee and the permittee’s surety. An annual bond may be given
under this provision which shall remain in force for one year conditioned as above, in the
amount specified above and in other respects as specified above but applicable as to all
excavation work in streets by the principal in such bond during the term of one year from
the date.
146.06 ROUTING OF TRAFFIC. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to
assure that during the performance of the excavation work traffic conditions, as nearly
normal as practicable, shall be maintained at all times so as to cause as little inconvenience
as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the general public. However,
the City Engineer may permit the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time
prescribed by the City Engineer if in the Engineer’s opinion it is necessary. The permittee
shall route and control traffic including its own vehicles as directed by the City Engineer.
The following steps shall be taken before any street may be closed or the traffic restricted
in any way:
1. The permittee must receive the approval of the City Engineer for the permit.
2. The permittee must notify the Chief of the Fire Department of any street so
closed;
3. Upon completion of construction work, the permittee shall notify the City
Engineer and Fire Department before traffic is moved back to its normal flow for
any necessary adjustment to be made.
4. Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the City Engineer, they shall be
furnished by the permittee at its own expense. Through traffic shall be maintained
without the aid of detours, if possible; in instances in which this would not be
feasible, the City Engineer shall designate detours. The City shall maintain roadway
surfaces of existing highways designated as detours without expense to the
permittee. However, if there are no existing highways, the permittee shall construct
all detours at its expense and in conformity with the specifications of the City
Engineer. The permittee will be responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to
any highways by the operation of its equipment.
146.07 CLEARANCE FOR FIRE EQUIPMENT. The excavation work shall be
performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants.
Materials or obstructions shall not be placed within fifteen (15) feet of fire hydrants.
Passageways leading to fire escapes or fire-fighting equipment shall be kept free of piles
of material or other obstructions. The Chief of the Fire Department shall interpret this
provision in each case so as to insure free access for fire-fighting equipment as so provided.
146.08 PROTECTION OF TRAFFIC. The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable
barriers to confine earth from trenches or other excavations in order to encroach upon
streets as little as possible. The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe
crossings over excavations and across streets under improvement to accommodate
vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections. Pedestrian crossings shall be not
less than three (3) feet in width and shall be provided with a railing as required by the City
Engineer.
146.09 REMOVAL AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES. The permittee shall not
interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the City Engineer and the
utility company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing
utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the City shall be moved to
accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee. The
cost of moving privately owned utilities shall likewise be borne by the permittee unless it
makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support
and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus
which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to
support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across the work. In case any of the
pipes, conduits, poles, wire or apparatus should be damaged as a result of permittee’s
negligence, they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense
of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee, and the permittee’s bond shall be so liable.
The permittee shall be responsible for the permittee’s damage done to any public or private
property by reason of the permittee’s negligently breaking any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe,
electric conduit or other utility, and its bond shall be liable for such damage. The permittee
shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect
the same against damage. Nothing in this provision shall be construed as preventing
permittee from recovering damages from a legally responsible party.
146.10 PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY. The permittee shall at all
times and at the permittee’s own expense protect from injury any adjoining property by
providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where
in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the
purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain permission
from the owner of such private property for such purpose. The permittee shall, at its own
expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be
damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all
damage to public or private property or streets resulting from its failure properly to protect
and carry out the work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through
any established lawn area, the existing sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced
after ditches have been backfilled as required in this chapter. New sod may be used or
seeding with approval of the City. All construction and maintenance work shall be done
in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition
as nearly as possible to that which existed before the work began. The permittee shall not
remove even temporarily any trees or shrubs which exist on public property without first
notifying and obtaining consent of the appropriate City department or City official having
control of such property.
146.11 SIDEWALK EXCAVATIONS. Any excavation made in or under any sidewalk
shall be provided with a substantial and adequate footbridge over the excavation on the line
of the sidewalk. This bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely railed on each
side so that foot passengers can pass over safely at all times.
146.12 PROTECTIVE MEASURES. The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or
barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent damage to persons using the
City street or sidewalks. These protective barriers shall be
maintained until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight there
shall be placed upon such place of excavation and upon any excavated materials or
structures or other obstructions to streets, suitable and sufficient lights which shall be kept
burning throughout the night during the maintenance of such obstructions.
146.13 CARE OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL. All material excavated from trenches
and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such a
manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets,
and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining
properties. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to permit the
piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as might be the case in a narrow alley,
the City Engineer shall have the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated
material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It
shall be the permittee’s responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all
necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites.
146.14 DAMAGE TO EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS. All damage done to existing
improvements during the progress of the excavation work shall be repaired by the
permittee. Materials for such repair shall conform with the requirements of any applicable
code or ordinance. If upon being ordered, the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor
and materials for such repairs, the City Engineer shall have the authority to cause the
necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the City. The cost of the necessary labor
and materials shall be charged against the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable
on the permittee’s bond.
146.15 PROPERTY LINES AND EASEMENTS. Property lines or curb lines and
limits of easements shall be indicated on the plan of excavation submitted with the
application for the excavation permit. It is the permittee’s responsibility to confine
excavation work within these limits.
146.16 CLEANUP. As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties
shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting
from the work. All clean-up operations at the location of the excavation shall be
accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of
the City Engineer. From time to time as may be ordered by the City Engineer and in any
event immediately after completion of the work, the permittee shall at the permittee’s
expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from
the work.
Upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the City
Engineer, the work may be done by the City and this cost charged to the permittee. The
permittee shall also be liable for such under the surety bond provided by this chapter.
146.17 PROTECTION OF WATER COURSES. The permittee shall provide for the
flow of all water courses, sewers or drains intercepted during the excavation work and shall
replace the same in as good condition as it found them or shall make such provisions for
them as the City Engineer may direct. The permittee shall not obstruct the gutter of any
street but shall use all proper measures to provide for the free passage of surface water.
The permittee shall make provision to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt, slickings
or other run-off pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations.
The permittee shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its failure to so provide.
146.18 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. All removals, construction and restoration
shall be in conformance with the latest edition of SUDAS as approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
146.19 CITY’S RIGHT TO RESTORE SURFACE. If the permittee shall have failed
to restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration
of the time fixed by such permit or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation
work covered by such permit, the City, if the City Engineer deems it advisable, shall have
the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the street and to complete the
excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the total actual cost of the work,
including general overhead and administrative expenses. The City shall have a cause of
action for all fees, expenses and amounts paid out and due it for this work. The City shall
also enforce its rights under the permittee’s surety bond provided pursuant to this chapter.
It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the paved portion of the
street in the same condition it was prior to the excavation for four (4) years after restoring
it to its original condition.
146.20 PROMPT COMPLETION OF WORK. The permittee shall prosecute with
diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the excavation permit. The
permittee shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition,
or as near as may be, as soon as practicable and in any event not later than the date specified
in the excavation permit. This provision shall not be construed as prohibiting temporary
closings.
146.21 URGENT WORK. If in the City Engineer’s judgment traffic conditions, the
safety or inconvenience of the travelling public or the public interest require that the
excavation work be performed as emergency work, the City Engineer shall have full power
to order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of workers and adequate facilities be
employed by the permittee twenty-four (24) hours a day to the end that the excavation work
may be completed as soon as possible.
146.22 EMERGENCY ACTION. In the event of any emergency in which a sewer,
main, conduit or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise, is in such
condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual,
the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit or utility, without first applying
for and obtaining an excavation permit under this chapter, shall immediately take proper
emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of
property, life, health and safety of individuals. However, the person owning or controlling
such facility shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next
succeeding day during which the Clerk’s office is open for business, and shall not proceed
with permanent repairs to the street paving without first obtaining an excavation permit
under this chapter.
146.23 NOISE, DUST AND DEBRIS. Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the
excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to
the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take
appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the
excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris. During the hours of ten o’clock (10:00)
p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. the permittee shall not use, except with the express
written permission of the City Engineer or in case of an emergency as herein otherwise
provided, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb
the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property.
146.24 PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS. The permittee shall not disturb any
surface monuments or hubs found on the line of excavation work until ordered to do so by
the City Engineer.
146.25 INSPECTIONS.
1. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a permit to
provide timely notification to the Engineering Department that such work is ready
for inspection. The City Engineering Department may require that every request
for inspection be filed at least one working day before such inspection is desired.
Such request may be in writing or by telephone, at the option of the Engineering
Department. No work shall be completed without inspection by the City
Engineering Department. The Engineering Department may require the person
doing the work to uncover or redo uninspected work at the person’s cost so that
proper and thorough inspection can be made.
2. It shall be the duty of the person requesting inspections required by this
chapter to provide access to and means for proper inspection of such work.
3. In addition to the inspections required by this chapter, the City Engineering
Department may require other inspections of any work to ascertain compliance with
the provisions of this Code and other laws which are enforced by the Engineering
Department.
4. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when
such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when required
corrections have not been made. This provision is not to be interpreted as requiring
reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections
before the job is ready for inspection or reinspection. The reinspection fee shall be
equal to the cost of the original excavation permit fee for the work. In instances
where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work
will be performed until the required fees have been paid.
5. Inspections requested outside of normal business hours shall be charged as
additional fee. The fee shall be based upon the actual cost to the City for
supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages and fringe benefits of all the
employees involved.
6. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to projects or work contracted
directly with the City, or work accomplished by City departmental employees as a
part of authorized City projects or work.
146.26 MAINTAIN DRAWINGS. Users of sub-surface street space shall maintain
accurate drawings of such installations. A utility shall locate and mark locations of their
installations upon the request of the City Engineer or other permittee at no charge.
Corrected drawings shall be made available to the City Engineer after new installations,
changes or replacements are made, if requested.
146.27 NOT APPLICABLE TO CITY WORK. The provisions of this chapter shall
not be applicable to any excavation work of the City under the direction of the City
Engineer or Public Services Director at the request of the City for the convenience of the
City or by any contractor of the City performing work for and on behalf of the City,
necessitating openings or excavations in streets.
146.28 INSURANCE. A permittee, prior to the commencement of excavation work
pursuant to this chapter, shall furnish the Clerk with satisfactory evidence in writing that
the permittee has in force and will maintain in force during the performance of the
excavation work and duration of the permit, insurance of not less than $500,000 combined
single limit, duly issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of
Iowa. Owners of real estate repairing their own sidewalks shall be required to furnish the
Clerk with satisfactory evidence that the owner has in effect personal liability coverage of
not less than $300,000. This provision shall not apply to public utility companies.
146.29 LIABILITY OF CITY. This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon
the City or any official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any
person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation permit
is issued pursuant to this chapter; nor shall the City or any City official or City employee
be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections
authorized, the issuance of any permit or the approval of any excavation work.
[The next page is 941]
CHAPTER 150 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CHAPTER 150
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
150.01 Title 150.12 Repair, Vacation and Demolition
150.02 Purpose and Scope 150.13 Notice to Vacate
150.03 Alterations, Additions and Repairs 150.14 Appeals
150.04 Enforcement, General 150.15 Hearing Appeals
150.05 Abatement of Dangerous Buildings 150.16 Compliance with Orders
150.06 Violations 150.17 Extension of Time to Perform Work
150.07 Inspection of Work 150.18 Interference with Repair or Demolition Work
150.08 Board of Appeals 150.19 Performance of Work
150.09 Definitions 150.20 Repair or Demolition; Recovery of Cost
150.10 Notices and Orders Re Buildings 150.21 Conflict of Ordinances
150.11 Recordation of Notice and Order
150.01 TITLE. These regulations shall be known as the “Uniform Code for the
Abatement of Dangerous Buildings,” may be cited as such and will be referred to herein
as “this Code.”
150.02 PURPOSE AND SCOPE. It is the purpose of this code to provide a just,
equitable and practicable method, to be cumulative with and in addition to, any other
remedy provided by the Building Code, Housing Code or otherwise available at law,
whereby buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health,
morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants may be
required to be repaired, vacated or demolished. The provisions of this code shall apply to
all dangerous buildings, as herein defined, which are now in existence or which may
hereafter become dangerous in the City.
150.03 ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS AND REPAIRS. All buildings and
structures which are required to be repaired under the provisions of this code shall be
subject to the provisions of Section 104(a) and (b) of the Building Code.
150.04 ENFORCEMENT, GENERAL.
1. Administration. The Building Official is hereby authorized to enforce the
provisions of this code.
2. Inspections. The Housing Official, the Fire Inspector, and the Building
Official and their authorized representatives, are hereby authorized to make such
inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of
this code.
3. Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any
of the provisions of this code, or whenever the Building Official or any authorized
representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or
upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building or
premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official or authorized
CHAPTER 150 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to
inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Building Official by
this code, provided that if such building or premises be occupied, such official
shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or
premises be unoccupied, the official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate
the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises
and request entry. If such entry is refused, the Building Official or authorized
representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure
entry. When the Building Official or authorized representative shall have first
obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure
entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of
any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made herein
provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Building Official or authorized
representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this code.
“Authorized representative” includes the officers named in subsection 2 of this
section and their authorized inspection personnel.
150.05 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS. All buildings or portions
thereof which are determined after inspection by the Building Official to be dangerous as
defined in this code are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by
repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified
in Section 150.10 of this chapter.
150.06 VIOLATIONS. It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any
building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code.
150.07 INSPECTION OF WORK. All buildings or structures within the scope of this
code and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by the Building Official in accordance with and in the manner provided by this
code and Sections 305 and 306 of the Building Code.
150.08 BOARD OF APPEALS. In order to provide for final interpretation of the
provisions of this code and to hear appeals provided for hereunder, appeals may be taken
to the Building Board of Appeals. The rules and regulations for conducting business and
rendering decisions and findings established for the Building Board of Appeals shall
apply to all appeals made under this code.
150.09 DEFINITIONS.
1. General. For the purpose of this code, terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall be construed as specified either in this chapter or as specified in
the Building Code or the Housing Code. When terms are not defined, they shall
have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context in which they are used.
CHAPTER 150 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
A. “Building Code” means the Marion Building Code as set forth in
Chapter 160 of this Code of Ordinances.
B. “Dangerous building” means any building or structure deemed to be
dangerous under the provisions of this section.
C. “Housing Code” means the Marion Housing Code as set forth in
Chapter 165 of this Code of Ordinances.
2. “Dangerous building” means any building or structure which has any or all
of the conditions or defects hereinafter described, provided that such conditions or
defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its
occupants are endangered:
A. Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of
exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe
and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
B. Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or
other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as
not to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
C. Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof,
due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the
working stress or stresses allowed in the Building Code for new buildings
of similar structure, purpose or location.
D. Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural
strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such
catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the Building
Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
E. Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely
to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby
injure persons or damage property.
F. Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance
or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the
Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location
without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the Building Code for
such buildings.
G. Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or
settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have
materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the
case of similar new construction.
CHAPTER 150 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
H. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because
of (i) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; (ii) faulty construction; (iii) the
removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for
the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the deterioration, decay or
inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially or
completely collapse.
I. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
J. Whenever the exterior wall or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of the base.
K. Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation,
shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or
members, or 50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members,
enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
L. Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire,
wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as
to (i) become an attractive nuisance to children; (ii) become a harbor for
vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or (iii) as to enable persons to
resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts.
M. Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition
applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations
of the City, as specified in the Building Code or the Housing Code, or of
any law or ordinance of the State or City relating to the condition, location
or structure of buildings.
N. Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in
accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting
part, member or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting
part, member or portion less than 66% of the (i) strength, (ii) fire-resisting
qualities or characteristics, or (iii) weather-resisting qualities or
characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building
of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.
O. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or
sanitation facilities, or otherwise is determined by the Building Official or
Housing Official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a
condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.
CHAPTER 150 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
P. Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections
or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Inspector to
be a fire hazard.
Q. Whenever any building or structure is in such condition as to
constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity
jurisprudence.
R. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site
after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever
any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months
so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or
hazard to the public.
150.10 NOTICES AND ORDERS RE BUILDINGS.
1. Commencement of Proceedings. Whenever the Building Official has
inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined
that such building is a dangerous building, said official shall commence
proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the building.
2. Notice and Order. The Building Official shall issue a notice and order
directed to the record owner of the building. The notice and order shall contain:
A. The street address and legal description sufficient for identification
of the premises upon which the building is located.
B. A statement that the Building Official has found the building to be
dangerous with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to
render the building dangerous under the provisions of Section 150.09.
C. A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the
Building Official.
(1) If the Building Official has determined that the building or
structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all required
permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced
within such time (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order)
and completed within such time as the Building Official shall
determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances.
(2) If the Building Official has determined that the building or
structure must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or
structure be vacated within a time certain from the date of the order
as determined by the Building Official to be reasonable.
CHAPTER 150 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
(3) If the Building Official has determined that the building or
structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the
building be vacated within such time as the Building Official shall
determine is reasonable (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the
order), that all required permits be secured therefor within 60 days
from the date of the order, and that the demolition be completed
within such time as the Building Official shall determine is
reasonable.
D. Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work
(without vacation also being required) is not commenced within the time
specified, the Building Official (i) will order the building vacated and posted
to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed, and (ii) may
proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the
property or its owner.
E. Statements advising (i) that any person having any record title of
legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any
action of the Building Official to the Board of Appeals, provided the appeal
is made in writing as provided in this code and filed with the Building
Official within 30 days from the date of service of such notice and order;
and (ii) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an
administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
3. Service of Notice and Order. The notice and order, and any amended or
supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record owner and posted
on the property; and one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following if
known to the Building Official or disclosed from official public records, the holder
of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; the owner
or holder of any lease of record; the holder of any other estate or legal interest of
record in or to the building or the land on which it is located. Failure of the
Building Official to serve any person required herein to be served shall not
invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve
any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on said person by the
provisions of this section.
4. Method of Service. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all
persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and
order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such
person at his or her address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of
the County or as known to the Building Official. If no address of any such person
so appears or is known to the Building Official, then a copy of the notice and order
shall be mailed, addressed to such person, at the address of the building involved
in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not
CHAPTER 150 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified
mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing.
5. Proof of Service. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified
at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by
the persons effecting service, declaring the time, date, and manner in which
service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in
acknowledgement of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the
notice and order retained by the Building Official.
150.11 RECORDATION OF NOTICE AND ORDER. If compliance is not had with
the order within the time specified therein, and no appeal has been properly and timely
filed, the Building Official shall file in the office of the County Recorder a certificate
describing the property and certifying (i) that the building is a dangerous building and (ii)
that the owner has been notified. Whenever the corrections ordered shall thereafter have
been completed or the building demolished so that it no longer exists as a dangerous
building on the property described in the certificate, the Building Official shall file a new
certificate with the County Recorder certifying that the building has been demolished or
all required corrections have been made so that the building is no longer dangerous,
whichever is appropriate.
150.12 REPAIR, VACATION AND DEMOLITION. The following standards shall
be followed by the Building Official (and by the Board of Appeals if an appeal is taken)
in ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of any dangerous building or structure:
1. Any building declared a dangerous building under this order either shall be
repaired in accordance with the current Building Code or shall be demolished at
the option of the building owner.
2. If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately
dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, it shall
be ordered to be vacated.
150.13 NOTICE TO VACATE.
1. Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as
provided in subsection 150.10(3), be posted at or upon each exit of the building
and shall be in substantially the following form:
DO NOT ENTER – UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building,
or to remove or deface this notice.
Building Official
City of Marion
2. Compliance. Whenever such notice is posted, the Building Official shall
include a notification thereof in the notice and order issued by the Building
CHAPTER 150 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Official under subsection 150.10(2), reciting the emergency and specifying the
conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any
building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair,
demolish or remove such building under permit. No person shall remove or
deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or
removal have been completed and a Certificate of Occupancy issued pursuant to
the provisions of the Building Code.
150.14 APPEALS.
1. Form of Appeal. Any person entitled to service under subsection 150.10(3)
may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the Building Official under
this code by filing at the office of the Building Official a written appeal
containing:
A. A heading in the words: “Before the Board of Appeals of the
_______ of ___________________.”
B. A caption reading: “Appeal of ____________________,” giving the
names of all appellants participating in the appeal.
C. A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the
appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and order.
D. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific
order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to
support the contentions of the appellant.
E. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action
should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
F. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official
mailing addresses.
G. The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least
one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
The appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date of the service of such order
or action of the Building Official, provided, however, that if the building or
structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb,
property or safety of the public or adjacent property and is ordered vacated and is
posted in accordance with Section 150.13, such appeal shall be filed within 10
days from the date of service of the notice and order of the Building Official.
2. Process of Appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this
section, the Building Official shall present it at the next regular or special meeting
of the Board of Appeals.
CHAPTER 150 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
3. Scheduling and Notice of Appeal for Hearing. As soon as practicable after
receiving the written appeal, the Board of Appeals shall fix a date, time and place
for the hearing of the appeal by the Board. Such date shall not be less than 10
days or more than 60 days from the date of appeal as filed with the Building
Official. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the Secretary of the
Board either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant
personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the
appellant at the address shown on the appeal.
4. Effect of Failure to Appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of the right
to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any
portion thereof.
5. Scope of Hearing on Appeal. Only those matters or issues specifically
raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
6. Staying of Order under Appeal. Except for vacation orders made pursuant
to Section 150.12, enforcement of any notice and order of the Building Official
issued under this code shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom
which is properly and timely filed.
150.15 HEARING APPEALS.
1. Board of Appeals Action. The Building Board of Appeals by a majority
vote, may sustain, modify or withdraw the notice or order. In granting an
extension or variance of any notice or order, the Board shall observe the following
condition: The Board may grant an extension of time for the compliance of any
notice or order for not more than 18 months subject to appropriate conditions and
provided that the Board makes specific findings of fact based on evidence relating
to the following:
A. That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in
carrying out the strict letter of any notice or order.
B. That such an extension is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter in securing the public health, safety and general
welfare.
2. Form of Notice of Hearing. The notice to appellant shall be substantially in
the following form but may include other information:
“You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the Board of Appeals
at _________________________________ on the ______ day of
_____________ at the hour of _________, upon the notice and order served
upon you. You may present any relevant evidence and witnesses.”
CHAPTER 150 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
3. Conduct of Hearing; Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to
the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.
4. Method and Form of Decision. The decision shall be in writing and shall
contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the
requirements to be complied with. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the
appellant personally or sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt
requested.
5. Effective Date of Decision. The effective date of the decision shall be as
dated therein.
150.16 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS.
1. General. After any order of the Building Official or the Board of Appeals
made pursuant to this code shall have become final, no person to whom any such
order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order.
2. Failure to Obey Order. If, after any order of the Building Official or Board
of Appeals made pursuant to this code has become final, the person to whom such
order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the Building
Official may (i) cause such person to be prosecuted under subsection 1 of this
section or (ii) institute any appropriate action to abate such buildings as a public
nuisance.
3. Failure to Commence Work. Whenever the required repair or demolition is
not commenced within 30 days after any final notice and order issued under this
code becomes effective:
A. The Building Official may cause the building described in such
notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice
reading:
DANGEROUS BUILDING – DO NOT OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building,
or to remove or deface this notice.
Building Official
City of Marion
B. No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as
specified in this subsection. No person shall remove or deface any such
notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the
Building Official have been completed and a Certificate of Occupancy
issued pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code.
CHAPTER 150 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
C. The Building Official shall notify the City Council of the failure to
commence work, and the City Council shall direct the Building Official on
action to be taken. In addition to any other remedy herein provided, the
Council may direct the Building Official to institute legal proceedings to
cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the
conditions which render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice
and order; or if the notice and order require demolition, to cause the
building to be sold and demolished or demolished and the materials, rubble
and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or
demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and
recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this code. Any surplus
realized from the sale of any such building, or from the demolition thereof,
over and above the cost of demolition and of cleaning the lot, shall be paid
over to the person or persons lawfully entitled thereto.
150.17 EXTENSION OF TIME TO PERFORM WORK. Upon receipt of an
application from the person required to conform to the order and an agreement by such
person that said person will comply with the order if allowed additional time, the
Building Official may, in such official’s discretion, grant an extension of time, not to
exceed an additional 120 days, to complete said repair, rehabilitation or demolition, if the
Building Official determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a
situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The Building Official’s authority to
extend time is limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the premises
and will not in any way affect the time to appeal the notice and order.
150.18 INTERFERENCE WITH REPAIR OR DEMOLITION WORK. No
person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or
authorized representative of the City or with any person who owns or holds any estate or
interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the
provisions of this code; or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold
pursuant to the provisions of this code, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or
authorized representative of the City, person having an interest or estate in such building
or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or
demolishing any such building, pursuant to the provisions of this code, or in performing
any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed
pursuant to this code.
150.19 PERFORMANCE OF WORK.
1. Procedure. Any work of repair or demolition is to be done pursuant to
subsection 150.16(3)(C); the Building Official shall issue an order therefor to the
Director of Public Services and the work shall be accomplished by personnel of
the City or by private contract under the direction of said Director. Plans and
specifications therefor may be prepared by said Director, or the Director may
CHAPTER 150 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
employ such architectural and engineering assistance on a contract basis as the
Director may deem reasonably necessary. If any part of the work is to be
accomplished by private contract, standard public works contractual procedures
shall be followed.
2. Costs. The cost of such work shall be paid by such City account as is
appropriate by the Code of Iowa and may be made a special assessment against the
property involved.
150.20 REPAIR OR DEMOLITION; RECOVERY OF COST.
1. Account of Expense, Filing of Report; Contents. The Director of Public
Services shall keep an itemized account of the expenses incurred by the City in the
repair or demolition of any building done pursuant to the provisions of subsection
150.16(3)(C). Upon completion of the work of repair or demolition, said Director
shall prepare and file with the City Clerk a report specifying the work done, the
itemized and total cost of the work, a description of the real property upon which
the building or structure is or was located, and the names and addressees of the
persons entitled to notice pursuant to subsection 150.10(3).
2. Report Transmitted to Council; Setting for Hearing. Upon receipt of said
report, the Clerk shall present it to the Council for consideration. The Council
shall fix a time, date and place of hearing said report and any protests or objections
thereto. The Clerk shall cause notice of said hearing to be posted upon the
property involved, published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City, and served by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner of the
property as such owner’s name and address appear on the last equalized
assessment roll of the County, if such so appear, or as known to the Clerk. Such
notice shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date set for hearing and shall
specify the day, hour and place where the Council will hear and pass upon the
Director’s report, together with any objections or protests which may be filed as
hereinafter provided by any person interested in or affected by the proposed
charge.
3. Protests and Objections, How Made. Any person interested in or affected
by the proposed charge may file written protests or objections with the Clerk at
any time prior to the time set for the hearing on the report of the Director. Each
such protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the
signer thereof is interested and the grounds of such protest or objection. The Clerk
shall endorse on every such protest or objection the date it was received. The
Clerk shall present such protests or objections to the Council at the time set for the
hearing, and no other protests or objections shall be considered.
4. Hearing of Protests. Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing the
Council shall hear and pass upon the report of the Director together with any such
objections or protests. The Council may make such revision, correction or
CHAPTER 150 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
modification in the report or the charge as it may deem just; and when the Council
is satisfied with the correctness of the charge, the report (as submitted or as
revised, corrected or modified) together with the charge, shall be confirmed or
rejected. The decision of the Council on the report and the charge, and on all
protests or objections shall be final and conclusive.
5. Special Assessment. If the Council orders that the charge shall be assessed
against the property it shall confirm the assessment, cause the same to be recorded
on the assessment roll, and thereafter said assessment shall constitute a special
assessment against and a lien on the property.
6. Contest. The validity of any assessment made under the provisions of this
chapter shall not be contested in any action or proceeding unless the same is
commenced upon 30 days after the assessment is placed upon the assessment roll
as provided herein. Any appeal from the final judgment in such action or
proceeding must be perfected within 30 days after the entry of such judgment.
7. Authority for Installment Payment of Assessments with Interest. The
Council, in its discretion, may determine that assessments in amounts of $500.00
or more shall be payable in not to exceed ten equal annual installments. The
Council’s determination to allow payment of such assessments in installments, the
number of installments, whether they shall bear interest, and the rate thereof shall
be by a resolution adopted prior to the confirmation of the assessment.
8. Lien of Assessment.
A. Priority. Immediately upon its being placed on the assessment roll,
the assessment shall be deemed to be complete, the several amounts
assessed shall be payable, and the assessments shall be liens against the lots
or parcels of land assessed, respectively. The lien shall be subordinate to
all existing special assessment liens previously imposed upon the same
property and shall be paramount to all other liens except for State, County
and property taxes with which it shall be upon a parity. The lien shall
continue until the assessment and all interest due and payable thereon are
paid.
B. Interest. All such assessments remaining unpaid after 30 days from
the date of recording on the assessment roll shall become delinquent and
shall bear interest at the lawful rate for special assessments.
9. Report to Assessor and Tax Collector; Addition of Assessment to Tax Bill.
After confirmation of the report, certified copies of the assessment shall be given
to the Assessor and the Tax Collector acting for the City, who shall add the
amount of the assessment to the next regular tax bill levied against the parcel for
municipal purposes.
10. Filing Copy of Report with County Auditor. If the County Assessor and
the County Tax Collector assess property and collect taxes for the City, a certified
CHAPTER 150 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
copy of the assessment shall be filed with the County Auditor as by law provided.
The descriptions of the parcels reported shall be those used for the same parcels on
the County Assessor’s map books for the current year.
11. Collection of Assessment; Penalties for Foreclosure. The amount of the
assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary
property taxes are collected; and shall be subject to the same penalties and
procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary property taxes.
All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of property taxes shall
be applicable to such assessment. If the Council has determined that the
assessment shall be paid in installments, each installment and any interest thereon
shall be collected in the same manner as ordinary property taxes in successive
years. If any installment is delinquent, the amount thereof is subject to the same
penalties and procedure for sale as provided for ordinary property taxes.
12. Repayment of Repair. All money recovered by payment of the charge or
assessment or from the sale of the property at foreclosure sale shall be paid to the
City Treasurer, who shall credit the same to the City.
150.21 CONFLICT OF ORDINANCES. In any case where a provision of this
chapter is found to be in conflict with the provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or
health ordinance or code of the City or State existing on the effective date of this chapter,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of
the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this
chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the
City existing on the effective date of this chapter which establishes a lower standard for
the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are hereby
declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this chapter.
CHAPTER 151
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES
151.01 Purpose 151.18 Individual Water Riser Pipes and Connections
151.02 Zoning Required 151.19 Sewage Disposal
151.03 Definitions 151.20 Electrical Distribution System
151.04 Site Requirements 151.21 Manufactured/Mobile Home Storm Shelters
151.05 Area Requirements 151.22 Refuse Handling
151.06 Density and Bulk Requirements 151.23 Natural Gas System
151.07 Perimeter Area Requirements 151.24 Insect and Rodent Control
151.08 Soil and Ground Cover Requirements 151.25 Fire Protection
151.09 Site Drainage Requirements 151.26 Responsibilities of Community Management
151.10 Areas for Accessory Uses 151.27 Responsibilities of Community Occupants
151.11 Required Recreation Areas 151.28 Restriction on Occupancy
151.12 Street Systems 151.29 Variations and Exceptions
151.13 Required Parking Areas 151.30 Manufactured/Mobile Homes Located Outside
151.14 Walks of Manufactured/Mobile Home Communities
151.15 Manufactured/Mobile Home Sites 151.31 Recreational Vehicles
151.17 Water Supply 151.32 Authority for Continuance of Non-Conformities
151.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for
development of manufactured/mobile home communities pursuant to and in compliance
with the procedures and regulations provided in the Zoning Ordinance.
151.02 ZONING REQUIRED. Development or enlargement of a manufactured/mobile
home community requires Planned Development zoning (PD-MH) pursuant to the Zoning
Ordinance. The site, size and area requirements set out in this chapter are intended to be
minimum standards to be met by the specific development plans required under the Zoning
Ordinance.
151.03 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Accessory use” means a use incidental to the primary use of the
manufactured/mobile home community such as direct service facility building,
community management building, maintenance building, community buildings or
other uses of a similar nature.
2. “Appurtenances” means attached or detached additions to a
manufactured/mobile home, situated on the manufactured/mobile home lot for the
use of its occupants, such as decks, open or enclosed carports, garages, storage sheds
or items of a similar nature.
3. “Common area” means any area or space designed for joint use of tenants
occupying manufactured/mobile home communities.
4. “Driveway” means a minor private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on
a manufactured/mobile home lot.
5. “Electric receptacle” means the waterproof, attachment receptacle device
located adjacent to the water and sewer outlets to receive the flexible cable from the
manufactured/mobile home or, where required, the permanently installed
conductors. Installations shall conform to the City’s Electrical Code.
6. “Electric service drop” means that part of the electric distribution system
from the main electrical distribution system, overhead or underground to the service
equipment serving one or more manufactured/mobile home spaces.
7. “Existing installations” means those installations which were constructed
before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
8. “Manufactured/mobile home” means a transportable, single-family dwelling
unit suitable for year-round occupancy having no foundation other than wheels,
jacks, piers, grade beams or skirtings and containing water supply, waste disposal,
heating and electrical conveniences.
9. “Manufactured/mobile home lot” means a parcel of land for the placement
of a single manufactured/mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
10. “Manufactured/mobile home community” means a parcel of land under
single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of
manufactured/mobile homes for non-transient use.
11. “Manufactured/mobile home stand” means that part of an individual
manufactured/mobile home lot which has been reserved for the placement of the
manufactured/mobile home and any appurtenances thereto.
12. “Motorized home” means a portable dwelling designed and constructed as
an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
13. “New installations” means those which are proposed for construction after
the effective date of these rules and regulations.
14. “Patio” means a surfaced outdoor living space designed to supplement the
manufactured/mobile home living area.
15. “Roadway” means that portion of the manufactured/mobile home
community street system that is surfaced, as defined in the Zoning Ordinances, for
the actual travel or parking of vehicles, and including curbs.
16. “Sewer connection” means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings,
and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the manufactured/mobile home to the
inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewerage system serving the
manufactured/mobile home community. Installations shall conform to the City’s
Plumbing Code.
17. “Sewer riser pipe” means that portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each manufactured/mobile home
lot.
18. “Skirting” means the materials and construction around the perimeter of a
manufactured/mobile home floor between the bottom of the manufactured/mobile
home floor and the grade level of the manufactured/mobile home stand.
19. “Tenant storage” means an area within part of the manufactured/mobile
home community but not within an individual lot to provide auxiliary general
storage space.
20. “Transient use” means the occupancy of a manufactured/mobile home lot by
a manufactured/mobile home for a period of fourteen (14) days or less.
21. “Travel trailer” means a vehicular, portable structure on a chassis, designed
to be used as a temporary dwelling.
22. “Water connection” means the connection consisting of all pipes and fittings
from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the
manufactured/mobile home. Installations shall conform to the City’s Plumbing
Code.
23. “Water riser pipe” means that portion of the water supply system serving the
manufactured/mobile home community which extends vertically to the ground
elevation and terminates at a designated point at each manufactured/mobile home
lot.
For purposes of this chapter the “front” of a manufactured/mobile home shall be considered
as that part of the manufactured/mobile home facing toward the approved street or rightof-
way as required by this chapter.
151.04 SITE REQUIREMENTS.
1. The area proposed for a manufactured/mobile home community shall have
at least ten (10) acres of gross development area or provide for a minimum of forty
(40) manufactured/mobile home lots.
2. A manufactured/mobile home community may be developed in two or more
stages, provided that said stages conform in all respects with the overall
Manufactured/Mobile Home Community Development Plan. Occupancy shall not
be permitted until all facilities and improvements are installed and operational for
not less than twenty-five (25) manufactured/mobile home lots with all conditions of
the required site plan being satisfied.
3. No manufactured/mobile home shall be connected to water, sewer, or
electrical service unless the manufactured/mobile home complies with the standards
and requirements prescribed by The United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) Standards and/or ANSI 119.1. Compliance with this
standard shall be determined by the Building Official. A certificate issued by the
manufacturer of the manufactured/mobile home shall be permanently affixed on a
readily visible location on the exterior of the manufactured/mobile home prima facie
evidence of such compliance.
151.05 AREA REQUIREMENTS. Every lot upon which a manufactured/
mobile home unit is located shall front onto an approved public or private street or rightof-
way as defined in this chapter and shall conform to the following minimum lot area and
width requirements.
1. Residential Use. The lot area shall be a minimum of 5,500 square feet, have
a minimum dimension of 110 feet on its longest side, and a minimum of 50-foot
frontage on an approved public or private street or right-of-way and not less than 15
feet in depth from back of curb.
2. Accessory Uses. The lot area shall be a minimum of 4,000 square feet for
basic requirements for such uses as direct servicing, management and maintenance
of the community. Any such structure shall be of permanent type construction
meeting all local applicable building and zoning codes. Building setbacks shall be
the same as defined in the O-1 Office/Transitional District.
For uses requiring larger lot areas than heretofore set forth under this section, such uses
may be permitted if lot sizes are increased proportionately to maintain minimum yard and
separation requirements as set forth in this chapter or in the Zoning regulations. The more
restrictive rules shall apply.
151.06 DENSITY AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.
1. The minimum distance between any detached appurtenance and any other
detached appurtenance on the same lot or any manufactured/mobile home on the
same lot shall be as set forth in the Building Code.
2. There shall be provided and maintained a minimum distance of three (3) feet
between any detached appurtenance buildings to the side or rear lot lines.
3. Manufactured/mobile homes shall be separated from each other on opposing
sides of public or private streets a minimum of 58 feet, provided that in no event
shall the required front yard be less than set forth in this chapter. No
manufactured/mobile home accessory use or appurtenance shall be permitted in the
required manufactured/mobile home lot front yard or in the required separation
between manufactured/mobile homes on opposing sides of public or private streets
as provided in this chapter.
4. Manufactured/mobile homes shall be set back a minimum of three (3) feet
from side lot line. In addition, the sides of manufactured/mobile homes shall be
separated from each other a minimum of ten (10) feet.
5. The Zoning Board of Adjustment is authorized to provide for variances from
the provisions of this section, in the same manner as provided under the Zoning
Ordinance.
151.07 PERIMETER AREA REQUIREMENTS.
1. Each yard abutting on a perimeter public street shall be considered a front
yard and shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in depth.
2. All other yards shall have a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet when
adjacent to any “A” District or other “R” District other than an R-MH District and
twenty (20) feet when adjacent to another R-MH District or when adjacent to any
district other than “A” or “R” District.
3. The yard requirement herein may be reduced by one-half the width of any
alley adjacent thereto, provided that a greater or lesser yard may be required where
the Council deems necessary.
4. Where the boundary of a manufactured/mobile home community directly
abuts another use district the Council may, where it is deemed necessary, require an
area a minimum of ten (10) feet in width be reserved along the perimeter of the
manufactured/mobile home community and within said area require the erection of
a fence or wall six (6) feet in height of a material which will provide a significant
visual and sound barrier and/or screen plantings to be provided and maintained with
a minimum height of eight (8) feet at maturity or as otherwise required by the
Council. Where the boundary of a manufactured/mobile home community abuts an
R zoning district, the Council may require additional screening measures to include,
but not limited to, placement of multi-sectional units along the perimeter of the area
adjacent to the R zoning district, additional open space or equivalent measures.
151.08 SOIL AND GROUND COVER REQUIREMENTS. Exposed ground surfaces
in all parts of every manufactured/mobile home community shall be paved or covered with
stone screenings or other solid material, or shall be protected with a vegetative growth that
is capable of preventing soil erosion and of preventing objectionable dust.
151.09 SITE DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS. A storm water management plan shall
be developed in accordance with the latest edition of SUDAS as approved by the City
Council Said plan must receive approval by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
151.10 AREAS FOR ACCESSORY USES. No part of any community shall be used
for nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and
well-being of community residents and for the management and maintenance of the
community. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting either:
1. The sale by an owner of a manufactured/mobile home located on a
manufactured/mobile home site and connected to the pertinent utilities. Any sales
of manufactured/mobile homes in place on the manufactured/mobile home site shall
not in any way relieve any parties involved from complying with all the applicable
regulations of this chapter.
2. Uses accessory to the residential uses as described in the Zoning Ordinance.
151.11 REQUIRED RECREATION AREAS. In all communities, there shall be one
or more recreation areas which shall be easily accessible to all community residents. The
size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of 500 square feet for each
lot. No outdoor recreation area shall contain less than 25,000 square feet. Required
recreational area shall be computed in addition to any other common open space required
elsewhere in this chapter. Recreation areas shall be located as to be free of traffic hazards
and should be easily accessible.
151.12 STREET SYSTEMS.
1. General Requirements. All manufactured/mobile home communities shall be
provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public or private
streets or roads to each manufactured/mobile home lot. Alignment and gradient
shall be properly adapted to topography as approved by the Engineering
Department.
2. Access. Access to manufactured/mobile home communities shall be
designed to minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free
movement of traffic on adjacent streets. The entrance road connecting the streets
with a public street or road shall have a minimum road pavement width of 44 feet
where parking is permitted on both sides, or a minimum road pavement width of 36
feet where parking is limited to one side. Where the primary entrance road is more
than 100 feet long and does not provide access to abutting manufactured/mobile
home lots within such distance, the minimum road pavement width may be 28 feet
providing parking is prohibited at both sides.
3. Interior Streets. Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to
accommodate anticipated traffic, and in any case shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
A. All streets providing no street parking shall be twenty-eight (28) feet
back of curb to back of curb.
B. Dead-end streets shall be limited in length to 300 feet and shall be
provided at the closed end with a turn-around having an outside roadway
radius of at least forty (40) feet with no parking permitted. Where parking is
permitted, the radius shall not be less than forty-eight (48) feet.
C. All streets of a manufactured/mobile home community providing
ingress and egress from an abutting public street or road approved by the City
Engineer and by any other governmental agency exercising control over such
streets or roads. Said design shall accommodate the moving of
manufactured/mobile homes within the community without causing
disturbance and/or damage to other manufactured/mobile homes or
respective lots.
4. Required Illumination of Street Systems. All communities shall be furnished
with lighting units so spaced and equipped with approved fixtures placed at such
mounting heights as will provide the following average maintained levels of
illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night.
A. All parts of the community systems: 0.6 foot candle, with a minimum
of .25 foot candle.
B. Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersections and
steps or stepped ramps: individually illuminated with a minimum of 0.4 foot
candle.
5. Street Construction and Design Standards. All other street design and
construction shall be in accordance with the latest edition of SUDAS as approved
by the City Council.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
151.13 REQUIRED PARKING AREAS.
1. Parking areas shall be provided in all manufactured/mobile home
communities for the use of community occupants and guests. Such areas shall be
furnished at the rate of at least two (2) car spaces for each manufactured/mobile
home lot (minimum space 9' x 19'). Additional guest parking shall be provided in
reasonable numbers and shall be so located as to provide access to the
manufactured/mobile home that it is intended to serve. All parking areas shall be
constructed with a hard, smooth, dust-free surfacing (seal-coat or equivalent
surface).
2. Off-street parking and storage areas provided for storing of boats, boat
trailers, travel trailers, pickup coaches, truck tractors, trucks over 3/4-ton pickup
size, and items of a similar nature must be constructed with a hard, smooth, dustfree
and weed-free surfacing (seal-coat or equivalent surface). Said parking and
storage area shall be in addition to parking required elsewhere in this section and
parking and storage of vehicles and items listed in this subsection shall not be
permitted in parking areas required elsewhere in this section. Temporary
manufactured/mobile home storage may be permitted prior to permanent placement
on the manufactured/mobile home stand; such temporary storage of a
manufactured/mobile home shall not exceed 48 hours.
151.14 WALKS. All communities shall be provided with City sidewalks in all perimeter
areas adjacent to the public right-of-way. All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance
with latest edition of SUDAS as approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
151.15 MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME SITES. The area of the
manufactured/mobile home site shall be improved to provide an adequate foundation for
the placement and tie-down of the manufactured/mobile home, thereby securing the
superstructure against uplift, sliding, rotation and overturning.
1. The manufactured/mobile home site shall be constructed in such a manner
that it will meet or exceed industry standards.
2. Tie-downs or anchors shall be placed to provide a readily accessible anchor
for the manufactured/mobile home and be able to sustain a minimum tensile strength
as per manufacturer’s requirements.
3. Skirting of a permanent type material and construction shall be installed to
enclose the open space between the bottom of a manufactured/mobile home floor
and the grade level of the manufactured/mobile home stand and shall be so
constructed to provide substantial resistance to heavy winds, thereby alleviating to
the maximum extent possible, lifting action created on the underside of the
manufactured/mobile home by heavy winds.
4. A sufficiently screened, ventilating area shall be installed in the skirting to
supply the combustion requirements of the manufactured/
mobile home. Provision shall be made for each removal of a section large enough
to permit access for inspection of the enclosed area under the manufactured/mobile
home and for repairs on sewer and water riser connections.
5. Skirting shall be maintained in an attractive manner consistent with the
exterior of the manufactured/mobile home and to preserve the appearance of the
manufactured/mobile home community.
151.17 WATER SUPPLY.
1. General Requirements. All manufactured/mobile home stands and
manufactured/mobile home community facilities shall be connected to the City’s
water supply and its supply used exclusively.
2. Source of Supply. The water supply shall be designed to supply a minimum
of 300 gallons per day per manufactured/mobile home plus the required fire flow of
1500 gallons per minute and 20 pounds of pressure.
3. Water Distribution System.
A. The water supply system of the manufactured/mobile home
community shall be connected by pipes to all manufactured/
mobile homes, buildings and other facilities requiring water. Water main 6
inches through 8 inches in diameter shall be PVC pipe meeting AWWA
C900 SDR18 or ductile iron pipe meeting AWWA C151 Class 52. Ductile
iron pipe shall be provided with a cement-mortar lining meeting AWWA
C104. Water main fittings shall meet AWWA C153 or AWWA C110 with
cement-mortar lining meeting AWWA C104. Fittings shall be provided with
mechanical joints meeting AWWA C111 and shall have an exterior
bituminous enamel coating.
B. The water piping, backflow prevention devices, fixtures and other
equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with Federal,
State and local regulations and requirements shall be of a type and in
locations approved by the health authority and the City Water Board.
C. The water system and all appurtenances shall be designed, constructed
and maintained according to the specifications and requirement of the City
Water Board and the City Building Department. Plans for water distribution
systems and backflow prevention systems shall be approved by the City
Water Board.
D. Backflow prevention devices shall be required at the connection of the
manufactured/mobile home community water system to the City water
distribution system and shall conform to all the installation and location
requirements as required by this Code of Ordinances.
151.18 INDIVIDUAL WATER RISER PIPES AND CONNECTIONS.
1. Individual service lines and water riser pipes shall be provided for each
manufactured/mobile home lot. The riser pipe shall be located within the confined
area of the manufactured/mobile home stand at a point where the water connection
will approximate a vertical position. Water service lines shall be of Type K soft
temper copper meeting ASTM B88. Water service pipes shall be laid at least 5½
feet, but not more than 6 feet below the surface of the finished surface of the ground.
When PVC water main is installed, water services shall be tapped to the water main
using a service saddle. Installation shall be approved by the City Water Board.
2. Water riser pipes shall extend at least to ground level. The pipe shall be at
least 3/4 inch inside diameter. The water outlet shall be capped when a
manufactured/mobile home does not occupy the lot.
3. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines,
valves and riser pipes from heaving and thawing actions of ground during freezing
weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
4. A service shut-off valve shall be placed on every service line on each
manufacture/mobile home lot near the riser pipe.
5. Underground stop and service valves shall have round ways of the same
diameter as the pipe with which they are placed, proper keys for tuning on and off,
and be of a make and pattern approved by the City Water Board.
6. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on individual
service lines, when or where deemed necessary by the City Water Board and City
Building Department.
151.19 SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
1. General Requirements. An adequate and safe sewage system shall be
provided in all manufactured/mobile home communities for conveying and
disposing of all sewage. Such system shall be designed, constructed and maintained
in accordance with State requirements and as approved by the City Engineering
Department.
2. Sewer Lines. All sewer mains and laterals shall be constructed according to
the latest edition of SUDAS as approved by the City Council and connected to the
City sewer system. For private sewer mains, PVC pipe SDR 35 A.S.T.M. D 3034
or equivalent is acceptable.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
3. Individual Sewer Connections.
A. Each manufactured/mobile home stand shall be provided with at least
a four-inch diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located
on each stand that the sewer connection to the manufactured/mobile home
drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
B. The sewer connection shall have a minimum inside diameter of three
inches and the slope thereof shall not be less than one-fourth inch per foot.
The sewer connection shall consist of one pipe line only without any branch
fittings, all joints shall be airtight and watertight.
C. All materials used for sewer and sewer connections shall be as
approved by the Plumbing Code of the City, and installation shall be
approved by the City Engineering Department.
D. Provisions shall be made for securely plugging the sewer riser pipe
when a manufactured/mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface
drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall
extend at least to ground level.
151.20 ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
1. General Requirements. Every community shall contain an electrical wiring
system consisting of necessary wiring, fixtures and equipment which shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations
governing such systems.
2. Main Electrical Power Distribution Lines. Main electrical power lines
should be constructed underground according to local electric utility specifications.
3. Individual Electrical Connections.
A. Each manufactured/mobile home stand shall be provided with an
approved disconnecting device and over-current protective equipment. The
minimum service per manufactured/
mobile home stand outlet shall be according to the Electrical Code for the
City. Minimum size for feeder circuits shall be 100 amps.
B. Outlet receptacles at each manufactured/mobile home stand shall be
located not more than thirty (30) feet from the exterior wall of the
manufactured/mobile home it serves and a three pole, four-wire grounding
type shall be used. Receptacles shall be of weather-proof construction and
configuration shall be in accordance with Standards for
Manufactured/Mobile Homes USAS A119.1 published by the United States
of American Standards Institute or similar equipment meeting the approval
of the City.
C. The manufactured/mobile home shall be connected to the outlet
receptacle that meets ANSI C73.17-1972, American Standard dimension of
caps, plugs and receptacles by an approved type of flexible cable with
connectors and a male attachment plug. However, where the calculated load
of the manufactured/mobile home is between 50 and 100 amperes, a second
50-ampere power supply assembly may be installed or an electrical service
shall be provided by means of permanently installed conductors.
D. Where the calculated load exceeds 100 amperes or where a permanent
feeder is used, the supply shall be by means of a four-wire installation
according to City specifications.
E. All exposed non-current carrying metal parts of manufactured/mobile
homes and all equipment having electrical connections shall be grounded by
means of an approved grounding conductor with branch circuit conductors
or other approved method of grounded metallic wiring. The neutral
conductor shall not be used as a ground for manufactured/mobile homes or
other electrical equipment.
151.21 MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME STORM SHELTERS.
1. General Requirements. Every manufactured/mobile home community of 10
or more mobile home spaces shall be provided with above- or below-grade storm
shelters which shall:
A. Have a minimum floor area of seven (7) square feet for each
manufactured/mobile home space in said manufactured/
mobile home community.
B. Be designed by a licensed structural engineer or architect and built in
accordance with plans as approved by the City Engineer, Building official or
licensed structural engineer or architect.
C. Be designed and constructed to meet all Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) requirements and guidelines if the shelter is
located in a flood plain.
D. Be designed and constructed to meet the minimum lighting,
ventilation and exiting requirements of the City’s currently adopted editions
of the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, Uniform
Plumbing Code and National Electrical Code, where applicable.
E. Be designed and constructed to meet all applicable requirements of
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
F. Be located no farther than 1,320 linear feet from the furthest
manufactured/mobile home space in the manufactured/
mobile home community.
2. Additions to Existing Communities. For any addition of ten (10) or more
manufactured/mobile home spaces to any existing manufactured/
mobile home community, a storm shelter which complies with the general
requirements of subsection 1 of this section shall be provided to serve such
additional spaces. For any addition of fewer than ten (10) manufactured/mobile
home spaces to an existing manufactured/mobile home community there is no
requirement that an additional shelter be provided to serve such additional spaces.
However, when two or more such additions of fewer than ten (10)
manufactured/mobile home spaces result in a cumulative addition of ten or more
manufactured/mobile home spaces to a manufactured/mobile home community, a
storm shelter which complies with the general requirements of subsection 1 of this
section shall be provided to serve such additional spaces.
3. Restroom Facilities. Restroom facilities in required storm shelters are not
mandatory but may be installed at the owner’s option. If restrooms are installed,
toilets may be either flush-type operating from normal water supply, chemical or
other approved types.
4. Access to Shelters. The manufactured/mobile home community owner or
such owner’s designated agent or representative shall be responsible for making the
storm shelter accessible and usable in times of need. It is unlawful for any required
storm shelter to be used for storage purposes if such storage reduces the minimum
floor area available for shelter of persons below the requirements of subsection 1 of
this section.
5. Existing Nonconforming Manufactured/Mobile Home Communities. Any
manufactured/mobile home community of ten (10) or more manufactured/mobile
home spaces which has an existing above- or below-grade storm shelter as of the
effective date of the ordinance codified herein which does not conform to the
requirements of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming manufactured/mobile
home community with regard to the requirements for storm shelters and may
continue to exist as a nonconforming manufactured/mobile home community for so
long as said existing shelter remains in place and usable; provided, however, any
manufactured/mobile home spaces added to such community after such effective
date shall require storm shelters as provided in subsection 2 of this section.
151.22 REFUSE HANDLING.
1. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the manufactured/mobile
home community shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent
harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution.
2. All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, watertight, rodent-proof containers.
Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all
refuse.
3. All manufactured/mobile home communities shall offer recycling
opportunities for residents by either providing drop-off facilities or curb-side
collection or some other alternative method for diverting solid waste from area
landfills.
4. Refuse collection stands shall be located on an impervious slab at ground
level shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container stands shall be so
designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and
container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them.
5. All refuse containing garbage shall be collected at least once weekly.
Collection shall be contracted by said manufactured/mobile home community and
private commercial carrier.
151.23 NATURAL GAS SYSTEM. Natural gas piping systems shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems
established by franchised public utility.
151.24 INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL.
1. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and
rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to
control insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the Linn County
Health Department.
2. Communities shall remain free of accumulations of debris which may
provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests.
3. Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage.
4. The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent
harborage of ticks, chiggers and other offensive insects. Communities shall be so
maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison
sumac and other weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be
maintained and free of heavy undergrowth of any description.
151.25 FIRE PROTECTION.
1. The manufactured/mobile home community area shall be subject to the rules
and regulations of the City Fire Department.
2. Manufactured/mobile home communities shall be kept free of litter, rubbish
and other flammable materials.
3. Portable fire extinguishers of the type approved by the Fire Department shall
be kept in service buildings and at all locations designated by such fire prevention
authority and shall be maintained in good operating condition.
4. Fire hydrants shall be installed in the community’s water system and located
at such locations as determined by the Fire Department and the City Water
Department. Piping layout and sizing shall be determined and approved by the
Water Department.
151.26 RESPONSIBILITIES OF COMMUNITY MANAGEMENT.
1. The owner/manager of a manufactured/mobile home community shall
operate the community in compliance with this chapter and regulations issued
hereunder and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the community, its
facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
2. The community management shall notify community residents of all
applicable provisions of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder.
3. Required skirting shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and within thirty (30) days after initial occupancy unless prohibited by
frozen ground, in which event such skirting shall be installed immediately after the
ground becomes unfrozen, but in all instances no later than June 1 of the year
following installation.
151.27 RESPONSIBILITIES OF COMMUNITY OCCUPANTS.
1. The community occupant shall comply with all applicable requirements of
this chapter and regulations issued hereunder and shall maintain his or her
manufactured/mobile home lot, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a
clean and sanitary condition.
2. All City ordinances with respect to keeping of animals and pets shall apply.
151.28 RESTRICTION ON OCCUPANCY. A manufactured/mobile home shall not
be occupied for dwelling purposes within a manufactured/mobile home community unless
it is properly placed on a manufactured/mobile stand and connected to water, sewer,
electrical and natural gas utilities.
151.29 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS. Whenever the tract proposed to be
developed is of such unusual size or shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual
conditions that the strict application of the requirements contained in these regulations
would result in substantial hardships or injustice, the Council, upon recommendation of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, may vary or modify such requirements so that the
developer is allowed to develop the property in a reasonable manner, but so that, at the
same time, the public welfare and interests of the City and surrounding area are protected
and the general intent and spirit of these regulations are preserved.
151.30 MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOMES LOCATED OUTSIDE OF
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES.
1. Standards. Manufactured/mobile homes located outside of
manufactured/mobile home communities shall comply with the following
standards, unless waived by the Council:
A. Residential Uses. Only an independent manufactured/
mobile home may be used for residential uses.
B. Nonresidential Uses. Only an independent manufactured/
mobile home may be used for nonresidential uses, unless the
manufactured/mobile home is occupied by an employee or resident for less
than one hour per day or five (5) hours per week, in which case the
manufactured/mobile home may be a dependent manufactured/mobile home.
C. Mixed Residential and Nonresidential Uses. Only an independent
manufactured/mobile home may be used for mixed residential and
nonresidential uses.
D. Conformance with State Standards. All manufactured/
mobile homes located outside of manufactured/mobile home communities
shall conform to applicable State statutes and regulations with respect to tiedowns
and anchoring, design and construction, movement on public roads
and similar requirements.
E. Sight Visibility. All manufactured/mobile homes located outside of
manufactured/mobile home communities shall be so located on the premises
so as not to obstruct or otherwise impair the sight visibility of drivers, traffic
control devices or otherwise present a traffic hazard.
F. Setbacks. All manufactured/mobile homes located outside of
manufactured/mobile home communities shall observe the setback
requirements of the zoning district in which they are located.
G. Easements. No manufactured/mobile home shall be located on any
easement or right-of-way without the written consent of the easement holder.
H. Conditions Imposed. The Council may stipulate such conditions and
restrictions upon the location, maintenance, operation or use of the
manufactured/mobile home as deemed necessary for the protection of the
public health, safety or general welfare or to secure compliance with this
section.
2. Special Permits Required. Mobile or manufactured homes not conforming
to the standards of this section shall not be located outside of manufactured/mobile
home communities unless a special permit has first been approved by the Council.
A manufactured/mobile home may be used as a construction trailer on a
construction site without a special permit during the period in which a building
permit is valid. The manufactured/mobile home shall be removed within forty-eight
(48) hours after issuance of a certificate of occupancy or expiration of the building
permit.
3. Application for Special Permit. Application for a special permit shall
include:
A. Inspection fee of $50.00.
B. Description of the applicant’s manufactured/mobile home, including
age, size and type (independent or dependent unit).
C. Street address of the premises where the manufactured/
mobile home is to be located.
D. The proposed use of the manufactured/mobile home and the length of
time the manufactured/mobile home is to be located at the site.
E. Written approval of the owner of the premises where the
manufactured/mobile home is proposed to be located.
F. Information as to the availability of sanitary sewer, water and
electricity at the proposed site.
G. Site plan showing the proposed location of the manufactured/mobile
home in relation to lot lines and other structures on the premises.
H. Photograph of the manufactured/mobile home.
I. Written statement by the applicant agreeing to comply with all
applicable City and State statutes, regulations and conditions.
4. Inspection. The Council shall not issue a special permit until an inspection
of the manufactured/mobile home, the proposed site, and application for special
permit has been made by the Building Official. The Building Official shall present
to the Council a written report as to the conformance of the application with the
standards set forth in subsection 1 of this section.
5. Expiration of Special Permit. The special permit shall be valid as follows:
A. Residential Uses: 30 days.
B. Nonresidential Uses: 180 days.
C. Mixed Residential and Nonresidential Uses: 30 days.
D. Time Extensions: The Council may in its discretion extend any
special permit any number of times upon application of the permit bidder.
151.31 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES. Parked or stored travel trailers, pickup
coaches or motorized homes may be occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping
purposes under the following circumstances:
1. The vehicles shall not be parked on a City street or alley.
2. The vehicle shall not be parked in a required front or corner side yard.
3. Occupancy of the vehicle is limited to not more than seventy-two (72) hours
unless special approval from the City is received.
151.32 AUTHORITY FOR CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMITIES.
1. Any nonconforming manufactured/mobile home, or structure, which existed
lawfully as of June 17, 1999 and which remains nonconforming by the terms of this
chapter, and any such manufactured/mobile home, or structure, which shall become
nonconforming on June 17, 1999, or upon any subsequent amendment to this
chapter, may be continued.
2. Manufactured/mobile home communities which existed lawfully on
November 5, 1998, but do not conform to the minimum requirements set forth in
this chapter, may be continued notwithstanding such nonconformity. Any home
located in such manufactured/mobile home community may be repaired or replaced
without adherence to the minimum requirements set forth in Section 151.05,
151.06(3), 151.07(2), 151.12(4)(A) and 151.13(1) in this chapter provided that the
number of home sites in the manufactured/mobile home community shall not
thereby be increased. The existing front yard setback from a public, private or
interior street shall be maintained when a replacement manufactured/mobile home
is located on a lot.








CHAPTER 153
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
153.01 Purpose 153.09 Request for Hearing
153.02 Definitions 153.10 Overcrowding
153.03 Authority for Enforcement 153.11 Nuisances
153.04 Interference With the Property Maintenance Official 153.12 Notice to Abate
153.05 International Property Maintenance Code Adopted 153.13 Emergency Abatement Measures
153.06 Amendments to the Property Maintenance Code 153.14 Code on File
153.07 Scope 153.15 Receptacles
153.08 Unsafe Structures and Equipment 153.16 Smoke Detectors
153.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to designate the responsibilities of persons
for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property within the City, to define nuisances
as a result of the failure to perform such maintenance and to provide for the abatement of such
nuisances in order to provide for the safety and preserve the health and welfare of the citizens of
the City.
153.02 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Blighted area” is defined as set forth in Section 403.17 of the Code of Iowa.
2. “Vermin” means any of various insects, bugs or small animals regarded as
objectionable because they are destructive, disease carrying, etc.
153.03 AUTHORITY FOR ENFORCEMENT. The City Manager shall be responsible for
the enforcement of this chapter and shall have all the necessary authority to carry out such
enforcement. Any person designated by the City Manager to enforce this chapter shall be known
as the Property Maintenance Official.
153.04 INTERFERENCE WITH THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE OFFICIAL. No
person shall interfere with the Property Maintenance Official while engaged in the enforcement of
this chapter.
153.05 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED. Except as
hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or amended, there is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Marion that certain code known as the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, First Printing, including Appendix A, as prepared and edited by
the International Code Council. Inc" and the provisions of said Property Maintenance Code shall
be controlling in maintaining minimum requirements and standards of structures and properties
within the corporate limits of the City and shall be known as the Marion Property Maintenance
Code.
153.06 AMENDMENTS TO THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE. Certain sections
and portions of sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, are hereby
amended, deleted, modified or added to as more specifically set forth below and in the following
sections of this chapter.
? Section 101.1 Insert: {City of Marion, Iowa}
? Section 103.5 Insert: {fee schedule as set by Council resolution}
? Section 112.4 Insert: {fine schedule as set by Council resolution}
? Section 302.4 Insert: {8 inches} (from 52.02 #13 Weeds)
? Section 304,14 Insert: {April 1, September 30}
? Section 602.3 Insert: {October 1, April 30}
? Section 602.4 Insert: {October 1, April 30}
153.07 SCOPE. The Marion Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by adding a new
exception to Section 101.2 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, as
follows:
Exception: Within occupied dwelling units regulated by the Marion Housing Code as provided in
Marion Code of Ordinances Chapter 165.
153.08 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT. The Marion Property Maintenance
Code is hereby amended by repealing Section 108.1 of the International Property Maintenance
Code, 2018 Edition, and by replacing said section with a new section, as follows:
108.1 General. When a structure or equipment is found by the Code Official to be unsafe, or when
a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, the Code Official shall
commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the structure and the structure
may be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code.
153.09 REQUEST FOR HEARING. The Marion Property Maintenance Code is hereby
amended by repealing in entirety, Section 111 from the International Property Maintenance Code,
2018 Edition, and by replacing said section with a new Section 111, as follows:
Section 111. Request for Hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance, or any person
interested therein may have a hearing with the Nuisance Enforcement/Property Maintenance
Advisory Board as to whether a nuisance exists or on a request for an extension of time in
which to abate a nuisance. A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the
Nuisance Enforcement/Property Maintenance Advisory Board either: within the time stated in the
order to abate or, (30) calendar days after the date of postmark of notice or proof of service,
whichever comes first; or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be
abated as ordered. The Nuisance Enforcement/Property Maintenance Advisory Board shall set a
hearing date as soon as practicable after receiving a written appeal. The applicant shall be advised
in writing of the time and place of such meeting at least (4) days prior to the date of the meeting.
At such meeting, the applicant shall be given an opportunity to be heard and show just cause why
a nuisance does not exist or why an extension of time is needed. At the conclusion of the hearing,
the Nuisance Enforcement/Property Maintenance Advisory Board shall render a written decision
as to whether or not a nuisance exists. If the Nuisance Enforcement/Property Maintenance
Advisory Board finds that a nuisance exists, it shall order the nuisance abated within an additional
time which is reasonable under the circumstances. The findings of the Nuisance
Enforcement/Property Maintenance Advisory Board shall be the final decision on the matter.
Enforcement of any notice or order issued under this code shall be stayed during the duration of an
appeal of the order, which is properly and timely filed.
153.10 OVERCROWDING. The Marion Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by
adding a new exception to Section 404.5 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018
Edition, as follows:
Exception: The actual number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not create conditions that,
in the opinion of the Code Official, endanger the life, health, safety, or welfare of the occupants.
153.11 NUISANCES. A failure to satisfy any of the provisions of the Marion Property
Maintenance Code shall constitute a nuisance.
153.12 NOTICE TO ABATE. Upon discovery of any violation of Section 153.06, the City
shall within five (5) days initiate abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of
Ordinances.
153.13 EMERGENCY ABATEMENT MEASURES. Notwithstanding any other provisions
of this chapter, whenever in the judgment of the Property Maintenance Official any nuisance is an
immediate and imminent threat to life and property, the Property Maintenance Official may, with
or without prior notice as required herein, order the nuisance abated and costs assessed against the
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. However, prior to such assessment,
the City shall give the property owner notice as provided by the Code of Iowa and this Code of
Ordinances.
153.14 CODE ON FILE. An official copy of the Marion Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted, including a certificate by the Clerk as to its adoption and the effective date thereof, shall
be on tile in the Office of the Clerk in City Hall and shall be kept there on file, and copies shall be
available for public inspection. A copy of this chapter shall be available in the Building Department
Office.
153.15 RECEPTACLES. The Marion Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by
addition of a new Section 605.2.1 to the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition,
reading as follows: 605.2.1 GROUND FAULT CIRCUIT REQUIREMENTS. Receptacles which
are within three feet of a source of water shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.
153.16 SMOKE DETECTORS. The Marion Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended
by repealing Section 704 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, and by
replacing said section with a new section, as follows:
704.1 Smoke detection and notification. Smoke alarms shall be listed and labeled in accordance
with UL 217 and installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and the household fire
warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72.
704.2 Smoke detection systems. Household fire alarm systems installed in accordance with NFPA
72 that include smoke alarms. or a combination of smoke detector and audible notification devices
installed as required by this section for smoke alarms, shall be permitted.
704.3 Location. Smoke alarms shall he installed in the following locations:
1. In each sleeping room.
2. Outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms.
3. On each story of the dwelling including basements.
704.3.1 Alterations, repairs and additions. When alterations. repairs or additions requiring a
permit occur, or when one or more sleeping rooms are added or created in existing dwellings, the
dwelling unit shall be equipped with smoke alarms in locations as required in R314.3 for new
dwellings.
Exceptions:
1. Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as the replacement of roofing or siding,
or the addition or replacement of windows or doors, or the addition of an open porch or deck, are
exempt from the requirements of this section.
2. Installation, alteration or repairs of plumbing or mechanical systems are exempt from the
requirements of this section.
704.4 Power source. Smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring
when such wiring is served from a commercial source, and when primary power is interrupted,
shall receive power from a battery. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch
other than those required for overcurrent protection.
Exception: Hard wiring of smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required finishes exposing
the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access
for hard wiring without the removal of interior finishes.
704.5 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an
individual dwelling unit in accordance with Section R314.3, the alarm devices shall be
interconnected in such a manner that the actuation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the
individual unit. Physical interconnection of smoke alarms shall not be required where listed
wireless alarms are installed and all alarms sound upon activation of any one alarm.
Exception: Interconnection of smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required where alterations
or repairs do not result in removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless
there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection
without removal of interior finishes
(Ch. 153 - Ord. 18-14 – Aug. 18 Supp.)




CHAPTER 155
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
155.01 General 155.10 Requirements for Sites Covered by Iowa DNR
155.02 Definitions General Permit No. 2
155.03 Major Erosion Control Permit Required 155.11 Inspection, Notice to Comply and Notice of Violation
155.04 Minor Erosion Control Permit Required 155.12 Powers of Authority for Inspection
155.05 Permit Renewals 155.13 Repair and Clean-up of Damage
155.06 Filling Requirements 155.14 Enforcement
155.07 SWPPP Required 155.15 Appeals
155.08 SWPPP Requirements 155.16 Fees Established
155.09 SWPPP Review and Approval Procedure
155.01 GENERAL.
1. Soil erosion contributes to the impairment of drainage ways,
increases road and storm sewer maintenance costs, contributes to the
destruction and obstruction to traveled roadways creating a potential
hazard for vehicular traffic, and contributes to contamination and
degradation of land surfaces and streams, flooding and dusty conditions.
This chapter establishes requirements in an effort to control erosion and
sediment transport.
2. Owners of certain construction sites are required, under rules
contained in General Permit No. 2, Storm Water Discharge Associated
with Industrial Activity for Construction Activities ("General Permit No.
2"), to obtain coverage through the Iowa DNR under that permit.
3. Under its Municipal Stormwater National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System permit, which permit is on file at the offices of the
City Clerk and the City Engineer and is available for public inspection
during regular office hours, the City is required to regulate, treat, and
control stormwater discharges into the City's stormwater drainage system.
One provision of that permit requires the City to enforce the requirements
of General Permit No. 2 jointly with the Iowa DNR.
4. General Permit No. 2 and the document entitled "Summary
Guidance, A Brief Guide to Developing Pollution Prevention Plans and
Best Management Practices", issued and administered by the Iowa DNR,
are hereby adopted and by reference made part of this section as if fully
set forth herein. Any act these documents require or prohibit, is required
or prohibited by this section. Any future amendments, revisions, or
modifications to these documents, incorporated herein, are intended to be
made a part of this section.
5. This chapter also establishes requirements for grading, filling, fill
material, and for obtaining Erosion Control Permits. These requirements
CHAPTER 155 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
include use of suitable fill material, stable slope construction, proper site
drainage, and usability of public and private easements.
6. Except as provided in Section 155.04, Minor Erosion Control
Permit Required, no person shall engage in land-disturbing activities
within the City unless they have received an Erosion Control Permit from
the City.
155.02 DEFINITIONS. Wherever used in this chapter the terms listed below
will have the meanings indicated.
1. “Applicant” means any individual, firm, corporation, association
or partnership, or proprietor of land to undergo land-disturbing activities.
2. “Certified professional erosion and sediment control specialist”
means a specialist in the area of soil erosion and sediment control as
certified by the Soil and Water Conservation Society and the International
Erosion Control Association.
3. “Civil engineer” means a professional engineer licensed in the state
of Iowa to practice civil engineering.
4. “Clearing and grubbing” means removal of unwanted growth, in
the form of trees, wood, shrubs, brush, or stumps on a site.
5. “Design professional” means a licensed civil engineer or certified
professional erosion and sediment control specialist.
6. "Design Standards Manual" means the latest edition of SUDAS as
approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
7. “Development” means the alteration of land from its existing state.
8. “Disturbed area” means the part of a site on which land-disturbing
activities take place. All land area that is to be disturbed at any time during
the project is to be counted in determining the disturbed area, even if part
of the land will be stabilized before another part is disturbed.
9. “Erosion” means the wearing away of the land surface by running
water, wind, ice, gravity, or other geological, natural, or man made agents.
10. “Erosion Control Officer” means the City Engineer or designee.
11. “Erosion Control Permit” means a Major Erosion Control Permit
or a Minor Erosion Control Permit.
12. “Filling” means placing materials to effectively change the site
contours. This shall include placing materials from the site itself, or from
off site.
CHAPTER 155 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
13. “Fill material” means soil, stone, rock, brick, Portland cement or
asphaltic concrete, or sand.
14. “Fill site” means land upon which fill materials are placed and
which placement does not require a Sanitary Disposal Permit issued by
the State of Iowa.
15. “Final stabilization” means that all land-disturbing activities at the
site have been completed, and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover
with a density of 70 percent for the area has been established or equivalent
stabilization measures have been employed.
16. “General Permit No. 2” means General Permit No. 2, Storm Water
Discharge Associated with Industrial Activity for Construction Activities,
as authored and administered by the Iowa DNR.
17. “Iowa DNR” means the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
18. “Land-disturbing activities” means clearing, grading, excavating,
filling, or removal of vegetation, paving, or buildings, exposing earthen
material on a site.
19. “Major Erosion Control Permit” means a permit issued by the City
to engage in land-disturbing activities on a site with one acre or greater
disturbed area.
20. “Minor Erosion Control Permit” means a permit issued by the City
to engage in land-disturbing activities on a site of greater than one-quarter
acre and less than one acre disturbed area.
21. “Responsible party” means one or more persons who have applied
for or hold a City Erosion Control Permit, or who own, control, or perform
work on a site.
22. “Sediment” means solid material, both natural and manmade, that
is in suspension, has been transported, or has been moved from its origin
by air, water, gravity, or ice and has been deposited by the action of water
or wind.
23. “Site” means property where land-disturbing activities take place.
24. “Stabilization or stabilized” means vegetative cover with a density
of 70 percent has been established, or equivalent stabilization measures
have been employed by chemical, biological, structural or non-structural
BMP methods that prevents soil detachment or transport thus limiting the
annual cumulative soil loss to a rate equivalent to that of a site containing
a 70 percent vegetative cover density.
25. "Standard Specifications" means the latest edition of SUDAS as
approved by the City Council.
CHAPTER 155 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
26. “Stormwater drainage system” means all manmade facilities and
structures and all natural watercourses that are owned by the City, or that
are within a drainage easement owned by the City, and that are used for
collection, storage, treatment, and conveyance of stormwater from any
area, through any area. This includes without limitation all stormwater
facilities, canals, creeks, curb and gutter, dams, ditches, floodwalls,
flumes, gulches, gullies, levees, ravines, siphons, streams, streets, and
swales. For the purpose of illicit discharge regulation, any discharge to an
area tributary to the stormwater drainage system shall be treated as a
discharge to the stormwater drainage system.
27. “Stormwater facilities” means anything built or used for the control
of stormwater, including without limitation catch basins, channels,
culverts, detention basins, energy dissipation structures, inlets, manholes,
outlets, pipes and other conduits, retention basins, and roadways and
gutters.
28. “Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan” means a document
conforming to the requirements therefore contained in General Permit No.
2 and this chapter, prepared and certified by a design professional.
29. “SWPPP” means Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
155.03 MAJOR EROSION CONTROL PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. Sites or common plans of development that will result in a total
disturbed area of one or more acres shall obtain a Major Erosion Control
Permit prior to any land-disturbing activities.
2. All Major Erosion Control Permits shall be issued by the Erosion
Control Officer upon approval of a completed Application for Erosion
Control Permit on a form provided by the City. The application shall be
signed by the title holder of the site, together with the applicant, if different
from the title holder.
3. Sites required to obtain an Erosion Control Permit shall comply
with Section 155.10, Requirements for Sites Covered by the Iowa DNR
General Permit No. 2, herein.
CHAPTER 155 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
4. A Major Erosion Control Permit Application shall include the
following:
A. A completed Application for Erosion Control Permit on a
form provided by the Erosion Control Officer.
B. A SWPPP conforming to:
(1) The requirements of this chapter, and the
requirements of General Permit No. 2.
(2) If a SWPPP for the site has previously been
submitted to the City and has not been modified, the
applicant shall submit a signed and dated statement that the
SWPPP has not been modified, in which case the SWPPP
need not be resubmitted.
C. Payment of the permit fee.
5. The permittee shall provide the Erosion Control Officer with all
material submitted as part of a Notice of Discontinuation when such a
notice is filed with the Iowa DNR.
155.04 MINOR EROSION CONTROL PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. Sites or common plans of development that will result in a
disturbed area of greater than 1/8 of an acre but less than one acre shall
obtain a Minor Erosion Control Permit prior to any land-disturbing
activity, except:
A. Filling or construction within floodplain limits as
established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and in
the Marion Floodplain Management Ordinance will require a
separate additional permit under that ordinance, in addition to the
permits required by this chapter.
B. The following activities are exempt from the requirements
of this chapter:
(1) Crop production activities;
(2) Cemetery graves;
(3) Emergencies posing an immediate danger to life or
property, or substantial flood or fire hazards;
(4) Total fill quantity of less than twenty-five cubic
yards in a twelve month time period;
(5) Public improvements.
CHAPTER 155 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
2. All Minor Erosion Control Permits shall be issued by the Erosion
Control Officer upon approval of a completed Application for Erosion
Control Permit on a form provided by the City. The application shall be
signed by the title holder(s) of the site, together with the applicant, if
different from the title holder(s).
3. A Minor Erosion Control Permit Application shall include the
following:
A. A completed Application for Erosion Control Permit on a
form provided by the City.
B. A dimensioned drawing including the following:
(1) Property address and legal description;
(2) Property lines and any existing easements of record;
(3) Limits of area of land-disturbing activities;
(4) Existing and proposed ground elevations (two-foot
maximum interval);
(5) A SWPPP if required under section 155.07, SWPPP
Required.
(6) Other information as required by the Erosion Control
Officer.
155.05 PERMIT RENEWALS.
1. Erosion control permits shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of issuance and may be renewed as provided for herein. A renewal
application shall include the following:
A. A completed Application for Erosion Control Permit
Renewal on a form provided by the City.
B. Payment of the renewal fee.
C. Any information required in 155.03 (4) (B) (for a major
permit) or 155.04 (3) (B) (for a minor permit) if it has changed. A
major permit renewal shall include a certification by the design
professional that all changed conditions are included in the renewal
application.
2. The City shall revoke an erosion control permit or decline renewal
if unacceptable materials are being deposited at the site, or if the permittee
has failed to comply with any of the regulations set forth in this chapter,
or any requirement of law, statute or regulation.
CHAPTER 155 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
155.06 FILLING REQUIREMENTS.
1. Clearing and grubbing shall be performed according to Section 2010 of the
SUDAS Specifications Manual.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
2. Fill material shall be placed according to the SWPPP as accepted by the City.
3. Interim filling during construction shall be placed in a safe manner. Slope
stabilization, inspection and maintenance of erosion control, and soil stabilization
where work has been suspended shall be according to the Design Standards Manual.
4. Finish grading shall be according to Section 2010 of the SUDAS
Specifications Manual.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
5. Finish slopes shall not exceed a 3:1 ratio on any slope facing and terminating
within 15 feet of a property line.
6. Unacceptable Fill Materials.
A. Fill materials shall not include hazardous waste, synthetic material,
metal, and organic material other than natural topsoil incidental to excavation
except as noted below. Concrete, brick, tile, and other manufactured inert
material shall not be greater than 18" in its greatest dimension. Asphalt
paving material shall not be used for bank stabilization or where the final
location will be below the known water table.
B. Trees may be buried within the site they originate from, provided they
are not buried within structural footprints or in earthwork providing
structural support, such as for building foundations and roadways. Trees shall
not be placed in the trench backfill for sewers, culverts, and other
underground utilities. Trees shall not be imported onsite from offsite for use
as fill.
155.07 SWPPP REQUIRED.
1. Sites with land-disturbing activities shall fall into one of two categories as
determined by the Erosion Control Officer as set forth herein below:
A. Sites with a disturbed area less than one acre shall not require
submittal of a SWPPP. However, the owner of a site is required to plan and
implement erosion control measures as described in the brochure "Erosion
Control for Small Site Development". The Erosion Control Officer shall
make this brochure available. The Erosion Control Officer may require an
acceptable SWPPP for sites with a disturbed area less than one acre in cases
warranted by site conditions. Such site conditions may include, but are not
limited to:
(1) Site contains slopes of 9 percent or greater;
CHAPTER 155 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
(2) Site is adjacent to a water body or open drainage channel;
sinkholes, wetlands and shallow depth to bedrock;
(3) The site has been identified as having severe erosion or as
creating a significant impact on adjacent properties, water bodies, or
open drainage channels due to erosion and sediment deposition.
B. Sites with a disturbed area greater than or equal to one acre shall
require an acceptable SWPPP meeting the requirements of this chapter,
certified by a design professional, and approved by the Erosion Control
Officer.
2. The SWPPP must be reviewed and approved by the Erosion Control Officer
prior to the commencement of land-disturbing activities.
3. The City's acceptance of a SWPPP does not constitute approval of Design
Standards Manual exceptions unless specifically requested and approved by the
Erosion Control Officer.
155.08 SWPPP REQUIREMENTS.
1. Every SWPPP submitted to the City in support of an application for a Major
Erosion Control Permit:
A. Shall contain complete 24-hour contact information for the site owner
and the person in responsible charge of providing and maintaining
sedimentation and erosion control for the site. The permittee shall inform the
Erosion Control Officer within seven calendar days of any change in this
contact information.
B. Shall comply with all current minimum mandatory requirements for
SWPPPs promulgated by the Iowa DNR in connection with General Permit
No. 2, including those published as Summary Guidance for General Permit
No. 2 by the Iowa DNR. The Erosion Control Officer may develop policies
modifying these requirements for sites with a disturbed area less than one
acre.
C. Shall comply with all other applicable state or federal permit requirements
in existence at the time of application.
D. Shall include a drainage plan prepared according to the Design Standards
Manual. The drainage plan shall be accompanied by a drainage report prepared
according to the City Engineering Department Drainage Report Process Handbook.
This handbook shall be available in the City Engineering Department. The drainage
report shall at a minimum demonstrate the design of proposed grading, erosion, and
sediment control if constructed per plan is not expected to adversely impact
adjacent properties.
E. Shall be prepared by a design professional; and
CHAPTER 155 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
F. Shall include within the SWPPP a signed and dated certification by the
person preparing the SWPPP that the SWPPP complies with all requirements of
this section.
2. The SWPPP shall be modified by a design professional as required in General
Permit No. 2. Any modification of a SWPPP shall meet the requirements above.
155.09 SWPPP REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE. The applicant shall submit a
SWPPP for the site, meeting the requirements established in the Design Standards Manual, to the
Erosion Control Officer for review and approval, as follows:
1. The Erosion Control Officer shall review the submittal for compliance with the
requirements of a SWPPP as set forth in the Design Standards Manual. Following the
review, the Erosion Control Officer may return comments to the design professional.
2. The Erosion Control Officer shall complete initial review and issue comments if
needed back to the preparer in 10 working days after submittal. The actual time required
is a function of the submittal complexity and overall workload of the Erosion Control
Officer.
3. Following receipt of comments from the Erosion Control Officer, the applicant
shall provide a revised submittal to the Erosion Control Officer in accordance with any
requested revisions.
4. The Erosion Control Officer may require supporting documentation as needed to
demonstrate conformance with these requirements. Issuance of an Erosion Control Permit
may be delayed pending receipt of the documentation.
5. If the submittal is complete, and meets the requirements as set forth herein, the
Erosion Control Officer shall approve the plan.
CHAPTER 155 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
155.10 REQUIREMENTS FOR SITES COVERED BY IOWA DNR GENERAL
PERMIT NO. 2.
1. The City shall not allow any land-disturbing activity on a site for which
coverage under General Permit No. 2 is required, nor shall the City issue any permit,
authorization, or license allowing such activity, until the site owner has obtained
coverage for the site under General Permit No. 2 from the Iowa DNR.
2. Any responsible party who is required to obtain, or has obtained, coverage
under General Permit No. 2 shall comply with all the requirements of General
Permit No. 2. Failure to do so is a violation of this section. Completion of work
shown in a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan submitted under the provisions of
General Permit No. 2 is a requirement of General Permit No. 2 and failure to
complete such work is a violation of this section.
3. For sites covered under General Permit No. 2 where the ownership changes,
the Enforcement Officer must be notified of the title transfer within 30 days, except
in the case of single-lot sales, which shall be recorded on the SWPPP. The new
owner shall be subject to all terms and conditions of the Erosion Control Permit. A
copy of the notice of transfer that was sent to the Erosion Control Officer shall be
included in the SWPPP. For sites that are part of a larger common plan of
development such as a housing or commercial development project, if a permittee
transfers ownership of all or any part of property subject to an Erosion Control
Permit, both the permittee and transferee shall be responsible for compliance with
the provisions of General Permit No. 2 and the Erosion Control Permit for that
portion of the project which has been transferred including when the transferred
property is less than one acre in area. If the new owner agrees in writing to be solely
responsible for compliance with the provisions of General Permit No. 2 and the
Erosion Control Permit for the property which has been transferred, then the existing
permittee shall be relieved of responsibility for compliance with General Permit No.
2 and the Erosion Control Permit for the transferred property, from and after the
date the transfer of responsibility is attached to the SWPPP.
155.11 INSPECTION, NOTICE TO COMPLY, AND NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
1. The Erosion Control Officer shall inspect the site in response to reports from
third parties or at other times, at the Erosion Control Officer's discretion.
2. The Erosion Control Officer shall issue a Notice to Comply to the responsible
party or parties, describing any problems and specifying a date and time by which
compliance must be achieved.
A. The Erosion Control Officer may modify a Notice to Comply and may
authorize, in writing, an extension to the specified date and time by which
compliance must be achieved.
CHAPTER 155 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
B. Failure to achieve compliance by the specified date and time is a
violation of this section.
3. The Erosion Control Officer shall, upon determination of any violation of
this section, issue a Notice of Violation in writing to the responsible party or parties,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.
A. The Notice of Violation may:
(1) Order the discontinuance of any illegal work, specifying a date
and time for such discontinuance; and
(2) Require the repair and cleanup of any damage done due to
failure to comply with General Permit No. 2, specifying a date and
time for completion of repair and cleanup; and
(3) Order the withholding of any building or occupancy permits
for the site, and
(4) Order the discontinuance of any or all work at the site,
including at the Erosion Control Officer's discretion work not directly
related to the cause and prevention of erosion and sedimentation,
except potential life safety related work and work necessary to
achieve compliance and to repair and clean up damage, specifying a
date and time for such discontinuance to commence and conditions
for such discontinuance to cease.
B. Failure to comply with any order in a Notice of Violation is an
additional violation. Each day of such failure constitutes a separate violation.
C. The Erosion Control Officer may modify a Notice of Violation and
may authorize, in writing, an extension to the specified dates and times
therein.
D. The Notice of Violation shall, where necessary or appropriate,
recommend to the City Attorney the institution of legal or equitable actions
that may be required for the enforcement of this section.
4. Communication to a responsible party's employee, partner, attorney, agent,
contractor, or subcontractor shall be regarded as communication to the responsible
party for the purpose of this section.
5. Communication to one responsible party shall be regarded as communication
to each responsible party for the purpose of this section.
155.12 POWERS OF AUTHORITY FOR INSPECTION.
1. Right of Entry. The Erosion Control Officer and authorized employees of
the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and
CHAPTER 155 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The applicant, owner, or
titleholder shall be deemed to have consented to such entry by submission of an
application for any permit or plan contemplated in this chapter. Barring or delaying
such inspection is a violation of this section.
2. The Erosion Control Officer shall have access to and be able to copy any
records that must be kept under the conditions of General Permit No. 2 within three
business hours, where a business hour is any hour between 8:00 AM and 3:30 PM
on a non-holiday weekday.
155.13 REPAIR AND CLEAN-UP OF DAMAGE.
1. For any site, whether or not covered by an Erosion Control Permit or other
stormwater discharge permit, the City may clean up eroded sediment or tracked soil
deposited on public property if:
A. Corrective action has not been completed within 24 hours or within
an extended deadline granted in writing by the City; or
B. In the judgment of the Erosion Control Officer, damage to the
environment is ongoing and prompt corrective action would be intended to
reduce such damage.
2. If the City cleans up such material deposited off site, the Erosion Control
Officer will invoice the responsible party or parties for the City's actual costs
including overhead, which may be recorded as an assessment against the property
and constitute a lien thereon.
3. Failure to pay an invoice under this section within 30 days shall constitute a
violation of this section.
CHAPTER 155 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
155.14 ENFORCEMENT.
1. Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced as a municipal
infraction within the meaning of Iowa Code 364.22, pursuant to Chapter 4 of this
Code of Ordinances.
2. Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced by civil
action including an action for injunctive relief.
3. In any civil enforcement action, administrative or judicial, the City shall be
entitled to recover its attorneys' fees and costs from a person who is determined by
a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.
155.15 APPEALS. Anyone claiming to be aggrieved by any determination made by the
Erosion Control Officer may within 5 days of the date of such determination appeal to the
Construction Codes Review Board and in writing state his or her reasons for requesting
such order to be rescinded or modified. The City Manager shall review the determination
of the Erosion Control Officer, and if reasonable grounds exist, shall modify, withdraw or
order compliance with said determination. Anyone claiming to be aggrieved by the
determination made by the Construction Codes Review Board shall have such rights of
appeal as provided by the law.
155.16 FEES ESTABLISHED. The City Council may establish fees by resolution for
permit applications, permit renewal applications, inspections, and for the review and
processing of documents necessitated by this chapter. When such fees are established a
submittal shall not be considered unless the appropriate fee has been submitted to the City.
(Ch. 155 – Ord. 06-17 - Nov. 06 Supp.)
CHAPTER 156
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
156.01 Goal 156.09 Erosion Control
156.02 Definitions 156.10 Inspection of Storm Water Management Features
156.03 Related Ordinances 156.11 Maintenance
156.04 Exemptions 156.12 Financing
156.05 Application 156.13 Sump Pump Connections
156.06 Site Plan Submittal 156.14 Savings Clause
156.07 Storm Water Management Requirements 156.15 Penalties
156.08 Waiver and Appeal
156.01 GOAL. The goal of this chapter is to provide comprehensive management and control
of storm water runoff in an environmentally sound, safe and economical manner such that only
minor inconvenience is experienced by the people and property within the City and its two-mile
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
156.02 DEFINITIONS. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be defined in accordance with the definitions in Section 176.39 (Flood Plain
Regulations) and of Chapter 175 (Subdivision Regulations). Words or phrases not defined below
or in said chapters shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
1. “BMP” or “best management practice” means a practice or combination of
practices that are the most effective and practicable (including technological, economic and
institutional considerations) means of controlling point or nonpoint source pollutants at
levels compatible with environmental quality goals.
2. “Capacity” (of a storm water facility) means the maximum volume or rate of
conveyance available in a storm water management facility, including freeboard, to store
or convey storm water without damage to public or private property.
3. “Channel” means a natural or manmade open watercourse with definite bed and
banks which periodically or continuously contains moving water; or which forms a link
between two bodies of water.
4. “City Engineer” means the City Engineer of the City or his/her designated
representative.
5. “Civil engineer” means a professional engineer licensed in the State of Iowa to
practice in the field of civil works.
6. “Comprehensive Plan” means the plan or series of plans prepared by the City or by
the Corridor Metropolitan Planning Organization to guide the development and
redevelopment of the City and the surrounding area. Such a comprehensive plan may
include a Major Street Plan, Land Use Policy Plan, Open Space Plan, and other applicable
plans available through the Department of Planning and Development.
7. “Control structure” means part of a storm water management facility designed to
regulate the storm water runoff release rate.
8. "Design Standards Manual" means the latest edition of SUDAS as approved by the
City Council.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
9. “Detention basin” means a storm water management facility designed, constructed
or modified to provide short term storage of storm water runoff, which reduces the peak
overflow to a rate less than the peak inflow.
10. “Development” means the improvement of land from its existing state or significant
alteration.
11. “Drainage area” means an area of land contributing to storm water runoff.
12. “Drainage system” means the surface and sub-surface system for the removal of
water from land, including both natural elements (streams, ponds, etc.) and manmade
elements (ditches, channels, storm sewers, etc.).
13. “First flush” means an initial rain event up to one inch (1") of accumulation that
carries soil particles and pollutants from streets and parking lots into the storm sewer
system and eventually depositing the pollutants into the streams or lakes.
14. “Five-year storm” means a rainfall of given intensity and duration having a twenty
percent (20%) chance of occurring in any one year. This does not imply that it will occur
only once in five (5) years, or having occurred, will not happen again for five (5) years.
15. “Hundred-year storm” means a rainfall of given intensity and duration having a one
percent (1%) chance of occurring in any one year. This does not imply that it will occur
only once in 100 years, or having occurred, will not happen again for 100 years.
16. “Hydrograph” means a graph showing, for a given point on a stream or conduit, the
storm water runoff flow rate with respect to time.
17. “Infiltration” means the downward movement of water from the land surfaces into
the soil profile.
18. “Infiltration basin” means a type of best management practice (BMP) that is used
to manage storm water runoff, prevent flooding and downstream erosion, and improve
water quality in an adjacent river, stream, lake or bay. It is essentially a shallow artificial
pond that is designed to infiltrate storm water through permeable soils into the groundwater
aquifer. Infiltration basins do not discharge to a surface water body under most storm
conditions, but are designed with overflow structures (pipes, weirs, etc.) that operate during
flood conditions.
19. “Overflow system” means the path taken by storm water runoff as a result of flows
which exceed the capacity of the underground drainage system. This path may include
streets, channels, drainage ways, or areas of sheet flows, and be located on public property
or private property with an easement.
20. “Post-development runoff” means the volume and rate of flow of storm water
discharged from a drainage area after a proposed development or other manmade action
involving construction, excavation, or fill that alters land or vegetation is completed.
21. “Pre-development runoff” means the volume and rate of flow of storm water
discharged from a drainage area prior to a proposed development or other manmade action
involving construction, excavation or fill that alters land or vegetation.
22. “Retention basin” means a storm water management facility designed, constructed
or modified to provide long-term storage of storm water runoff, which reduces the peak
outflow during a specific rainfall event. This facility is typically designed to maintain a
specific water elevation (privately owned).
23. “Riparian area” means a vegetated ecosystem along a water body through which
energy, materials and water pass. Riparian areas characteristically have a high water table
and are subject to periodic flooding.
24. “Site” means a lot, parcel, or tract of land, or portion thereof, where development
is occurring, or has occurred, and may, or may not, require additional permits.
25. “Storm sewer system” means facilities for the conveyance of storm water runoff,
typically a series of conduits and appurtenances, to accommodate frequent storms, not
generating large peak discharges. These facilities usually include conduits, street gutters
and small swales.
26. “Storm water drainage system” means all manmade facilities and structures and all
natural watercourses that are owned by the City, or that are within a drainage easement
owned by the City, and that are used for collection, storage, treatment, and conveyances of
storm water from any area, through any area. This includes without limitation all storm
water facilities, canals, creeks, curb and gutter, dams, ditches, floodwalls, flumes, gulches,
gullies, levees, ravines, siphons, streams and swales. For the purpose of illicit discharge
regulation, any discharge to an area tributary to the storm water drainage system shall be
treated as a discharge to the storm water drainage system.
27. “Storm water facilities” means anything built or used for the control of storm water,
including without limitation catch basins, channels, culverts, detention basins, energy
dissipation structures, inlets, manholes, outlets, pipes and other conduits, retention basins,
and roadways and gutters.
28. “Storm Water Management Plan” or “SWMP” means a site plan, certified by a
Civil Engineer, Landscape Architect, or Certified Inspector of Sediment and Erosion
Control, including materials, construction phasing, grading activities, and methods used
for mitigation of increased storm water runoff from the site under the requirements set forth
in the Design Standards Manual.
29. “Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan” means a document conforming to the
requirements therefore contained in General Permit No. 2 and this chapter, prepared and
certified by a design professional as defined herein.
30. “SWPPP” means Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.
31. “Storm water runoff” means the flow of water resulting from precipitation upon a
surface area, not absorbed by the soil or plant material.
32. “Storm water runoff release rate” means the amount of storm water runoff
discharged from dominant to subservient land.
33. “Storm water storage area” means an area designated to store excess storm water.
34. “Watercourse” means any stream, creek, reservoir, lake, pond, or natural or
artificial drainage way.
35. “Wetlands” means lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where
the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. For
purposes of this classification wetlands must have one or more of the following three
attributes: (i) at least periodically, the land supports predominately hydrophytes; (ii) the
substrate is predominately undrained hydric soil; and (iii) the substrate is non-soil and is
saturated with water or covered by shallow water at some time during the growing season
of the year. The Corp of Engineers have jurisdiction over wetlands determined to be of
importance.
36. “Open loop geothermal heating/cooling system” means a heating/cooling system
where water is extracted from a pond, lake, or well, circulated through a heat pump unit
where the heat is extracted, then the water is discharged to a storm sewer or surface water
drainage system. For the purpose of this chapter open loop geothermal heating/cooling
systems using well re-injection do not apply.
156.03 RELATED ORDINANCES.
1. Supplemented Ordinances. The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances are
hereby supplemented:
A. Chapter 175 - Subdivision Ordinance.
B. Chapter 176 - Zoning Ordinance
C. Chapter 160 - Building Code.
2. Greater Restrictions. Where conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter
are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any
other provision of this chapter or any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of
any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards shall
govern.
156.04 EXEMPTIONS. The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
1. Agricultural use of land.
2. Emergencies posing an immediate danger to life or property, or substantial flood or
fire hazards.
3. Land within flood plain areas as designated in the Federal Emergency Management
Agency maps in effect at the time of development, except when associated with discharge
sites related to open loop geothermal heating/cooling systems.
4. Areas deemed appropriate by the City Engineer.
156.05 APPLICATION.
1. The requirements of this chapter apply to all development within the City.
2. Storm water detention basins intended to serve single-family residential
development shall be publicly owned and maintained (see Resolution 15436 and
Resolution 17525), unless approved otherwise by the City Engineer.
3. Lots (other than single-family lots) with an overall area of one acre or more shall
provide on-site storm water detention. Such lots with an overall area less than one acre
and an impervious surface greater than 11,000 square feet (approximately ¼ acre) shall
comply with one of the following, as approved by the City Engineer:
A. Privately owned, on-site detention basin.
B. Tributary to privately or publicly owned detention basin.
In some watersheds, on-site storm water detention may be required, at the discretion of the
City Engineer, for said lots.
4. At the discretion of the City Engineer, if a detention basin serves other than singlefamily
zoning districts and can provide storm water attenuation for a substantial drainage
area, the facilities may be publicly owned and maintained.
156.06 SITE PLAN SUBMITTAL. A site plan containing information regarding storm water
drainage facilities set forth in this chapter must be submitted and approved by the City Engineer
before any person may:
1. Receive a building permit for new construction or relocation of a principal or
accessory use or enlargement or extension of an existing use.
2. Reroute, deepen, narrow, enlarge, fill or in any way alter an existing storm water
drainage system.
3. Pave a parking lot containing four or more parking spaces with hot mix asphalt
(HMA) or portland cement concrete (PCC).
4. Install an open loop geothermal heating/cooling system.
156.07 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
1. For purposes of obtaining approval of a Storm Water Management Plan, an Iowa
Licensed Professional Engineer, certified Inspector of Sediment and Erosion Control, or
Landscape Architect shall design storm water drainage facilities in conformance with
SUDAS. Storm water drainage facilities shall be designed with appropriate BMP's such as
detention and retention basins, grass swales, buffer strips, bio-retention and other similar
types of infiltration basins and riparian areas, that will convey drainage through the
property to one or more treatment areas such that no development shall cause downstream
property owners, water courses, channels or conduits to receive storm water runoff from
the proposed development site at a peak flow greater than that allowed by the standards in
effect at the time of approval of the development.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
2. In order to ensure that the storm water drainage facilities are constructed in
accordance with the approved design, the property owner or applicant shall provide to the
City an as-built plan detailing dimensions and elevations as well as certification that the
approved facilities were installed and properly working. The as-built plan shall be
completed by an Iowa licensed Professional Engineer, Surveyor, or Landscape Architect
and submitted to the City prior to the acceptance of any improvements or issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy. At the discretion of the City, a property owner or applicant may
satisfy the SWMP requirements by ensuring the conveyance of storm water discharge from
the property to a regional public detention facility.
3. The Storm Water Management Plan, including on-site storm water detention
facilities, shall be reviewed for the purpose of completing review of plans by the City
Engineer prior to issuance of foundation permits, or building permits for the site. The
improvements shall be constructed prior to the issuance of final certificates of occupancy.
The requirements of this subsection may be deferred at the discretion of the City Engineer.
4. For sites on which privately owned and maintained storm water detention and/or
conveyance facilities are located, the property owner shall be responsible for the following:
A. All future grading, repairs, and maintenance.
B. Maintenance of the minimum storm water detention volume, as approved
by the City Engineer.
C. Maintenance of the detention basin control structure(s) and discharge
pipe(s) to insure the maximum theoretical storm water release rate, as reviewed by
the City Engineer, is not increased.
5. The property owner shall place no fill material, or erect any buildings, obstructions,
or other improvements on the area reserved for storm water detention purposes, unless
otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
6. The property owner shall, when required by the City Engineer, dedicate to the City,
by instrument or final platting, any property on which public storm water detention basins
will be located. Ingress-egress easements for maintenance of public facilities shall be
provided prior to final site approval. Paved surface to basin is required if basin is not
located adjacent to a public road.
7. All public storm sewers shall be dedicated to the City.
8. Upon determination that a site is not in compliance with the SWMP and/or DNR
regulations, the City Engineer may issue an order to comply. The order shall describe the
problem and specify a date whereby the work must be completed, and indicate the penalties
to be assessed for further noncompliance.
9. Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall engage in construction of storm
water management facilities, unless a Storm Water Management Plan has been reviewed
and approved by the City Engineer.
10. Compliance with this chapter is achieved when:
A. The site plan has been approved.
B. The approved storm water drainage facilities have been implemented and
are demonstrably in conformance with the approved site plan and Design Manual.
11. It is the intent of this section that review of the storm water drainage system be
carried out simultaneously with the review of the request for a building permit. The site
plan required under this chapter may be submitted in a form which will satisfy the site plan
requirements set forth in the Building Code and Zoning Ordinance.
12. Before starting on construction regulated by this chapter, the applicant shall comply
with the requirements set forth in other applicable ordinances with respect to submission
and approval of subdivision plats, plans of improvements, building permits, inspections,
appeals and similar matters, as well as requirements of State statutes and the regulations of
any Department of the State of Iowa.
13. At the direction of the City Council, during times of flooding or excessive storm
water run-off, open loop geothermal heating/cooling system discharge may be required to
be diverted or discontinued from storm sewer or surface water drainage systems.
14. At the direction of the City Council, open loop geothermal heating/cooling systems
may be required to be modified to include a well re-injection system.
156.08 WAIVER AND APPEAL.
1. Higher Release Rate. The City Engineer may permit a higher storm water runoff
release rate from a development than set forth in the Master Drainage Plan and/or Design
Manual, provided the City Engineer determines that the proposed storm water runoff
release rate:
A. Will not adversely affect properties in the downstream portion of the
drainage system.
B. Will not adversely affect the drainage system or any watercourse.
C. Will not adversely affect the environment.
D. Will not be contrary to the goal and general objectives of this chapter and
will not adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare.
2. Waiver to City Engineer. An applicant may request a waiver from the requirements
of this chapter and/or the Design Manual by submitting an application in writing to the City
Engineer. This application shall identify the name of the developer and/or owner of the
property, a description and drawing of the proposed development, the location of the
proposed development and any other information requested by the City Engineer that is
reasonably necessary to evaluate the proposed development. The City Engineer may grant
a waiver if he/she determines that as a result of the waiver of the development:
A. It is not likely to adversely affect other properties.
B. It is not likely to adversely affect the drainage system or any watercourse.
C. It is not likely to adversely affect the environment.
D. It is not likely to be contrary to the goal and general objectives of this
chapter and the public health, safety and welfare.
E. There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in carrying out the
strict letter of this chapter.
F. The effect of the application of this chapter would be arbitrary and
unreasonable in this specific case.
3. Appeals to Building Board of Appeals. Any person affected by a decision of the
City Engineer given in connection with the administration or enforcement of this chapter
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Building Board of
Appeals. All requests for such hearing shall be made in writing and shall contain the
information set forth in subsection 2 of this section, plus such other information as may be
required by the Building Board of Appeals. In addition, the Building Board of Appeals
may request other information that is reasonably necessary to evaluate the request for
appeal.
A. The Building Board of Appeals shall use the standards set forth in
paragraphs A through F of subsection 2 of this section as criteria for evaluating
appeals.
B. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the time and place of the
meeting at least four (4) days prior to the meeting. At the meeting, the applicant
and the City Engineer shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause
why any decision should be sustained, modified, withdrawn, or variance granted.
C. The Building Board of Appeals by a majority vote may sustain, modify,
withdraw, or grant a waiver or variance on any decision of the City Engineer that
is appealed.
D. The rules of procedure of the Building Board of Appeals shall govern the
conduct of the meeting.
156.09 EROSION CONTROL. Storm water drainage facilities may not outlet onto adjacent
property unless downstream land has adequate means to convey runoff and erosion control
measures are taken to assure compliance with City and State erosion control regulations. Erosion
resulting from such outlet may not exceed soil erosion limits established by State law.
156.10 INSPECTION OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FEATURES.
1. The City Engineer, or his authorized representatives, shall establish and maintain a
storm water inspection schedule that includes but is not limited to:
A. Routine inspections.
B. Random inspections.
C. Inspections based upon public complaint.
D. Inspections based upon notice of possible violations.
E. Inspection of areas identified as having a higher than typical detention
requirement for sediment or pollutant exposure, such as construction sites,
detention and retention basins.
F. Inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with discharges
that begin to discharge above acceptable tolerance limits set by local, state or
federal water or sediment quality standards, or the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II storm water permit and the Clean Air Act.
G. Joint inspections with other agencies inspecting per environmental or safety
regulations as deemed necessary.
2. Inspections may include, but are not limited to the following:
A. Evaluating the condition and current need for maintenance of storm water
control features such as inlets, manholes, piping, detention and retention basins.
B. Sampling discharges, surface water, ground water, sediment material or
standing water in drainage control facilities as deemed necessary.
C. Reviewing maintenance and repair records of storm water facilities.
D. Verification that storm water facilities approved during construction plan
review, such as detention basins, retention basins, piping and inlets are present and
in good condition.
156.11 MAINTENANCE.
1. Owner Responsibility. The owner shall be responsible for all storm water drainage
facilities not officially dedicated and accepted by the City.
A. The City shall notify the owner of a storm water drainage facility of the
existence of a maintenance problem when the City has received a verified
complaint or a field inspection report.
B. If after notice and a reasonable time, the owner fails to properly maintain
the storm water drainage facility, the City may institute legal action to abate or
enjoin the violation. The City may also authorize City employees to enter the storm
water drainage facility to make it fully operative pursuant to City and State statute.
The property owner may bear the costs of such action.
2. City Responsibility. The City shall be responsible for maintenance of land and
storm water drainage facilities dedicated to the City. The City may provide maintenance
for storm water storage areas serving more than one lot which have not been dedicated to
the City. Such maintenance shall be subject to negotiation with the owner.
156.12 FINANCING.
1. Intent. It is the intent of this section to achieve the objectives of this chapter by:
A. Assuring compliance with the Master Drainage Plan and Design Manual in
terms of storm water runoff flow rates, thereby protecting downstream properties.
B. Promoting equity in terms of the financial responsibility of owners
developing either upstream or downstream properties.
2. Owner’s Responsibilities. The owner and/or developer shall be responsible for:
A. Installation of all storm water drainage facilities.
B. Purchase of all storm sewer pipe and their construction materials.
C. Design of all storm water drainage facilities in accordance with the Master
Drainage Plan and Design Manual.
D. Construction of all storm water storage areas, channels, swales, culverts,
ditches, streets, and pumping stations and similar facilities.
E. Payment of drainage fee at time of final plat.
F. Acquisition of all applicable permits and submittal of said permits to the
City for review.
G. Reconstruction of all downstream storm water drainage facilities
determined to have inadequate capacity as affected by increased water flow due to
open loop geothermal heating/cooling systems discharge.
H. Payment of application review fees set by City Council resolution at time
of open loop geothermal heating/cooling system project site plan submittal.
3. City’s Responsibilities. The City shall be responsible for:
A. Payment to the owner or developer of the difference in actual purchase price
between all pipes larger than 36 inches in size to be installed in a development and
the cost of a 36-inch pipe of the same material. The cost of installing the pipe is
exclusively the responsibility of the owner or developer. Notwithstanding
subsection 5 of this section, the owner shall be completely responsible for materials
and construction of bridges and culverts on streets not designated in the
transportation plan, unless the Council directly requires the extension on a nonmajor
street across a drainage way necessitating the installation of a bridge or
culvert, in which case the City financial responsibility shall be for the additional
costs associated with the bridge or culvert but only to the extent that the costs
exceed the costs of normal construction that would normally be borne by the owner.
B. Purchase of land designated for approved City-owned storm water storage
areas. The land purchase price shall be established by independent appraisal of the
fair market value of the subject parcel. The appraisal shall be obtained by the City
and the cost of this appraisal shall be borne by the City.
(1) In the event of a dispute between the owner and the City as to the
value of the property, a second independent appraisal shall be obtained.
Both the owner and the City shall have the opportunity to present evidence
of this appraisal. The decision of this appraiser shall be considered the final
administrative act within the City. The cost of this appraisal shall be borne
equally by the owner and the City.
(2) To qualify for City acquisition, storm water storage areas shall:
(a) Be part of an approved subdivision plat inside the corporate
limits of the City.
(b) Serve more than one lot.
(c) Be dedicated to the City.
(d) Not be hard-surfaced.
(e) Meet the design standards of the City.
(f) Be inspected by the City.
4. Drainage Fee. The owner of all new subdivision final plats and all new planned
development final development plans shall pay a storm water management fee prior to
Council consideration of such final plat or final development plan. Such fee shall be
established by resolution of the Council.
A. Such money shall be placed in a special fund to be used for the purpose of
financing the City’s responsibilities set forth in subsection 3 of this section.
B. Single-family residential subdivisions containing two lots or less are
exempt from the drainage fee provided the lots created by such subdivision are one
acre or more in size.
5. Shared Responsibilities. The owner and the City shall share financial responsibility
in the following instances:
A. Bridges and Culverts. The City shall be responsible for purchasing the
materials for bridges and culverts needed as part of major streets as designated in
the Transportation Plan. The owner shall be responsible for construction and
installation of bridges and culverts. The owner shall be completely responsible for
bridges and culverts on streets not designated in the Transportation Plan.
B. Channels. The use of open channels with or without improvements is
available to developers. Cost participation by the City is subject to negotiation
between the developer and the City at the time of platting.
6. (Repealed by Ord. 11-04 – May 13 Supp.)
156.13 SUMP PUMP CONNECTIONS.
1. New Construction. All new construction of a principal use on a lot shall provide
for connection of sump water discharge to a dedicated City drain tile or storm sewer
whenever such drain tile or storm sewer is located immediately adjacent to such lot or
located within twenty-five (25) feet thereof in the public right-of-way or a drainage
easement.
2. Existing Development. Upon determination that a nuisance exists, the City
Engineer is authorized to require a property owner to connect a sump water discharge hose
or other device for storm water runoff to a dedicated City drain tile or storm sewer system,
or surface drainage way or slope, provided such drain tile or storm sewer is located
immediately adjacent to or located within twenty-five (25) thereof, in the public right-ofway
or a drainage easement, of the property causing the nuisance.
156.14 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
1. This chapter does not imply that site development will be free from storm water
damage, nor shall it create liability on the part of the City for damages caused by
unanticipated storms or storm sequences.
2. It is not intended that this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any statutory
provision, administrative regulation, common law right, existing easement, express or
implied, covenant or deed restriction controlling storm water. When this chapter imposes
greater restrictions, however, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
3. Responsibility. The failure of City officials to observe or foresee hazardous or
unsightly conditions, or impose other or additional conditions or requirements, or to deny
or revoke permits or approvals, or to stop work in violation of this chapter shall not relieve
the property owners of the consequences of their actions or inactions or result in the City,
its officers or agents being liable therefore or on account thereof. Notwithstanding any
provisions of this chapter, every applicant bears final and complete responsibility for
compliance with the NPDES General Permit #2 and any other requirements of state or
federal law or administrative rule.
156.15 PENALTIES. Any person who engages in development of a site within the area of
jurisdiction of this chapter before meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to one
or more of the following:
1. The standard penalty as provided in Section 1.06 of this Code of Ordinances or may
be cited for a municipal infraction under Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances or may be
subject to any other remedy allowed by law.
2. No foundation permits or building permits shall be issued for the property in
question until the violations are corrected.
3. No permanent certificates of occupancy shall be issued for property in question
until the violations are corrected. Any existing certificate of occupancy may be rescinded.
4. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, the provisions expressed herein
shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall be liberally constructed in favor of
the City consistent with the purposes and guiding principles of this chapter.
A. Whenever the City Engineer finds such a nuisance exists, the City Engineer
shall cause notice to be served on the owner of the property causing the nuisance in
the same manner as provided in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
B. In the event the person neglects or fails to abate the nuisance as directed by
the City Engineer, the City may cause the nuisance to be abated as provided in
Chapter 50. The City Engineer may also choose to institute proceedings under civil
enforcement as provided in this Code of Ordinances or municipal infractions as
provided in Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.
C. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing and appeal as
provided under Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ch. 156 - Ord. 10-30 – Nov. 10 Supp.)
CHAPTER 157
STORM WATER UTILITY
157.01 Findings and Declarations of Policy 157.08 Customer Classification
157.02 Establishment 157.09 Charge Formulas
157.03 Authority 157.10 Fees
157.04 Interpretation 157.11 Credits and Adjustments
157.05 Severability of Provisions 157.12 Budget-Excess Revenues
157.06 Definitions 157.13 Effective Date
157.07 Basis of Charge 157.14 Residential Storm Water Rebates
157.01 FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS OF POLICY. The City of Marion finds that the
management of storm water and other surface water discharges within and beyond the City of
Marion is a matter that affects the health, safety and welfare of the City, its citizens and businesses,
and others in the surrounding area. Failure to effectively manage storm water affects the sanitary
sewer utility operations of the City by, among other things, increasing infiltration to the sanitary
sewer. In addition, surface water runoff causes erosion of lands, damage to businesses and
residences, sedimentation, and other environmental damage in the City of Marion and/or
surrounding area. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the City of Marion
is establishing a storm water utility for storm water management services.
157.02 ESTABLISHMENT. There is hereby established a storm water utility in the City of
Marion. The operation of the storm water utility shall be under the supervision of the City
Engineer. Activities and projects funded by the storm water utility, including operation,
maintenance and construction of the City’s storm water management program and infrastructure
shall be overseen by the City Engineer.
157.03 AUTHORITY. The City, acting through the storm water utility, may acquire, construct,
lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand, replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage and
finance such facilities, operations and activities, as are deemed by the City to be proper and
reasonably necessary for a system of storm and surface water management. These facilities may
include, without limitation due to enumeration, surface and underground drainage facilities,
sewers, watercourses, retaining walls, ponds, streets, roads, ditches, dams and such other facilities
as will support a storm water management system.
157.04 INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be interpreted liberally to secure the ends sought hereby and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the Iowa statutes.
157.05 SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS. If any section, provisions or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of this chapter shall not
be affected thereby.
157.06 DEFINITIONS. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be defined in accordance with the definitions in Section 176.39 (Flood Plain
Regulations), Chapter 175 (Subdivision Regulations) and Chapter 156 (Storm Water
Management). Words or phrases not defined below or in said chapters shall be interpreted so as
to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
1. “City Engineer” means the City Engineer of the City or his/her designated
representative.
2. “Committee” means a working group appointed by the Mayor to provide review of
applications regarding requests for credits and adjustments by non-residential properties.
3. “Developed Property.” A property shall be considered to be developed if:
A. A certificate of occupancy has been issued for a building or structure on the
property or, if no certificate of occupancy has been issued, upon substantial
completion of construction or final inspection; or
B. Construction of an improvement on the property is at least fifty (50) percent
completed and such construction has ceased for a period of at least 3 months,
whether consecutive or not.
4. “Equivalent Runoff Unit” or “ERU” means the basic unit by which the storm water
utility charge is calculated under this chapter. It is the statistical average horizontal
impervious area of residential living units within the City of Marion on the date of the
establishment of the storm water utility. The horizontal impervious area includes, but is not
limited to, all areas covered by structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways,
sidewalks, pavement, gravel, compacted clay, and loading docks.
5. “Impervious Area” means a surface which has been compacted or covered with a
layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by rain water. The term includes,
without limitation due to enumeration, all areas covered by structures, roof extensions,
patios, porches, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, pavement, gravel, compacted clay, and
loading docks, all as measured on a horizontal plane.
6. “Living Unit” means a room or group of rooms including cooking
accommodations, occupied by one family, and in which not more than two persons, other
than members of the family, are lodged or boarded for compensation at any one time.
7. “Nonresidential Property” means a lot or parcel of land, with improvements such
as a building, structure, other impervious areas as defined herein, grading or substantial
landscaping, which is not exclusively residential as defined herein, or is a developed
residential parcel with five or more living units. This includes, but is not limited to,
commercial, industrial, institutional, mixed-use, governmental property, manufactured
home parks, and multi-family residential parcels with five or more living units. This
excludes publicly-owned right-of-way and publicly-owned or privately-owned rail beds.
8. “Residential Property” means a lot or parcel of land developed exclusively for
residential purposes. For the purpose of this chapter, it includes single-family homes,
condominiums, duplexes, and multi-family parcels with three or four living units.
9. “Storm Water Utility” means the utility established under this chapter for the
purpose of managing storm water and imposing charges for the recovery of costs connected
with such storm water management.
10. “Undeveloped Property” means property that is not developed by the addition of
an improvement such as a building, structure, other impervious area as defined herein,
grading or substantial landscaping which increases storm water runoff.
157.07 BASIS OF CHARGE. By this chapter, the City Council is establishing the rate
classification and basis for computation of charge for storm water services for each lot and parcel
within the City of Marion. All charges established pursuant to this chapter shall be fair and
reasonable. Storm water utility charges shall be based on the number of Equivalent Runoff Units
(ERUs) assigned to each parcel, plus a monthly service charge. The ERU charge shall be assessed
based upon the impervious area as reasonably determined by the City Engineer, except for
undeveloped properties and publicly owned right-of-way and rail beds, which are exempt from
storm water utility charges.
157.08 CUSTOMER CLASSIFICATION.
1. Customer Classes. For the purposes of imposing the storm water charges, all lots
and parcels within the City are classified into the following four (4) customer classes.
A. Residential
B. Non-residential
C. Undeveloped
D. Right-of-Way
2. Parcel Classification. The City Engineer shall assign a customer classification to
each lot and parcel within the City of Marion.
3. ERU. The ERU is established to be 2,791 square feet.
157.09 CHARGE FORMULAS.
1. Residential. The monthly charge imposed for single and multi-family residential
properties shall be the fee for one ERU per living unit existing on the property, plus a per
account service charge, i.e.
Residential Storm Water Fee = (ERU Fee x No. of Living Units) + (Account
Service Charge x No. of Accounts)
2. Non-Residential. The monthly charge imposed for non-residential and mixed use
properties shall be the fee for one ERU, multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by
dividing the total square footage of impervious area of the property by the square footage
of one ERU, rounded to the nearest one-tenth (0.1), plus a per account service charge. For
multiple contiguous parcels under the same ownership and with one potable water meter
(non-irrigation/fire) serving all the lots, lot areas shall be aggregated into one account and
charged, i.e.
Non-residential Parcel Charge = (Parcel Impervious Area ÷ 2,791 ft.² x ERU Fee)
+ Account Service Charge
3. Undeveloped. There shall be no charges imposed on parcels during the time period
in which they are defined herein as undeveloped.
4. Right-Of-Way. Public highway, road, alley, and rail right-of-way shall be exempt
from the storm water utility fee.
5. Minimum Charge. The minimum charges for any customer charged a fee shall be
equal to the fee for one ERU, plus a per account service charge, in the absence of a credit
or adjustment approved by the City Engineer. The fee for parcels with more than one-half
of an ERU of impervious area (1395 square feet) shall be rounded up to one (1) ERU. Noncontiguous
parcels with less than one-half of an ERU of impervious area (1395 square feet)
shall be rounded down to zero, and the service fee waived.
6. The maximum charges for any customer charged a fee shall be one ERU, multiplied
by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total square footage of impervious area of
the property by the square footage of one ERU, rounded to the nearest one-tenth (0.1), plus
a per account service charge, in the absence of a credit or adjustment approved by the City
Engineer.
Five Year Phase-Out of Maximum Fee (Non-Residential). The following phase-out is to
be in effect at the start of the next water billing cycle following the effective date of this
subsection. Non-residential properties which consist of an ERU amount that does not
exceed one of the five threshold amounts, will be charged based on their total ERU.
FY18 – 100 ERU x $1.67 = $167 + $3.50 (Administrative Fee) = $170.50 Storm
Water Utility
FY19 – 200 ERU x $1.67 = $334 + $3.50 (Administrative Fee) = $337.50 Storm
Water Utility
FY20 – 300 ERU x $1.67 = $501 + $3.50 (Administrative Fee) = $504.50 Storm
Water Utility
FY21 – 400 ERU x $1.67 = $668 + $3.50 (Administrative Fee) = $671.50 Storm
Water Utility
FY22 – No Cap = Total ERU of parcel x $1.67 + $3.50 (Administrative Fee) =
Storm Water Utility
(Ord. 17-30 – Feb. 18 Supp.)
7. Impervious Area Measurement. The City Engineer shall be responsible for
determining the impervious area of nonresidential parcels based on the best available
information, including, but not limited to, data supplied by the City Assessor, City Building
Inspector, City Engineering Staff, aerial photography, property owner, tenant, or
developer. The City Engineer may require additional information as necessary to make the
determination. The number of ERUs shall be updated by the City Engineer based on any
additions to the impervious area as approved through the building permit process.
157.10 FEES. The City Council shall set or adjust the ERU fee to reflect to costs of the storm
water management program, and shall set the application fee for credit and adjustments to reflect
the cost of application processing and review.
1. Storm Water Utility Charge Rate.
A. ERU Rate. The storm water utility ERU charge rate is hereby established to
be $1.67 per month per ERU.
B. Service Charge. The storm water utility service charge is hereby established
to be $3.50 per month per account.
(Ord. 17-30 – Feb. 18 Supp.)
2. Credit and Adjustment Application Fees.
A. The fee for storm water utility credit and adjustment applications received
on or after the effective date of this chapter shall be $50 for credit applications and
$25 for adjustment applications.
B. The fee for storm water utility credit and adjustment applications received
before the effective date of this chapter shall be waived.
C. Application fees for all applications that result in the approval of a credit or
adjustment shall receive a 100% rebate.
157.11 CREDITS AND ADJUSTMENTS. The City Council shall adopt, by separate
resolution, criteria for providing credits and adjustments. The resolution shall explain the criteria
for calculating credits and adjustments and provides application materials for each. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to prove, using the credits and adjustments manual, that a
parcel is eligible for either a credit or an adjustment.
1. Credits.
A. Eligibility. Customer may be eligible for a credit, in the form of a reduced
ERU multiplier for properties where all of the following conditions apply:
(1) The City’s cost of providing service or making service available to
the property has been lessened.
(2) The property conforms to all applicable ordinances and standards of
the City of Marion in effect at the time of parcel development.
(3) The property has been assigned a nonresidential user classification
by the City Engineer.
B. Maximum Credit. The maximum aggregate credit for any individual
property is 65% of its ERU charge, regardless of how many types of credits the
property qualifies.
C. Credit Types. The following credits may be available to customers for
properties that meet all of the eligibility criteria of subsection 1(A).
(1) Peak Flow Control, Volume Reduction and Water Quality Control
Credits. Credits shall be considered for customers who own and maintain
storm water management facilities such as retention or detention basins that
meet or exceed existing peak flow rate, volume, and water quality
requirements. The maximum aggregate credit for any individual property
that receives one or more of the credit types described in paragraph (a), (b)
and/or (c) is 50% of its ERU charge, regardless of how many types of credits
the property qualifies. The credit amount awarded to any parcel shall be
pro-rated based on the fraction of impervious area draining to a discharge
point where credit requirements are met.
(a) Peak Flow Control Credit. Credits shall be considered for
customers who own and maintain storm water management facilities
such as retention or detention basins that meet or exceed the peak
discharge rate standards contained or referenced in the City’s Storm
Water Management Ordinance, Chapter 156. Up to a 12.5% credit
may awarded for meeting existing storm water standards, and up to
25% credit may be awarded for exceeding existing storm water
standards.
(b) Runoff Volume Reduction Credit. Credits shall be
considered for customers who own and maintain storm water
management facilities such as infiltration basins or biofiltration
devices that exceed the infiltration standards referenced in the City’s
Storm Water Management Ordinance, Chapter 156. Up to a 12.5%
credit may awarded for meeting existing storm water standards, and
up to 25% credit may be awarded for exceeding existing storm water
standards.
(c) Water Quality Credit. Credits shall be considered for
customers who own and maintain storm water management facilities
that improve the quality of runoff from the property to a degree that
exceeds the water quality standards contained or referenced in the
City’s Storm Water Management Ordinance, Chapter 156. Up to a
12.5% credit may awarded for meeting existing storm water
standards, and up to 25% credit may be awarded for exceeding
existing storm water standards.
(2) Other. Other proposals may be considered on a case-by-case basis.
All such proposals must either directly reduce the City’s cost of managing
storm water runoff, or contribute directly towards improving the quality or
reducing the quantity of runoff discharged into the City’s municipal
separated storm sewer system. Such proposals may receive up to 15%
credit, towards the 65% maximum.
2. Adjustments. A customer may be eligible to have the number of ERUs assigned to
their property adjusted under the conditions described below:
A. Nonresidential Property.
(1) Properties assigned a non-residential user classification may be
eligible to have the property reclassified as undeveloped if the property
owner can show that the cumulative impervious area on the parcel is less
than half of the impervious area of one ERU.
(2) Nonresidential customers who believe the number of ERUs
allocated to their property to be incorrect may submit an adjustment request
to the City Engineer. The allocated ERUs may be adjusted if the owner can
provide information showing the square footage calculation as determined
in subsections 157.09(2) and 157.09(6) to be incorrect.
B. Residential. Residential customers who believe that the number of ERUs
allocated to their property to be incorrect may submit an adjustment request to the
City Engineer. The allocated ERUs may be adjusted if the owner can provide
information showing the number of living units assigned to their property, as
determined in subsection 157.09(1) to be incorrect.
3. Review Procedure.
A. Within thirty (30) days of the submission of a request to the City Engineer
for a credit or an adjustment, the City Engineer shall issue a written decision as to
whether the request for adjustment, as determined by the Committee, should be
granted, denied or granted in part. The written decision shall also set forth the
reason or reasons tor such decision. The decision shall be sent to the customer by
certified mail, and a copy to the City Manager.
B. If an appeal is requested, the City Manager shall determine whether the
Committee’s decision should be approved, rejected, or modified. The customer
shall be allowed to present additional written evidence. The final determination of
the City Manager shall be in writing and set forth, in detail, the reason or reasons
for the decision and shall inform the customer by certified mail.
4. Effective Date. Any ERU adjustment or credit granted shall thereafter be used to
calculate the customer’s user charges. The reduction shall only apply for the period of time
subsequent to the filing of the request for adjustment. There shall be no retroactive
adjustment for user charges imposed prior to the filing of the request.
157.12 BUDGET-EXCESS REVENUES.
1. The City shall separately account for the storm water utility finances. The City
Engineer shall prepare an annual budget, which is to include all operation and maintenance
costs, costs of borrowing and other costs related to the operation of the utility. The budget
shall be reviewed annually and subject to approval by the City Council. Any excess of
revenues over expenditures in a year will be deposited in a storm water maintenance fund,
which will be used to defer the costs of capital improvements or to retire debt.
2. Bills. Storm water utility charges shall be billed to the utility account or accounts
associated with each property. In the event that there are multiple utility accounts
associated with a single property, the charge shall be divided among accounts based on the
best available information regarding the relative number of living units or amount of
impervious area associated with each account. In the event of late or non-payment by utility
account holders, the property owner shall be responsible for payment of all storm water
utility charges.
3. Unpaid Charges. The fees provided for in this chapter may be collected by all
available legal means and may also be secured by levy and certification by the Council to
the Linn County Auditor to be collected in the same manner and subject to the State
penalties as special taxes, in accordance with State laws.
157.13 EFFECTIVE DATE. The ordinance codified by this chapter shall be in full force and
effect on October 7, 2013, after its passage and publication. When the City Manager determines
to implement Chapter 157 of the Code of Ordinances, the City Manager shall file a certification to
that effect with the City Clerk and shall provide copies thereof to members of the City Council.
157.14 RESIDENTIAL STORM WATER REBATES. Storm water runoff from residential
properties can pick up pollutants such as lawn fertilizer, pet waste, and trash, and carry those into
storm sewers, creeks, and rivers. Storm water Best Management Practices - or BMPs - such as rain
gardens, rain barrels, and soil quality restoration can be used in residential yards to capture storm
water where it falls and allow for it to infiltrate into the ground. Methods exist to improve the
quality of storm water runoff and increase local awareness of the importance of protecting our
local streams and lakes. The City has therefore created a Residential Cost-Sharing Program to
provide for Storm water Best Management Practices Rebates to assist in the promotion of such
methods to capture and infiltrate storm water in residential areas.
1. Rebates for Storm water Best Management Practices.
A. Rain Garden. Shallow depressions that contain permeable soils and native
plants where rain water is collected from yards and downspouts. Rain water
collected is for absorption by the roots of the native plants and also naturally
infiltrates into the earth. The rebate for a rain garden would be up to $400 to include
actual associated costs upon installation of associated improvements with a limit of
a onetime rebate per residence.
B. Rain Barrel. Used for collecting rain water from roofs and downspouts. This
water can then be used to water plants, gardens, lawns, or even for flushing toilets.
The rebate for a rain barrel would be up to $50 per rain barrel to include actual
associated costs upon installation of associated equipment with a limit of a onetime
rebate per residence.
C. Lawn Soil Improvement. Soil quality restoration is a simple but effective
way to improve the ability of lawns to absorb rainwater. A process of soil aeration
and compost application improves the root systems of lawn grass and allows for
better rainwater absorption. The rebate for soil quality restoration would be up to
$350 upon completion of improvements to include actual associated costs with a
limit of a onetime rebate per residence.
2. Stormwater Best Management Application.
A. Rain Garden Rebate application must be completed and approved by the
Engineering Department and requires submittal of a detailed plan prior to applicant
initiating rain garden installation.
B. Rain Barrel application must be completed and approved by the
Engineering Department prior to purchase of equipment by the applicant.
C. Lawn Soil Improvement Rebate application must be completed and
approved by the Engineering Department and requires submittal of a detailed plan
prior to applicant initiating lawn soil quality improvements.
D. Applications for rebates, upon receipt, will be reviewed by City staff within
15 days.
3. Storm water Best Management Funding and Program Maintenance.
A. City will provide an annual maximum funded amount ($5,000 FY 15/16)
for the support of the program participation.
B. City shall maintain a GIS Mapping Data Base and Inspection Program of
all locations of residential storm water BMP projects installed as part of this
program.
(Ord. 15-18 – Aug. 15 Supp.)
(Ch. 157 - Ord. 13-09 – May 13
CHAPTER 160
BUILDING CODE
160.01 International Building Code Adopted 160.20 Glazing Adjacent to Doors
160.02 Amendments to the Building Code 160.21 Repeal of Section (Window Sills)
160.03 Name of Jurisdiction 160.22 Automatic Sprinkler Systems
160.04 Work exempt from Permit IBC Decks 160.23 Smoke Alarms
160.05 Work exempt from Permit IRC Sheds 160.24 Swimming Pool Drainage Systems
160.06 Work exempt from Permit IRC Decks 160.25 Chimney Enclosures
160.07 Expiration 160.26 Repeal of Section – Lighting Systems
160.08 Schedule of Permit Fees 160.27 Incidental Uses Area Limitations
160.09 Valuation 160.28 NFPA 13R Sprinkler Systems
160.10 Re-inspection Fees 160.29 Fire Alarms Group R-2
160.11 Certificate of Occupancy 160.30 Repeal of Exception (Door To Remain Unlocked)
160.12 Board of Appeals 160.31 Fuel Gas Piping
160.13 Violations and Penalties 160.32 Exception (Backwater Valve)
160.14 Townhouse 160.33 Frost Closure
160.15 Design Criteria 160.34 Slab on Grade Foundations
160.16 Exterior Walls 160.35 Foundation Drainage Systems
160.17 Two-Family Dwellings 160.36 Code on File
160.18 Opening Protection 160.37 Condominium Conversions
160.19 Fire Protection of Floors
160.01 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED. Except as hereinafter added to,
deleted, modified or amended, there is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City that certain
Building Code known as the International Building Code, 2018 Edition and International
Residential Code, 2018 Edition, First Printings, as prepared and edited by the International Code
Council, Inc. and the provisions of said Building Code shall be controlling in the construction of
buildings and other structures and in all matters covered by said Building Code within the
corporate limits of the City and shall be known as the Marion Building Code.
160.02 AMENDMENTS TO THE BUILDING CODE. Certain sections and portions of
sections of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition and International Residential Code,
2018 Edition, are hereby amended, deleted, modified or added to as more specifically set forth in
the following sections of this chapter.
160.03 NAME OF JURISDICTION. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by
inserting “City of Marion” as the name of jurisdiction into Section 101.1 of the International
Building Code, 2018 Edition, and Section R101.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018
Edition.
160.04 WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT. IBC DECKS The Marion Building Code is
hereby amended by adding a new numbered item to Section 105.2 of the International Building
Code, 2018 Edition, as follows:
Building:
14. Unenclosed residential dwelling unit platforms or decks not more than 30 inches above
adjoining grade and not over any basement or story and not supporting a roof or unusual
loads.
160.05 WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT. IRC SHEDS The Marion Building Code is
hereby amended by repealing Section R105.2 Building: Exception #1 of the International
Residential Code, 2018 Edition, and by replacing said Exception with new Exception, as follows:
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and
similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet.
160.06 WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT. IRC DECKS The Marion Building Code is
hereby amended by repealing Section R105.2 Building: Exception #10 of the International
Residential Code, 2018 Edition, and by replacing said Exception with new Exception, as follows:
Building:
10. Unenclosed platforms or decks not more than 30 inches above adjoining grade and not
over any basement or story and not supporting a roof or unusual loads.
160.07 EXPIRATION. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by adding a new Section
105.5.1 to the International Building Code, 2018 Edition and International Residential Code, 2018
Edition, as follows:
105.5.1 EXPIRATION. Every building permit issued under the provisions of the Code
shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of issue, unless the application is
accompanied by a construction schedule of specific longer duration, in which
instance the permit may be issued for the term of the construction schedule. If the
work has not been completed by the expiration date of the permit, no further work
shall be done until the permit shall have been renewed by the owner or his or her
agent and by payment of the renewal fee as set forth in Table 1-A SHEDULE OF
FEES as adopted by resolution of the Marion City Council, and provided no
changes have been made in plans or location. No permit shall be renewed more
than once.
160.08 SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by
repealing Section 109.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition and Section R108.2 of
the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, and by replacing said sections with a new section
as follows:
108.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. On buildings, structures or alterations requiring a
permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as set forth in Table 1-A SCHEDULE
OF FEES as adopted by resolution.
160.09 VALUATION. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by adding a new Section
109.3.1 to the International Building Code, 2018 Edition and Section R108.3.1 to the International
Residential Code, 2018 Edition, as follows:
108.3.1 Valuation. Valuation for the purpose of establishing permit fees for new
construction, additions or alterations to existing buildings shall be determined by
the Building Official from the MARION VALUATION SHEET as adopted by
resolution of the City of Marion City Council.
160.10 RE-INSPECTION FEES. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by adding a
new Section 109.7 to the International Building Code, 2018 Edition and Section R108.7 to the
International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, as follows:
108.7 Re-inspections. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection
when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete
or when corrections called for are not made.
This section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the first time a
job is rejected for failure to comply with requirements of this code, but as
controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such
inspection or re-inspection.
Re-inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection card is not posted or
otherwise available on the work site, the property and building address are not
properly posted, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for
failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for
deviating from plans requiring the approval of the building official.
160.11 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended
by repealing Section 111.2 Number (3) of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition and
Section R110.3 Number (3) of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition and leaving said
section numbers (3) blank.
160.12 BOARD OF APPEALS. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by repealing
Section 113.1 from the International Building Code, 2018 Edition and Section R112.1 of the
International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, and by replacing said Sections with new Sections
as follows:
113.1/R112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this Code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of
Appeals, consisting of The members of the Construction Codes Review
Board as established in City of Marion Code of Ordinances Section 30.05.
The Building Official or designated representative shall be an ex-officio
member without a vote and shall act as secretary of the Board.
The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its
investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the
Building Official with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and may recommend to
the City Council such new legislation as is consistent therewith. The Board shall
hold a regular meeting on the fourth Tuesday of each month, unless there are no
appeals or business on file for a hearing.
Nominal appeal fee to the Board of Appeals shall be paid as set forth in Table
1-A SCHEDULE OF FEES as adopted by resolution of the City Council. The
appeal shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of the Board approval to
the commencement of work and to the completion of work undertaken
pursuant to the approval.
160.13 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by
repealing Section 114.4 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, and Section R113.4 of
the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, and by replacing said Sections with new
Sections, as follows:
114.4/R113.4 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. Any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation
of any provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted and upon
conviction of any such violations such person shall be punished in a manner
provided in Chapter 4 of the Code of Ordinances.
160.14 TOWNHOUSE. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by repealing the
definition of Townhouse in Section 202 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, and
International Residential Code, 2018 Edition and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of two or
more attached units in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a
yard or public way on at least two sides.
160.15 DESIGN CRITERIA. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by inserting
climate and geographical design criteria into Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential
Code, 2018 Edition as follows:
160.16 EXTERIOR WALLS. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by repealing
Sections R302.1 Exception 2. of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition and by replacing
said Exception with a new Exception 2. as follows:
Exception 2. Fire separation distance based on an imaginary line between two buildings on
the same lot shall not apply to walls separating dwellings from their accessory structures.
160.17 TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by
repealing Section R302.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition and by replacing
said section with a new Section R302.3 as follows:
R302.3 Two-family dwellings. Dwelling units in two-family dwellings shall be
considered as townhouses and shall be separated from each other with wall
assemblies in compliance with Section R302.2 or shall be constructed as a two-unit
dwelling in compliance with the International Building Code.
Exception: Wall assemblies separating two-unit townhouses need not extend
through attic spaces when the ceiling is protected by not less than 5/8 inch Type X
gypsum board and an attic draft stop constructed as specified in Section R302.12.1
is provided above and along the wall assembly separating dwellings. The structural
framing supporting the ceiling shall also be protected by not less than ½ inch
gypsum board or equivalent.
160.18 OPENING PROTECTION. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by
repealing Sections R302.5.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition and by replacing
said section with a new Section R302.5.1 as follows:
R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used
for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage
and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than 1 3/8 inches
in thickness, solid or honeycomb-core steel doors not less than 1 3/8 inches thick,
or 20-minute fire-rated doors.
160.19 FIRE PROTECTION OF FLOORS. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended
by repealing Section R302.13 of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition and leaving said
section blank.
160.20 GLAZING ADJACENT TO DOORS. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended
by repealing Section R308.4.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition and by
replacing said section with a new Section R308.4.3 as follows:
R308.4.3 Glazing adjacent to doors. Glazing in an individual fixed or operable panel
adjacent to a door where the nearest vertical edge of the glazing is within a 24
inch arc of either vertical edge of the door in a closed position and where the
Ground
Snow Load
Wind
Speed
Mph
Topo.
Special
Wind
Debris
Seismic
Design
Category
Subject To Damage From Winter
Design
Temp
Ice Shield
Underlayment
Required
Flood Hazards Air
Freezing
Index
Mean
Annual
Weathering Frost Temp
Line
Depth
Termite Decay NFIP
Adoption
FIRM
Maps
30 PSF 115 NO A Severe 42”
Moderate-
Heavy
Slight-
Moderate
-5 F YES 1982 7/5/82 1784 48.9
bottom exposed edge of the glazing is less than 60 inches above the floor or
walking surface shall be considered to be a hazardous location.
Exceptions:
1. Decorative glazing.
2. Where there is an intervening wall or other permanent barrier between the door
and the glazing.
3. Where access through the door is to a closet or storage area 3 feet or less in
depth. Glazing in this application shall comply with Section R308.4.3.
4. Glazing that is adjacent to the fixed panel of patio doors.
160.21 REPEAL OF SECTION (WINDOW SILLS). The Marion Building Code is hereby
amended by repealing Section 1015.8 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition and
Section R312.2.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, and leaving said sections
blank.
160.22 AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS. The Marion Building Code is hereby
amended by repealing Section R313 of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, and by
replacing said section with a new section as follows:
SECTION R313
AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic residential fire
sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all attached townhouse dwelling units when
any of the following conditions exist:
1. The townhouses are constructed in a group of more than four attached units.
2. Any individual townhouse dwelling unit of a structure with four or fewer
attached townhouses has a floor area greater than 4000 square feet on any one
story or greater than 8,000 square feet of total floor area for all stories,
excluding non-habitable areas separated from the rest of the building by a
minimum of one-hour fire-resistive construction and containing smoke or heat
detection interconnected with the dwelling unit smoke alarms.
Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required
when additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses that do not
have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.
R313.1.1 Design and installation. Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems for
townhouses shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section P2904.
R313.2 One and two-family dwellings automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic
residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in one and two-family dwellings when the
following conditions exist:
1. The one or two-family dwelling has a floor area greater than 4000 square feet
on any one story or greater than 8000 square feet of total floor area for all
stories, excluding non-habitable areas separated from the rest of the building by
a minimum of one-hour fire-resistive construction and containing smoke or heat
detection interconnected with the dwelling unit smoke alarms.
Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required
when additions or alterations are made to existing one- and two-family
dwellings that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system
installed.
R313.2.1 Design and installation. Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems for one-and
two-family dwellings shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section P2904.
R313.3 Alternative Methods. Maximum floor area square footages of Sections R313.1 and
R313.2 may be increased by 25% for buildings or floors containing more than one egress door
as specified in Section R311.2 or more than one vertical egress as specified in Section R311.4
or other approved alternate methods of building occupant egress enhancement.
160.23 SMOKE ALARMS. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by repealing
Sections R314 of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition and by replacing said section
with a new Section R314 as follows:
SECTION R314
SMOKE ALARMS
R314.1 Smoke detection and notification. Smoke alarms shall be listed and labeled in
accordance with UL 217 and installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and the
household fire warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72.
R314.2 Smoke detection systems. Household fire alarm systems installed in accordance
with NFPA 72 that include smoke alarms, or a combination of smoke detector and audible
notification devices installed as required by this section for smoke alarms, shall be permitted.
R314.3 Location. Smoke alarms shall be installed in the following locations:
1. In each sleeping room.
2. Outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms.
3. On each story of the dwelling including basements.
R314.3.1 Alterations, repairs and additions. When alterations, repairs or additions
requiring a permit occur, or when one or more sleeping rooms are added or created in existing
dwellings, the dwelling unit shall be equipped with smoke alarms in locations as required in
R314.3 for new dwellings.
Exceptions:
1. Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as the replacement of
roofing or siding, or the addition or replacement of windows or doors, or the
addition of an open porch or deck, are exempt from the requirements of this
section.
2. Installation, alteration or repairs of plumbing or mechanical systems are exempt
from the requirements of this section.
R314.4 Power source. Smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building
wiring when such wiring is served from a commercial source, and when primary power is
interrupted, shall receive power from a battery. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than those required for overcurrent protection.
Exception: Hard wiring of smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required
where the alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or
ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or
basement available which could provide access for hard wiring without the removal
of interior finishes.
R314.5 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed
within an individual dwelling unit in accordance with Section R314.3, the alarm devices shall
be interconnected in such a manner that the actuation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms
in the individual unit. Physical interconnection of smoke alarms shall not be required where
listed wireless alarms are installed and all alarms sound upon activation of any one alarm.
Exception: Interconnection of smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required
where alterations or repairs do not result in removal of interior wall or ceiling
finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement
available which could provide access for interconnection without removal of
interior finishes.
160.24 SWIMMING POOL DRAINAGE SYSTEMS. The Marion Building Code is hereby
amended by adding a new Section R326.1.1 to the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition,
as follows:
R326.1.1 Swimming pool drainage discharge. Swimming pools shall be designed and
constructed so as to provide for appropriate drainage of water resulting from
overfilling, draining, and maintenance operations. The site plan for a proposed
swimming pool shall indicate where pool drainage is to be directed in such a
manner that:
(A) Swimming pool drainage water shall be directed away from any structure
foundation.
(B) Ponding of surface water shall be avoided
(C) Swimming pool drainage water shall whenever possible be directed to
available drainage tile or storm sewer systems.
(D) Surface water shall not be discharged to any adjacent private property except
upon drainage easements or established waterways shall not be altered so
that upstream water flow is adversely affected.
(E) Water flow shall be controlled to avoid excessive volume or velocity which
could cause soil erosion or create other possible hazards.
160.25 CHIMNEY ENCLOSURES. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by adding
a new Section 429 to the International Building Code, 2018 Edition and Section R328 to the
International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, respectively as follows:
429/R328 CHIMNEY ENCLOSURES. All enclosed chimneys serving solid fuel burning
fireplaces and appliances shall be separated from the structure to which they are
attached by installation of materials approved for one-hour fire resistive
construction on the chimney side of the enclosure. The separation shall extend
from the base of the appliance to the outer roofline.
160.26 REPEAL OF SECTION – LIGHTING SYSTEMS. The Marion Building Code is
hereby amended by repealing Section N1104.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition
and leaving said section blank.
160.27 INCIDENTAL USES AREA LIMITATIONS. The Marion Building Code is hereby
amended by repealing Section 509.3 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition and leaving
said section blank.
160.28 NFPA 13R SPRINKLER SYSTEMS. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended
by repealing Section 903.3.1.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, and by replacing
said section with a new section as follows:
903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R Sprinkler Systems. Automatic sprinkler systems in Group R
occupancies of twelve or fewer dwelling units or twelve or fewer sleeping rooms
and up to and including four stories in height in buildings not exceeding 60 feet
in height above grade plane, are permitted to be installed throughout in
accordance with NFPA 13R.
The number of stories of Group R occupancies constructed in accordance with
sections 510.2 and 510.4 shall be measured from the horizontal assembly creating
separate buildings.
160.29 FIRE ALARMS GROUP R-2. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by
repealing Section 907.2.9.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, and by replacing
said section with a new section as follows:
907.2.9.1 Group R-2. A fire alarm system shall be installed in Group R-2 occupancies
where:
1. Any dwelling unit is located three or more stories above the lowest level of
exit discharge;
2. Any dwelling unit is located more than one story below the highest level of
exit discharge of exits serving the dwelling unit;
3. The building contains 12 or more dwelling units; or
4. Any dwelling unit, or portion thereof, is located more than one story above
any other dwelling unit in the same building.
Exceptions:
1. A fire alarm system is not required in buildings not over two stories in height
where all dwelling units and contiguous attic and crawl spaces are separated
from each other and public or common areas by at least 1-hour fire partitions
and each dwelling unit has an exit directly to a public way, exit court or yard.
2. A separate fire alarm system is not required in buildings that are equipped
throughout with an approved, supervised automatic sprinkler system installed
in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or Section 903.3.1.2 and which have a
local alarm that meets the notification requirements of Section 907.5.2.1.
For purposes of this section, firewalls shall not define separate buildings.
160.30 REPEAL OF EXCEPTION (“THIS DOOR TO REMAIN UNLOCKED”). The
Marion Building Code is hereby amended by deleting Section 1010.1.9.4, item 2. of the
International Building Code, 2018 Edition and leaving said item blank.
160.31 FUEL GAS PIPING. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by repealing
Sections G2415.3 of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition and by replacing said
section with a new Section G2415.3 as follows:
G2415.3 Prohibited Locations. Piping shall not be installed in or through a duct supply,
return or exhaust, or a clothes chute, chimney or gas vent, dumbwaiter or elevator
shaft.
160.32 EXCEPTION (BACKWATER VALVE). The Marion Building Code is hereby
amended by adding a new exception to Section P3008.1 of the International Residential Code,
2018 Edition, as follows:
EXCEPTION: The requirements of this Section shall apply only at locations
determined necessary by the City Engineer based on local conditions.
160.33 FROST CLOSURE. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended by deleting Section
P3103.2 from the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, and inserting in lieu thereof the
following:
P3103.2 Frost Closure. Where the 97.5-percent value for outside design temperature is
0ºF or less, every vent extension through a roof or wall shall be not less than 3
inches in diameter. Any increase in the size of the vent shall be made inside the
structure at a point not less than 1 foot below the roof or inside the wall.
160.34 SLAB ON GRADE FOUNDATIONS. The Marion Building Code is hereby amended
by adding a new Exception (4) to Section 1809.5 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition
and new exception (5) to Section R403.1.4.1 of the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition,
respectively, as follows:
Exception:
4/5 Slab-on-Grade Foundations. The Building Official may approve slab-ongrade
foundation designs for wood or metal frame, detached buildings of
Group U Occupancy or accessory to buildings constructed under the
provisions of the International Residential Code and 1250 square feet in floor
area or less, without additional engineering, providing the design meets all
of the following:
1. Foundations supporting wood shall extend at least six inches above the
adjacent finish grade.
2. The entire perimeter of the foundation shall be provided with a thickened
portion of slab with cross section dimensions of 10 inches minimum width
and 10 inches minimum thickness.
3. The slab floor shall be a minimum of 4 inches thick concrete with 6" x 6"
reinforcing mesh or #4 reinforcing bars 24" on center front-to-back and sideto-
side.
4. Slab floor and thickened edge shall be one continuous pour, interconnected
with reinforcing.
5. Vertical distance from the top of the foundation floor to the lowest point of
the footing base shall not be more than 24 inches.
160.35 FOUNDATION DRAINAGE SYSTEMS. The Marion Building Code is hereby
amended by repealing Section 1805.4.3 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition and by
replacing said section with a new Section 1805.4.3 and by adding a new Section R401.3.1 to the
International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, as follows:
1805.4.3/R401.3.1 Drainage discharge. The floor base and foundation perimeter drain shall
discharge by gravity or mechanical means into an approved drainage system that complies
with the following:
(A) At least one sump pit located inside building. Exception: Sump pit/s may
be omitted if drainage tile can be designed with natural fall and drain on the
same property if approved by the City Engineer.
(B) For each required sump pit installed, a pump discharge pipe shall be provided
running continuous from a point directly outside the sump pit to the City
storm sewer or other approved discharge location.
(C) Pump discharge pipe shall be installed as per the requirements of the City of
Marion Plumbing Code with connections to City storm sewer as per City of
Marion Engineering Specifications.
(D) Installation of sump pump if one is found by the Building Official to be
necessary. It shall be equipped to automatically provide for discharge of
sump pit water outside the basement wall and above grade and/or approved
by the City Engineer.
FPN: A sump pump will be considered to be necessary if water inside the
sump pit will not recede to a level four inches or more below the lowest
basement floor surface by gravity or absorption into the earth within a
reasonable period of time.
(E) Where ground water conditions warrant, the Building Official may require
additional drain tile and/or sump pits as he/she deems necessary.
Final graded lots shall comply with the grading plan and any terms of the
memorandum of agreement for the approved subdivision.
160.36 CODE ON FILE. An official copy of the Marion Building Code hereby adopted,
including a certificate by the Clerk as to its adoption and the effective date thereof, shall be on file
in the Office of the Clerk in City Hall and shall be kept there on file, and copies shall be available
for public inspection. Copies of this chapter shall be available in the Building Department Office.
A copy of the Marion Building Code hereby adopted shall also be placed in the collection of the
Marion Public Library for public reference.
160.37 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS. No person shall record in the office of the Linn
County Recorder, a condominium conversion relating to property within the corporate limits of
the City of Marion, without first complying with the provisions of Section 499B.3 of the Iowa
Code and having satisfactorily corrected any deficiency noted in the city inspection and having
received a certificate of compliance.
For the purposes of condominium conversion, structures completed prior to the date of adoption
of this Code, and thereafter converted to a horizontal property regime (condominium) are not
required to be updated to comply with the building code in effect at the time of the conversion,
except the following building code provisions shall be complied with:
1. Fire Protection Systems
2. Means of Egress
3. Structural and Life-Safety concerns specifically noted
The Building Official may waive compliance with any or all of the above exceptions where he
determines compliance to be unduly burdensome or not practical or reasonable given the nature of
the structure.
(Ch. 160 - Ord. 18-11 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
CHAPTER 161
PLUMBING CODE
161.01 Plumbing Code Adopted 161.09 Exception (Backwater Valve)
161.02 Amendments to the Plumbing Code 161.10 Gas Pipe Joints
161.03 International Fuel Gas Code 161.11 Fuel Gas Pipe Location
161.04 Uniform Plumbing Code 161.12 Water Heater Pan Drain Termination
161.05 Schedule of Fees 161.13 Cross Connection Control
161.06 Fee Refunds 161.14 Frost Closure
161.07 Violations 161.15 Subsurface Landscape Irrigation Systems
161.08 Board of Appeals 161.16 Code on File
161.01 PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED. Except as hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or
amended, there is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City that certain Plumbing Code
known as the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, as prepared and edited by the
International Code Council, which code is hereby specifically incorporated by reference and shall
be known as the Marion Plumbing Code. The provisions of said Plumbing Code shall be
controlling in the erection, installation, alterations, additions, repair, relocation, replacement,
maintenance or use of any plumbing system within the corporate limits of the City.
161.02 AMENDMENTS TO THE PLUMBING CODE. Certain sections and portions of
sections of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, are hereby amended, deleted, modified
or added to as more specifically set forth in the following sections of this chapter.
161.03 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE. The Marion Plumbing Code is hereby
amended by adding a new Section 101.2.1 to the International Plumbing Code as follows:
101.2.1 The International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, as further amended is hereby
adopted and shall be considered as part of this code.
161.04 UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE. The Marion Plumbing Code is hereby amended by
adding a new Section 105.2.2 to the International Plumbing Code as follows:
105.2.2 The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, is hereby approved as an equivalent
method for complete plumbing systems.
Exception: 1. Administrative regulations shall be as provided in the International
Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, as amended in this ordinance.
161.05 SCHEDULE OF FEES. The Marion Plumbing Code is hereby amended by repealing
Section 106.6.2 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, and replacing said section with
a new Section 106.6.2 as follows:
106.6.2 The fees for all plumbing work shall be as set forth in Table P-1 as adopted by
resolution of the Marion City Council.
161.06 FEE REFUNDS. The Marion Plumbing Code is hereby amended by deleting the words
“[SPECIFY PERCENTAGE]” from Section 106.6.3 (2.) and (3.) of the International Plumbing
Code, 2018 Edition, and replacing said words with “80 percent”.
161.07 VIOLATIONS. The Marion Plumbing Code is hereby amended by adding a new
Section 108.1.1 to the International Plumbing Code, as follows:
108.1.1 Penalties. Specifics of information for Section 108, Violations, shall be as set forth
in City of Marion Code of Ordinances Chapter 4.
161.08 BOARD OF APPEALS. The Marion Plumbing Code is hereby amended by repealing
Section 109 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, and replacing said section with
new Section 109 as follows:
109 Board of Appeals. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this Code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals,
consisting of The members of the Construction Codes Review Board as established
in City of Marion Code of Ordinances Section 30.05. The Building Official or
designated representative shall be an ex-officio member without a vote and shall
act as secretary of the Board.
The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations
and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the Building Official with a
duplicate copy to the appellant, and may recommend to the City Council such new
legislation as is consistent therewith. The Board shall hold a regular meeting on the
fourth Tuesday of each month, unless there are no appeals or business on file for a
hearing.
Nominal appeal fee to the Board of Appeals shall be paid as set forth in Table P-1
SCHEDULE OF FEES as adopted by resolution of the City Council. The appeal
shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of the Board approval to the
commencement of work and to the completion of work undertaken pursuant to the
approval.
The Board shall have no authority of interpretation of the administration of this
code nor shall such board be empowered to waive requirements of this code.
161.09 EXCEPTION (BACKWATER VALVE). The Marion Plumbing Code is hereby
amended by adding a new exception to Section 714.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018
Edition, as follows:.
EXCEPTION: The requirements of this Section shall apply only at locations
determined necessary by the City Engineer based on local conditions.
161.10 GAS PIPE JOINTS. The Marion Plumbing Code is hereby amended by adding a new
Section 403.10.1.1 to the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, as follows:
403.10.1.1 Pipe Joints. All joints of wrought iron steel gas piping larger than two inches
(2") standard iron pipe size or providing gas pressure greater than two (2) PSIG
shall be welded steel. All welded joints shall comply with the State of Iowa
requirements and the work shall be performed by certified welders, whose
current certification is on file with the City of Marion.
161.11 FUEL GAS PIPE LOCATION. The Marion Plumbing Code is hereby amended by
deleting Section 404.3 from the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, and inserting in lieu
thereof the following:
404.3 Prohibited Locations. Piping shall not be installed in or through a duct supply,
return or exhaust, or a clothes chute, chimney or gas vent, dumbwaiter or elevator
shaft.
161.12 WATER HEATER PAN DRAIN TERMINATION. The Marion Plumbing Code is
hereby amended by deleting Section 504.7.2 from the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition,
and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
504.7.2 Pan drain termination. The pan drain shall extend full size and terminate over a
suitably located indirect waste receptor or floor drain or extend to the exterior of
the building and terminate not less than 6 inches and not more than 24 inches above
the adjacent ground surface. Where a pan drain was not previously installed, the
Code Official may approve installation of a replacement water heater without a pan
drain.
161.13 CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL. The Marion Plumbing Code is hereby amended
by adding a new Section 608.1.1 to the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, as follows:
608.1.1 For the purposes of Section 608 International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, of the
Marion Plumbing Code only, the Administrative Authority is the Marion Water
Department as authorized by City of Marion Council.
The Administrative Authority may create such rules and policy as necessary to
implement the provisions of this Section.
161.14 FROST CLOSURE. The Marion Plumbing Code is hereby amended by deleting
Section 903.2 from the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, and inserting in lieu thereof
the following:
903.2 Frost Closure. Where the 97.5-percent value for outside design temperature is 0ºF
or less, every vent extension through a roof or wall shall be not less than 3 inches
in diameter. Any increase in the size of the vent shall be made inside the structure
at a point not less than 1 foot below the roof or inside the wall.
161.15 SUBSURFACE LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION SYSTEMS. The Marion Plumbing
Code is hereby amended by deleting Section 1401.1 from the International Plumbing Code, 2018
Edition, and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
1401.1 Scope. The provisions of Chapter 14, regarding the materials, design, construction
and installation of subsurface landscape irrigation systems connected to nonpotable
water from on-site water reuse systems, shall be optional and for
information only.
161.16 CODE ON FILE. An official copy of the Marion Plumbing Code hereby adopted,
including a certificate by the Clerk as to its adoption and the effective date thereof, is on file in the
Office of the Clerk in City Hall and shall be kept there on file, and copies shall be available for
public inspection. The Building Department shall furnish a copy of this Plumbing Code hereby
adopted to the Marion Public Library.
(Ch. 161 – Ord. 18-13 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
CHAPTER 162
ELECTRICAL CODE
162.01 ICC Electrical Code & National Electrical Code Adopted 162.08 Receptacles
162.02 Amendments to the Electrical Code 162.09 Garage Branch Circuits
162.03 Schedule of Permit Fees 162.10 Countertops
162.04 Penalties 162.11 Meeting Rooms
162.05 Electrical Board of Appeals 162.12 Paragraph Added to Article 230
162.06 Smoke Alarms and Carbon Monoxide Alarms 162.13 Uses Permitted
162.07 Clear Space 162.14 Uses Not Permitted
162.01 ICC ELECTRICAL CODE & NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE
ADOPTED. Except as hereinafter amended, there is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code
of the City of Marion that certain Electrical Code known as the ICC Electrical Code--
Administrative Provisions, 2006 Edition as promulgated by the International Code Council
including the referenced National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, as prepared and edited by
the National Fire Protection Association, which codes are hereby specifically incorporated
by reference and shall be known as the Marion Electrical Code. The provisions of said
Electrical Code shall be controlling in the installation, alterations, repairs, removals,
renewals, replacements, connection, disconnection and maintenance of all electrical
equipment within the corporate limits of the City. For the purpose of this chapter, the term
"electrical equipment" means all materials, wiring, conductors, fittings, devices,
appliances, luminaires, signs and apparatus or parts thereof comprising an electrical system
within a structure or facility.
162.02 AMENDMENTS TO THE ELECTRICAL CODE. Certain sections and
portions of sections of the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition and ICC Electrical
Code—Administrative Provisions, 2006 Edition, are hereby amended, deleted, modified or
added to as more specifically set forth in the following sections of this chapter.
162.03 SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES. The Marion Electrical Code is hereby
amended by deleting Section 404.2 of the ICC Electrical Code—Administrative
Provisions, and replacing said section with a new section as follows:
Section 404.2. Schedule of Permit Fees. A fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in
accordance with Schedule E-l SCHEDULE OF FEES as adopted by resolution.
162.04 PENALTIES. The Marion Electrical Code is hereby amended by deleting
Section 1003.1.1 to ICC Electrical Code—Administrative Provisions and replacing said
section with a new section as follows:
Section 1003.1. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this code
or who fails to carry out an order made pursuant to this code or violates any condition
attached to a permit, approval or certificate shall be subject to enforcement and penalties
as provided section 1.06 of the Code of Ordinances or may be cited as a municipal
infraction under chapter 4 of the Code of Ordinances.
162.05 ELECTRICAL BOARD OF APPEALS. The Marion Electrical Code is hereby
amended by deleting Chapter 11, Means of Appeal of the ICC Electrical Code—
Administrative Provisions and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
Chapter 11 - Means of Appeal. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this Code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals,
consisting of the members of the Construction Codes Review Board as established
in City of Marion Code of Ordinances Section 30.05. The Building Official or
designated representative shall be an ex-officio member without a vote and shall
act as secretary of the Board.
The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its
investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the Building
Official with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and may recommend to the City
Council such new legislation as is consistent therewith. The Board shall hold a
regular meeting on the fourth Tuesday of each month, unless there are no appeals
or business on file for a hearing.
Nominal appeal fee to the Board of Appeals shall be paid as set forth in Table E-l
SCHEDULE OF FEES as adopted by resolution of the City Council. The appeal
shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of the Board approval to the
commencement of work and to the completion of work undertaken pursuant to the
approval.
The Board shall have no authority to interpretation of the administration of this
code nor shall such board be empowered to waive requirements of this code.
FAILURE TO ACT. In case an appellant or applicant does not exercise his/her
rights, act, begin construction or operation or occupancy, as the case may be, in
accordance with any appeal, variance or permit granted by the Board within one
year after the matter has been acted upon by the Board, such variance or permit
shall become null and void.
162.06 SMOKE ALARMS AND CARBON MONOXIDE ALARMS. The Marion
Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding a new Section 102.1.3.1 to the ICC Electrical
Code—Administrative Provisions, 2006 Edition, as follows:
Section 102.1.3.1. When an electrical service is installed or replaced in a dwelling or
multiple dwelling unit building, smoke alarms and carbon monoxide alarms shall be
installed as required by the International Residential Building Code for each dwelling unit
receiving power from the electrical service.
162.07 CLEAR SPACE. The Marion Electrical Code is hereby amended by deleting
Section 110.26(B) to the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, in its entirety and adding
the following:
Section 110.26(B). CLEAR SPACES. For electrical equipment located in rooms that
contain storage areas, the required working clearances as prescribed in this article shall be
maintained by providing approved rigid barriers and labels.
Exception 1: Within individual residential dwelling units.
Exception 2: Where barriers would obstruct exit pathways the authority having
jurisdiction for enforcing this Code may grant an exception or approve an alternate
method.
Informational Note: Barriers shall be a minimum of 36 inches in height, the full
width of the required working area and meet the load requirements as prescribed
by the Building Code for guardrails.
162.08 RECEPTACLES. The Marion Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding an
additional exception to Section 210.8(A)(5) of the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition,
as follows:
Exception No. 2 to (5): The sump pump receptacle shall not be required to be GFCI
protected. A single receptacle supplying a permanently installed sump pump, providing
that the sump pump receptacle is permanently and clearly labeled “for sump pump use
only” and providing there is at least one GFI protected duplex receptacle available for use
within the room or area in which the sump pump receptacle is located.
162.09 GARAGE BRANCH CIRCUITS. The Marion Electrical Code is hereby
amended by deleting Section 210.11(C)(4) and adding a new Section 210.11 (C)(4) to the
National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, as follows:
(4) Garage Branch Circuits. In addition to the number of branch circuits required by other
parts of this section, at least one additional 120-volt, 20-ampere branch circuit shall be
provided to supply the garage receptacle outlet(s) required by 210.52(G).
162.10 COUNTER TOPS. The Marion Electrical Code is amended by deleting a portion
of Section 210.52(C) of the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition as follows.
Delete Section 210.52 (C)(2) Island Counter Spaces
162.11 MEETING ROOMS. The Marion Electrical Code is hereby amended by
deleting Section 210.71 of the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition in its entirety and
leaving said Section blank.
162.12 PARAGRAPH ADDED TO ARTICLE 230.
1. The Marion Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding a second paragraph
to Section 230.26 of the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, as follows:
Where a service mast is used for the support of service drop conductors, the service
raceway shall be a minimum of 2" rigid galvanized steel conduit.
162.13 USES PERMITTED. The Marion Electrical Code is hereby amended by
repealing Section 334.10 (1) thru (5) of the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, and
replacing it with a new Section 334.10 (1) thru (3) as follows as follows:
Section 334.10. Uses Permitted. Type NM, Type NCM and Type NMS cables shall be
permitted in the following:
(1) One and two-family dwellings.
(2) Multi-family dwelling structures containing not more than twelve (12)
dwelling units, except as prohibited in Section 334.12. For the purpose of this
section, multi-family dwelling structures are buildings that contain only dwellings
and no other uses.
(3) Structures and uses, accessory to dwelling units of numbers (1) and (2)
above.
162.14 USES NOT PERMITTED. The Marion Electrical Code is hereby amended by
adding an eleventh and twelfth condition to Section 334.12 (A) of the National Electrical
Code, 2017 Edition (Uses Not Permitted, Types NM, NMC and NMS cable) as follows:
Section 334.12 (A)
(11) For commercial, educational, ceremonial or public uses.
(12) Uses not specified in 334.10.
(Ch. 162 - Ord. 17-14 – Aug. 17 Supp.)
CHAPTER 163
MECHANICAL CODE
163.01 Mechanical Code Adopted 163.07 Violations
163.02 Amendments to the Mechanical Code 163.08 Board of Appeals
163.03 Conflicts 163.09 Gas Pipe Joints
163.04 International Fuel Gas Code 163.10 Fuel Gas Pipe Location
163.05 Permit Fees 163.11 Code on File
163.06 Fee Refunds
163.01 MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED. Except as hereinafter added to, deleted, modified
or amended, there is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City that certain Mechanical
Code known as the International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, as prepared and published by
the International Code Council, which code is hereby specifically incorporated by reference and
shall be known as the Marion Mechanical Code. The provisions of said Mechanical Code shall be
controlling in the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use,
maintenance or removal of heating, ventilation, cooling or refrigerating systems, incinerators or
other miscellaneous heat-producing or refrigerating appliances and in all matters covered by said
Mechanical Code within the corporate limits of the City.
163.02 AMENDMENTS TO THE MECHANICAL CODE. Certain sections of the
International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, are hereby amended, deleted, modified or added to
as more specifically set forth in the following sections of this chapter.
163.03 CONFLICTS. If conflicts arise in requirements with regards to specifications of
materials or methods between portions of this code, between this code and other local codes or
between this code and applicable State or Federal requirements, the more stringent shall apply.
163.04 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE. The Marion Mechanical Code is hereby
amended by adding a new Sections 101.2.2 to the International Mechanical Code as follows:
101.2.2 The International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, as further amended is hereby
adopted and shall be considered as part of this code.
163.05 PERMIT FEES. The Marion Mechanical Code is hereby amended by deleting Section
106.5.2 from the International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, and inserting in lieu thereof the
following:
106.5.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be as set forth in Table M-1
Mechanical Fees, as adopted by resolution of the City of Marion Council.
163.06 FEE REFUNDS. The Marion Mechanical Code is hereby amended by deleting the
words “[SPECIFY PERCENTAGE]” from Section 106.5.3 (2.) and (3.) of the International
Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, and replacing said words with “80 percent”.
163.07 VIOLATIONS. The Marion Mechanical Code is hereby amended by adding a new
Section 108.1.1 to the International Mechanical Code, as follows:
108.1.1 Violations. Specifics of information for Section 108 Violations shall be as set forth
in City of Marion Code of Ordinances Chapter 4.
163.08 BOARD OF APPEALS. The Marion Mechanical Code is hereby amended by repealing
Section 109 from the International Mechanical Code, and by replacing said section with a new
section as follows:
109 Board of Appeals. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this Code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals,
consisting of The members of the Construction Codes Review Board as established
in City of Marion Code of Ordinances Section 30.05. The Building Official or
designated representative shall be an ex-officio member without a vote and shall
act as secretary of the Board.
The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations
and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the Building Official with a
duplicate copy to the appellant, and may recommend to the City Council such new
legislation as is consistent therewith. The Board shall hold a regular meeting on the
fourth Tuesday of each month, unless there are no appeals or business on file for a
hearing.
Nominal appeal fee to the Board of Appeals shall be paid as set forth in Table M-1
SCHEDULE OF FEES as adopted by resolution of the City Council. The appeal
shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of the Board approval to the
commencement of work and to the completion of work undertaken pursuant to the
approval.
The Board shall have no authority to interpretation of the administration of this
code nor shall such board be empowered to waive requirements of this code.
163.09 GAS PIPE JOINTS. The Marion Mechanical Code is hereby amended by adding a new
Section 403.10.1.1 to the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, as follows:
403.10.1.1 Pipe Joints. All joints of wrought iron steel gas piping larger than two inches
(2") standard iron pipe size or providing gas pressure greater than two (2) PSIG
shall be welded steel. All welded joints shall comply with the State of Iowa
requirements and the work shall be performed by certified welders, whose
current certification is on file with the City of Marion.
163.10 FUEL GAS PIPE LOCATION. The Marion Mechanical Code is hereby amended by
deleting Section 404.3 from the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, and inserting in lieu
thereof the following:
404.3 Prohibited Locations. Piping shall not be installed in or through a duct supply,
return or exhaust, or a clothes chute, chimney or gas vent, dumbwaiter or elevator
shaft.
163.11 CODE ON FILE. An official copy of the Marion Mechanical Code Ordinance hereby
adopted, including a certificate by the City Clerk as to its adoption and the effective date thereof,
is on file in the Office of the Clerk in City Hall and shall be kept on file, and copies shall be
available in the Building Department for public inspection. The Building Department shall furnish
a copy of the Mechanical Code ordinance hereby adopted to the Marion Public Library.
(Chapter 163 – Ord. 18-12 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
CHAPTER 164
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
164.01 Purpose 164.03 Amendments to Fire Prevention Code
164.02 Adoption of Fire Prevention Code 164.04 Board of Appeals
164.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, hazardous materials, or explosion.
164.02 ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE. Pursuant to public notice
and public hearing, there is hereby adopted by the City that certain Code known as the
International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix B, D, E, F, G, and I, as
prepared and edited by the International Code Council, Inc. thereof, and the whole
thereof, save and except such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended;
and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out in full herein; and
the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City effective July 1,
2018. Appendix C in the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, will be used as a
reference guide.
164.03 AMENDMENTS TO FIRE PREVENTION CODE. The International Fire
Code, 2018, first printing, adopted by this Chapter, is amended as follows:
1. Delete all of the permits within section 105.6 Required operational
permits except for the following:
105.6.2 Amusement buildings
105.6.3 Aviation Facilities
105.6.4 Carnivals and Fairs
105.6.6 Combustible dust-producing operations
105.6.13 Exhibits and trade shows
105.6.14 Explosives
105.6.27 LP gas
105.6.30 Mobile food preparation vehicles
105.6.36 Outdoor assembly events
105.6.32 Open Burning
105.6.40 Pyrotechnic special effects material
105.6.47 Tents and Membrane Structures
2. Delete the exception in Section 105.6.27 and replace with the
following:
Exception: A permit is not required for individual containers with a
water capacity of less than 100-gallon or multiple container systems
having an aggregate quantity not exceeding 100 gallons, serving
occupancies in group R-3.
CHAPTER 164 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
3. Delete Section 105.6.47 - Temporary membrane structures and tents
and replace it with the following:
Section 105.6.47 - Temporary membrane structures and tents. An
operational permit is required to operate an air-supported temporary
membrane structure or a tent having an area in excess of 600 square feet.
Exception:
1. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.
2. Tents open on at least three sides, which comply with all of the
following:
2.1 Individual tents having a maximum size of 1000 square feet.
2.2 The aggregate area of multiple tents placed side by side without
a fire break clearance of not less than 12 feet shall not exceed 1000
square feet.
2.3 A minimum clearance of 12 feet to structures and other tents
shall be provided.
4. Delete all of the permits within Section 105.7 - Required construction
permits except for the following:
105.7.1 Automatic Fire-extinguishing systems
105.7.2 Battery Systems
105.7.3 Capacitor energy storage systems
105.7.6 Emergency responder radio coverage system
105.7.7 Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment
105.7.8 Fire pumps and related equipment
105.7.9 Flammable and combustible liquids
105.7.10 Fuel cell power systems
105.7.11 Gas detection systems
105.7.12 Gate and barricades across fire apparatus access road (not
related to new construction only)
105.7.16 LP-Gas
105.7.18 Plant extraction systems
105.7.24 Standpipe systems
5. Delete Section 110.4 - Violation penalties and replace it with the
following:
Section 110.4 - Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of
the approved construction documents or direction of the fire code
official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code,
CHAPTER 164 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
shall be punished in a manner provided in Chapter 4 of the Code of
Ordinances.
6. Add to Section 106.2 – Schedule of permit fees. Whenever an inspection
fee, reinspection fee, or permit fee is required, the fees shall be paid as set for
the in the Fire Code Table of Fees (Table 104.12 (A) as adopted by resolution.
7. Delete from Section 202 of Definitions the following: “Associated with
Group E occupancies” AND “Accessory to places of religious worship”.
8. Delete Section 308.1.4 Exception 3 and replace it with the following:
3. Townhouses as defined by the International Building Code.
9. Delete Section 311.2.2 Exception 3 “where fire areas do not exceed
12,000 square feet”
10. Delete Section 315.3.1 Exception 2
11. Amend Table 315.7.6 (1) Column 51 to 200 all number 5’s change to 15
12. Amend Table 405.2 by deleting the work “monthly” for Group E and
replace it with the following:
Two fire and tornado drills per semester shall be conducted for a total of
four fire drills through the school year. Two lockdown drills shall be
conducted per year.
Exception: Child Daycare centers shall conduct monthly fire drills.
13. Delete Section 501.4 - Timing of installation and replace it with the
following:
Section 501.4 - Timing of Installation. When fire apparatus access
roads or water supply for fire protection is required to be installed, such
protection shall be installed and made serviceable prior to occupancy
except when approved alternative methods of protection are provided.
Temporary street signs shall be installed at each intersection when
construction of new roadways allows passage by vehicles in accordance
with section 505.2.
14. Add the following exceptions to Section 503.2.1 - Dimensions, as
follows:
Exception:
1. Private fire lanes used exclusively as fire apparatus access roads may
be reduced to an unobstructed width of no less than 12 feet provided that
parking/operating pad(s) with a width of not less than 20 feet and a length
of not less than 30 feet are installed at the locations approved by the Code
Official.
2. For divided two-lane (one each way) public roadways the required
unobstructed width may be reduced to 17 foot curb back to curb back so
long as all of the following are met:
CHAPTER 164 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
? No median and/or island or other obstruction may extend over
150 linear feet without an approved crossover.
? Outside curbs adjacent to the medians/islands or other
obstructions must be of a drive over/roll over design.
? Medians/islands or other obstructions may not exceed a
saturation limit of 25% of the entire project distance.
15. Add Section 503.2.1.1 - Residential Drives and Lanes, as follows:
Section 503.2.1.1 - Residential Drives and Lanes. For any dwelling that
is set back greater than 100 feet from the public way, the drive or lane
shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 10 feet and an
unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet, 6 inches and shall
comply with Section 503.2.3. Any drive or lane greater than 150 feet in
length shall be provided with a fire apparatus turnaround as approved by
the code official.
16. Add a new Section 504.4, as follows:
504.4 - Identification of Interior Doors. The Code Official may require
that certain interior doors be identified.
17. Amend Section 505.1 - Each character shall not be less than 4 inches
high with a minimum stroke width of ½ inch. The height of the character must
increase by one inch and the stroke by ¼ inch for every additional 100 feet the
character are away from the road.
18. Delete Section 507.5.1 - Where Required and replace it with the
following:
Section 507.5.1 - Where required. Where a portion of the facility or
building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is
more than 300 feet from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as
measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or
building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where
required by the Fire Chief.
Exception:
1. For Group R-3, the distance requirement shall be 500 feet.
2. For buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic
sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or
903.3.1.2, the distance requirement shall be 600 feet.
19. Delete Section 603.4.2.1.2 - Clearance to Building and replace it with
the following:
Section 603.4.2.1.2 Clearance to building. Portable outdoor gas-fired
heating appliances shall be located at least 10 feet from building or per
manufacturer recommendations which must be provided.
CHAPTER 164 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
20. Delete Section 603.4.2.1.3 - Clearance to combustible materials and
replace it with the following:
Section 603.4.2.1.3 - Clearance to combustible materials. Portable
outdoor gas-fired heating appliances shall not be located beneath, or
closer than 10 feet to combustible decorations and combustible
overhangs, awnings, sunshades or similar combustible attachments to
building.
21. Delete Section 603.4.2.1.4 - Proximity to exits and replace it with the
following:
Section 603.4.2.1.4 - Proximity to exits. Portable outdoor gas-fired
heating appliances shall not be located within 10 feet of exits or exit
discharges.
22. Delete Section 704.1 – Last paragraph. Unprotected joints and voids do
not need to be protected where such joints and voids were not required to be
protected when the building was originally build.
23. Delete Section 706.2 – Unprotected openings.
24. Add Section 901.2.2 – Qualifications, as follows:
Section 901.2.2 - Qualifications. For the installation, inspection and
maintenance of water-based fire protection systems and fire alarm
systems a contractor must be certified by the State Fire Marshal’s Office.
When required by the Code Official, the contractor must provide a copy
of their certificate.
25. Amend Section 903.2.8 Group R – An automatic sprinkler system
installed in accordance with Section 903.3 NFPA 13R sprinkler system shall be
provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area, with any Group R
occupancy having 13 or more dwelling units will have an automatic sprinkler
system installed to the section 903.3.1.1 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems.
26. Delete Section 907.2.9 - Group R-2 and replace it with the following:
Section 907.2.9 – Group R-2. An automatic fire alarm system shall be
installed in Group R-2 occupancies where:
1. Any dwelling unit is located three or more stories above the lowest
level of exit discharge;
2. Any dwelling unit is located more than one story below the highest
level of exit discharge of exits serving the dwelling unit;
3. The building contains 12 or more dwelling units; or
4. Any dwelling unit is more than one story above any other dwelling
unit in the same building.
Exceptions:
1. A fire alarm system is not required in buildings not over two stories
in height where all dwelling units and contiguous attic and crawl spaces
CHAPTER 164 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
are separated from each other and public or common areas by at least 1-
hour fire partitions and each dwelling unit has an exit directly to a public
way, exit court or yard.
2. A separate fire alarm system is not required in buildings that are
equipped throughout with an approved, supervised automatic sprinkler
system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or Section
903.3.1.2 and which will automatically activate throughout the
notification zones upon a sprinkler water flow.
For purposes of this section, area separation walls shall not define
separate buildings.
27. Delete Section 1008.2.3 – Exit discharge illumination.
28. Section 1010.1.9.4 - Locks and latches. Delete subparagraph 2.
29. Delete 3103.2 - Approval required and replace it with the following:
Section 3103.2 - Approval required. Tents and membrane structures
having an area in excess of 600 square feet shall not be erected, operated
or maintained for any purpose without first obtaining a permit and
approval of the fire code official.
Exceptions:
1. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.
2. Tents open on at least three sides, which comply with all of the
following:
i. Individual tents having a maximum size of 1000 square
feet or less.
ii. The aggregate area of multiple tents placed side by side
without a fire break clearance of 12 feet, not exceeding
1000 square feet.
iii. A minimum clearance of 12 feet to structures and other
tents.
30. Add the following Exception to Section 3103.12.6.1 Exit sign
illumination, as follows:
1. Exit sign illumination is not required in a temporary membrane
structure tent or canopy if it is not going to be occupied after dark.
31. Add the following Exception to Section 3103.12.7 Egress illumination,
as follows:
Egress illumination is not required in a temporary membrane structure
tent or canopy if it is not going to be occupied after dark.
32. Add following criteria to Section 3104.3 - Label as follows:
CHAPTER 164 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
In lieu of a permanently affixed label on a temporary membrane
structure, tent or canopy, flame-resistance or fire retardant shall be
documented and certified by the manufacturer in an approved manner.
33. Delete Section 5704.1 General and replace it with the following:
Section 5704.1 Storage of flammable and combustible liquids in
containers, cylinders and tanks shall be in accordance with this section,
applicable sections of Chapter 50 and rules and regulations promulgated
by the State Fire Marshal.
34. Add to Appendix D107 One- or Two-Family Residential Developments
Exception 2 the following:
The fire code official shall not exceed an allowance of over 100 dwelling
units in accordance with NFPA 1141 Chapter 5 Table 5.1.4.1.
164.04 BOARD OF APPEALS. General. In order to hear and decide appeals of
orders, decisions or determinations made by the Fire Code Official relative to the
application and interpretation of this Code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board
of Appeals, consisting of the members of the Construction Codes Review Board as
established in City of Marion Code of Ordinances Section 30.05. The Fire Code Official
or designated representative shall be an ex-officio member without a vote and shall act
as secretary of the Board.
The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations
and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the Fire Code Official with a
duplicate copy to the appellant, and may recommend to the City Council such new
legislation as is consistent therewith. The Board shall hold a regular meeting on the
fourth Tuesday of each month, unless there are no appeals or business on file for a
hearing.
Nominal appeal fee to the Board of Appeals shall be paid as set forth by resolution of
the City Council. The appeal shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of the Board
approval to the commencement of work and to the completion of work undertaken
pursuant to the approval.
(Ch. 164 – Ord. 18-18 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
CHAPTER 164 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
[The next page is 1131]
CHAPTER 164 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
CHAPTER 165
HOUSING CODE
165.01 International Property Maintenance Code Adopted 165.09 Overcrowding
165.02 Amendments to the Property Maintenance Code 165.10 Board of Appeals
165.03 Scope 165.11 Definitions
165.04 Housing Official 165.12 Lead-Based Paint
165.05 Registration and Fees 165.13 Receptacles
165.06 Plans of Inspection 165.14 Smoke Detectors
165.07 Certification of Inspected Housing 165.15 Penalties and Corrective Actions
165.08 Unsafe Structures and Equipment 165.16 Code on File
165.01 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED. Except as
hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or amended, there is hereby adopted as the Housing Code
of the City of Marion that certain Code known as the International Property Maintenance Code,
2018 Edition, First Printing, as prepared and edited by the International Code Council, Inc. and
the provisions of said Housing Code shall be controlling in maintaining minimum requirements
and standards of residential buildings and properties and in all matters covered by said Housing
Code within the corporate limits of the City and shall be known as the Marion Housing Code.
165.02 AMENDMENTS TO THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE. Certain sections
and portions of sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, are hereby
amended, deleted, modified or added to as more specifically set forth below and in the following
sections of this chapter.
? Section 101.1 Insert: {City of Marion, Iowa}
? Section 112.4 Insert: {fine schedule as set by Council resolution}
? Section 302.4 Insert: {8 inches} (from 52.02 #13 "Weeds)
? Section 304.14 Insert: {April l , September 30}
? Section 602.3 Insert: {October 1, April 30}
? Section 602.4 Insert: {October 1, April 30}
165.03 SCOPE. The Marion Housing Code is hereby amended by adding new exceptions
numbered 1 and 2 to Section 101.2 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition,
as follows:
Exception:
1. Nonresidential structures and nonresidential premises shall be regulated as
provided in Marion Code of Ordinances Chapter 153, Property Maintenance.
2. Residential structure exteriors and residential exterior premises that do not
constitute a serious and continuous endangerment to the health and safety of the residents
shall be regulated as provided in Marion Code of Ordinances Chapter 153, Property
Maintenance.
165.04 HOUSING OFFICIAL. The Marion Housing Code is hereby amended by repealing
Section 103.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, and by replacing
said section with a new section, as follows:
103.1 Housing Official. For the purposes of this Code, the executive official in charge of
administering this Code shall be known as the Housing Official or Code Official and the
terms Housing Official and Code Official shall have the same meaning.
165.05 REGISTRATION AND FEES. The Marion Housing Code is hereby amended by
repealing Section 103.5 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, and by
replacing said section with new Section 103.5, as follows:
103.5 Notification and Fees. No person shall operate a rental dwelling unit, rooming house,
congregate housing or independent group residence unless the person has first registered
such rental dwelling unit, rooming house, congregate housing or independent group
residence with the City.
Fees for activities and services performed in carrying out the responsibilities of this code
shall be as provided in the Housing Code Table of Fees adopted by resolution of the City
Council.
165.06 PLANS OF INSPECTION. The Marion Housing Code is hereby amended by adding
a new Section 104.2.1 to the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, as follows:
104.2.1 Plans of Inspection.
1. Preparation of Plans. The Housing Official is authorized and directed to develop
and present to the Council for adoption, plans for the inspection of dwelling units subject
to the provisions of this chapter, including:
A. A plan for the regular inspection of all rental units, rooming houses,
congregate housing, and independent group residences.
B. A plan for the inspection of all residential dwellings contained within the
City upon receipt of complaints.
2. Public Notice. Before making inspections pursuant to the plans authorized in
subsection 1 of this section, the City shall publish a notice advertising of the plan to inspect.
165.07 CERTIFICATION OF INSPECTED HOUSING. The Marion Housing Code is
hereby amended by adding a new Section 104.7 to the International Property Maintenance Code,
2018 Edition, as follows:
104.7 Certification of Inspected Housing. Whenever the Housing Official has inspected or
caused to be inspected any dwelling unit and has determined that the dwelling unit is in
compliance with the provisions of this Housing Code, a certificate of inspected housing
shall be issued to the owner or the agent of the dwelling unit.
165.08 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT. The Marion Housing Code is hereby
amended by repealing Section 108.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018
Edition, and by replacing said section with a new section, as follows:
108.1 General. When a structure or equipment is found by the Code Official to be unsafe,
or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, the Code
Official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the
structure and the structure may be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code.
165.09 OVERCROWDING. The Marion Housing Code is hereby amended by adding a new
exception to Section 404.5 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, as
follows:
Exception: The actual number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not create
conditions that, in the opinion of the Code Official, endanger the life, health, safety, or
welfare of the occupants.
165.10 BOARD OF APPEALS. The Marion Housing Code is hereby amended by repealing in
entirety, Section 111 from the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, and by
replacing said section with a new Section 111, as follows:
Section 111 Board of Appeals.
1. General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations
made by the Housing Official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code,
and to provide reasonable variances for existing structures which cannot practicably meet
the standards in the Housing Code, but are not unsafe for habitation, there is hereby created
a Housing Code Board of Appeals. The Housing Code Board of Appeals shall consist of
the members of the Nuisance Enforcement/Property Maintenance Advisory Board as
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Council in accordance with Chapter 50 of the
Marion Code of Ordinances.
2. Organization. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the
conduct of its meetings and investigations and shall render all decisions and findings,
which shall be made part of the public record.
3. Appeals Process.
A. Any person aggrieved by a written notice of the City issued in connection
with any alleged violation of this Housing Code or of any applicable rule or
regulation issued pursuant to the Housing Code or by any order requiring repair or
demolition, may apply in writing to the Housing Code Board of Appeals for a
reconsideration of such notice or order provided that such application is made
within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of postmark of notice or proof of
service.
B. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the Housing
Official shall present it at the next regular or special meeting of the Board.
C. As soon as practicable after receiving a written appeal, the Board shall hold
a public meeting to consider the appeal. The applicant shall be advised in writing
of the time and place of such meeting at least four (4) days prior to the date of the
meeting. At such meeting, the applicant shall be given an opportunity to be heard
and to show cause why such notice or order should be modified, extended,
withdrawn or variance granted. The Board may, in its discretion, hold a public
hearing on any matter brought before the Board.
D. The Board, by a majority vote, may sustain, modify or withdraw the notice
or order. In granting an extension or variance of any notice or order, the Board shall
observe the following conditions:
(1) The Board may grant an extension of time for the compliance of any
notice or order for not more than 18 months subject to appropriate
conditions and provided that the Board makes specific findings of fact based
on evidence relating to the following:
a. That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships
in carrying out the strict letter of any notice or order.
b. That such an extension is in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this Housing Code in securing the public
health, safety and general welfare.
(2) The Board may grant a variance in a specific case and from a
specific provision of this Housing Code subject to appropriate conditions
and provided the Board makes specific findings of fact based on evidence
relating to the following:
a. That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships
in carrying out the strict letter of any notice or order.
b. That the effect of the application of the provisions would be
arbitrary in the specific case.
c. That an extension would not constitute an appropriate
remedy for these practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in
this arbitrary effect.
d. That such a variance is in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this Housing Code in securing the public health, safety
and general welfare.
E. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of
this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and
adjudication of the notice and order or to any portion thereof.
F. Enforcement of any notice or order issued under this Code shall be stayed
during the duration of an appeal of the order, which is properly and timely filed.
165.11 DEFINITIONS. The Marion Housing Code is hereby amended by adding new
definitions to Section 202 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, as
follows:
1. "Dwelling unit, rental" means any dwelling unit which is or is intended to be rented,
leased, let, or hired out to be occupied.
2. "Housing Official" means the individual and the individual’s designated
representatives hired by the City Manager to administer and enforce the Housing Code.
3. "Independent group residence" means housing for the exclusive residential use of
two to twelve elderly, handicapped or disabled individuals, excluding one or two resident
assistants, if needed, who cannot live completely independently and require a planned
program of supportive services, and designated by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development as an "Independent Group Residence."
4. "Lead-based paint" means any paint containing more lead than the level established
by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission as being the "safe" level of lead in
residential paint and paint products.
5. "Temporary housing" means any tent, trailer, motor home or other structure used
for human shelter for less than seventy-two (72) hours, which is designed to be transported
and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility system on the
same premises.
(Ord. 19-13 – May 19 Supp.)
165.12 LEAD-BASED PAINT. The Marion Housing Code is hereby amended by adding a new
Section 305.3.1 to the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition as follows:
Section 305.3.1. Lead-Based Paint. The dwelling unit shall be in compliance with HUD
lead-based paint regulations, 24 C.F.R., Part 35, issued pursuant to the Lead-based Paint
Poisoning Prevention Act, 42 U.S.C. 4821-4846; and the owner shall provide a certification
that the dwelling is in accordance with such HUD regulations. If the property was
constructed prior to 1950, the family upon occupancy shall be furnished the notice required
by HUD lead-based paint regulations and procedures regarding the hazards of lead-based
paint poisoning, the symptoms and treatment of lead poisoning, and the precautions to be
taken against lead poisoning.
Surfaces of the dwelling covered with lead-based paint, including walls, stairs, railings,
windows and doors, less than four (4) feet above adjacent walking surfaces, must be free
from noticeable cracking, scaling, peeling, chipping and loose paint; or adequately treated
or covered to prevent exposure of children to lead-based paint hazards.
165.13 RECEPTACLES. The Marion Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by
addition of a new Section 605.2.1 to the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition,
reading as follows: 605.2.1 GROUND FAULT CIRCUIT REQUIREMENTS. Receptacles which
are within three feet of a source of water shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.
165.14 SMOKE DETECTORS. The Marion Housing Code is hereby amended by repealing
Section 704 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, and by replacing said
section with a new section, as follows:
704.1 Smoke detection and notification. Smoke alarms shall be listed and labeled in
accordance with UL 217 and installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and
the household fire warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72.
704.2 Smoke detection systems. Household fire alarm systems installed in accordance
with NFPA 72 that include smoke alarms, or a combination of smoke detector and audible
notification devices installed as required by this section for smoke alarms, shall be
permitted.
704.3 Location. Smoke alarms shall be installed in the following locations:
1. In each sleeping room.
2. Outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms.
3. On each story of the dwelling including basements.
704.3.1 Alterations, repairs and additions. When alterations, repairs or additions
requiring a permit occur, or when one or more sleeping rooms are added or created in
existing dwellings, the dwelling unit shall be equipped with smoke alarms in locations as
required in R314.3 for new dwellings.
Exceptions:
1. Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as the replacement of roofing or
siding, or the addition or replacement of windows or doors, or the addition of an open porch
or deck, are exempt from the requirements of this section.
2. Installation, alteration or repairs of plumbing or mechanical systems are exempt from
the requirements of this section.
704.4 Power source. Smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building
wiring when such wiring is served from a commercial source, and when primary power is
interrupted, shall receive power from a battery. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than those required for overcurrent protection.
Exception: Hard wiring of smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required finishes
exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which
could provide access for hard wiring without the removal of interior finishes.
704.5 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed
within an individual dwelling unit in accordance with Section R314.3, the alarm devices
shall be interconnected in such a manner that the actuation of one alarm will activate all of
the alarms in the individual unit. Physical interconnection of smoke alarms shall not be
required where listed wireless alarms are installed and all alarms sound upon activation of
any one alarm.
Exception: Interconnection of smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required where
alterations or repairs do not result in removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing
the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could
provide access for interconnection without removal of interior finishes.
165.15 PENALTIES AND CORRECTIVE ACTIONS.
1. Actions Authorized. The Housing Official shall take any action authorized by this
chapter to assure compliance, or to prevent violations of its provisions. Specifically, this
may include citation for municipal infractions pursuant to Chapter 4 of this Code of
Ordinances. The Housing Official may recommend to the City Attorney the institution of
other legal or equitable actions for the enforcement of this chapter.
2. Applicability. No penalty shall be assessed for a violation of this chapter as for the
time that the dwelling unit is vacant and remains vacant. However, no dwelling unit for
which an order or notice of an alleged violation of this code has been issued may be
reoccupied until such time that the violation has been corrected and a Certificate of
Inspected Housing has been issued. In the event that a dwelling or dwelling unit becomes
vacant before the violation has been corrected and a Certificate of Inspected Housing has
been issued, the Housing Official may post a notice on or about the dwelling or dwelling
unit. The notice shall state the described dwelling or dwelling unit contains Housing Code
violations and that such dwelling or dwelling unit shall not be occupied until such time that
the violations have been corrected and a Certificate of Inspected Housing has been issued.
It is the responsibility of the owner or agent to inspect the premises at least every thirty
(30) days to make sure the notice is still posted on the property. It shall be a violation of
this Code to remove or deface such notice until a Certificate of Inspected Housing has been
issued. It is the responsibility of the owner or agent to notify the Housing Official within
72 hours if the notice is removed prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Inspected
Housing.
3. Prosecution. In case there is no prompt compliance with any violation order, the
Housing Official may issue a citation pursuant to Section 805.1 through 805.5 of the Code
of Iowa and request the City Attorney to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at
law to exact the penalty provided herein and, in addition, may ask the legal representative
to proceed at law or in equity against the person responsible for the violation for the purpose
of ordering the person:
A. To restrain, correct, remove the violation or refrain from any further
execution of work;
B. To restrain or correct the erection, installation, or alteration of such
structure;
C. To require the removal of work in violation;
D. To prevent the occupation or use of the structure, or part of the structure
erected, constructed, installed, altered or maintained in violation of the provisions
of this Code.
4. Other Remedies. The City Attorney is authorized to pursue any other remedy
available in law or equity to correct violations of the provisions of this Housing Code.
165.16 CODE ON FILE. An official copy of the Marion Housing Code hereby adopted,
including a certificate by the Clerk as to its adoption and the effective date thereof, shall be on file
in the Office of the Clerk in City Hall and shall be kept there on file, and copies shall be available
for public inspection. A copy of this chapter shall be available in the Building Department Office.
(Ch. 165 - Ord. 18-16 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
[The next page is 1165]
CHAPTER 166 SPECULATIVE SHELL BUILDINGS
CHAPTER 166
SPECULATIVE SHELL BUILDINGS
166.01 Intent 166.04 Application for Tax Exemption
166.02 Definitions 166.05 Duration
166.03 Eligibility for Tax Exemption
166.01 INTENT. It is the intent of this chapter to provide financial incentives for the
development of speculative shell buildings by community development organizations,
not-for-profit cooperative associations under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa, or forprofit
entities to attract manufacturing, processing, and warehouse employers to the City
of Marion.
166.02 DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
1. “Community development organization” means an organization, which
meets the membership requirements contained herein, formed within a city or
county or multi-community group for one or more of the following purposes:
A. To promote, stimulate, develop, and advance the business prosperity
and economic welfare of the community, area, or region and its citizens.
B. To encourage and assist the location of new business and industry.
C. To rehabilitate and assist existing business and industry.
D. To stimulate and assist in the expansion of business activity.
For purposes of this definition, a community development organization must have
at least fifteen (15) members with representation from the following: a
representative from government at the level or levels corresponding to the
community development organization’s area of operation; a representative from a
private sector lending institution; a representative of a community organization in
the area; a representative of business in the area; and a representative of private
citizens in the community, area, or region.
2. “New construction” means new buildings or structures and includes new
buildings or structures, which are constructed as additions to existing buildings or
structures. New construction also includes reconstruction or renovation of an
existing building or structure which constitutes complete replacement of an
existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or structure, if the
reconstruction or renovation of the existing building or structure is required due to
economic obsolescence, if the reconstruction or renovation is necessary to
implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing or processing of
products, and the reconstruction or renovation is required in order to competitively
CHAPTER 166 SPECULATIVE SHELL BUILDINGS
manufacture or process products or for community development organizations,
not-for-profit cooperative associations under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa, or
for-profit entities to market a building or structure as a speculative shell building,
which determination must receive prior approval from the City Council.
3. “Speculative shell building” means a building or structure owned and
constructed or reconstructed by a community development organization, a not-forprofit
cooperative association under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa, or for-profit
entity without a tenant or buyer for the purpose of attracting an employer or user
which will complete the building to the employer's or user's specification for
manufacturing, processing, or warehousing the employer's or user's product line.
Speculative shell buildings do not include properties developed for or marketed as
service-oriented businesses such as, but not limited to, commercial office or retail
space.
166.03 ELIGIBILITY FOR TAX EXEMPTION. An exemption from property
taxation is hereby allowed for the new construction of shell buildings by community
development organizations, not-for-profit cooperative associations under Chapter 499 of
the Code of Iowa, or for-profit entities for speculative purposes or the portion of the value
added by buildings being reconstructed or renovated by community development
organizations, not-for-profit cooperative associations under Chapter 499 of the Code of
Iowa, or for- profit entities in order to become speculative shell buildings. This
exemption shall apply only (1) for properties that are currently served with public water
and sewer and for which no road improvements are needed; or (2) for properties for
which the developer will assume all responsibilities for such public improvements. An
exemption shall not be granted a speculative shell building of a not-for-profit cooperative
association under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa or a for-profit entity, if the building is
used by the cooperative association or for-profit entity, or a subsidiary or majority owners
thereof for other than as a speculative shell building. Eligibility for an exemption as a
speculative shell building shall be determined as of January 1 of the assessment year.
166.04 APPLICATION FOR TAX EXEMPTION An application shall be filed for
each project resulting in actual value added for which an exemption is claimed. The
application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property with the Linn
County Assessor's Office by February 1 of the assessment year in which the value added
is first assessed for taxation. Applications for exemption shall be made on forms
prescribed by the Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the
nature of the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the
Director of Revenue.
166.05 DURATION The tax exemption or partial tax exemption shall be effective for
the assessment year in which the building is first assessed for property taxation or the
assessment year in which the reconstruction or renovation first adds value and all
subsequent years until the property is leased or sold or until the exemption is terminated
CHAPTER 166 SPECULATIVE SHELL BUILDINGS
by ordinance of the City Council. If the shell building or any portion of the shell building
is leased or sold, the portion of the shell building which is leased or sold shall not be
entitled to an exemption under this subsection for subsequent years. Upon the sale of the
shell building, the shell building shall be considered new construction for purposes of
Section 427B.1 of the Code of Iowa if used for purposes set forth in Section 427B.1.
(Ord. 04-02 – May. 04 Supp.)
CHAPTER 167 RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX
OFFENDERS
CHAPTER 167
RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX OFFENDERS
167.01 Purpose 167.04 Residency Exception
167.02 Definitions 167.05 Violations
167.03 Residency Restriction
167.01 PURPOSE. This chapter is a regulatory measure aimed at protecting the health
and safety of children in Marion from the risk that convicted sex offenders may reoffend
in locations close to their residences. As recognized by the Eighth Circuit United States
Court of Appeals in its April 29, 2005, decision of Doe v. Miller, and as recognized by
the Iowa Supreme Court in State v. Seering, decided on July 29, 2005, the City finds and
declares that sex offenders are a serious threat to public safety. When convicted sex
offenders reenter society, they are much more likely than any other type of offender to be
re-arrested for a new rape or sexual assault. Given the high rate of recidivism for sex
offenders and that reducing opportunity and temptation is important to minimizing the
risk of reoffense, there is a need to protect children where they congregate or play in
public places in addition to the protections afforded by state law near schools and day
care centers. The City finds and declares that, in addition to schools and daycare centers,
children congregate or play at public parks, swimming pools, multi-use recreational trails
and libraries.
167.02 DEFINITIONS. As used in this chapter and unless the context otherwise
requires:
1. “Aggravated offense” means a conviction for any of the following offenses:
A. Sexual abuse in the first degree in violation of Iowa Code Section
709.2.
B. Sexual abuse in the second degree in violation of Iowa Code Section
709.3.
C. Sexual abuse in the third degree in violation of Iowa Code Section
709.4. subsection 1.
D. Lascivious acts with a child in violation of Iowa Code Section 709.8,
subsection 1.
E. Assault with intent to commit sexual abuse in violation of Iowa
Code Section 709.11.
F. Burglary in the first degree in violation of Iowa Code Section 713.3,
subsection 1, paragraph “d”.
CHAPTER 167 RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX
OFFENDERS
G. Kidnapping, if sexual abuse as defined in Iowa Code Section 709.1
is committed during the offense.
H. Murder, if sexual abuse as defined in Iowa Code Section 709.1 is
committed during the offense.
I. Criminal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus in
violation of Iowa Code Section 709C.1, subsection l, paragraph “a”.
2. “Criminal offense against a minor” means any of the following criminal
offenses or conduct:
A. Kidnapping of a minor, except for the kidnapping of a minor in the
third degree committed by a parent.
B. False imprisonment of a minor, except if committed by a parent.
C. Any indictable offense involving sexual conduct directed toward a
minor.
D. Solicitation of a minor to engage in an illegal sex act.
E. Use of a minor in a sexual performance.
F. Solicitation of a minor to practice prostitution.
G. Any indictable offense against a minor involving sexual contact with
the minor.
H. An attempt to commit an offense enumerated in this subsection.
I. Incest committed against a minor.
J. Dissemination and exhibition of obscene material to minors in
violation of Iowa Code Section 728.2.
K. Admitting minors to premises where obscene material is exhibited in
violation of Iowa Code Section 728.3.
L. Stalking in violation of Iowa Code Section 708.11, subsection 3,
paragraph “b”, subparagraph (3), if the fact-finder determines by clear and
convincing evidence that the offense was sexually motivated.
M. Sexual exploitation of a minor in violation of Iowa Code Section
728.12.
N. Enticing away a minor in violation of Iowa Code Section 710.10,
subsection 1.
O. An indictable offense committed in another jurisdiction which would
constitute an indictable offense under paragraphs A through N.
3. “Other relevant offense” means any of the following offenses:
CHAPTER 167 RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX
OFFENDERS
A. Telephone dissemination of obscene materials in violation of Iowa
Code Section 728.15.
B. Rental or sale of hard-core pornography in violation of Iowa Code
Section 728.4.
C. Indecent exposure in violation of Iowa Code Section 709.9.
D. Incest committed against a dependent adult as defined in Iowa Code
Section 235B.2 in violation of Iowa Code Section 726.2.
E. A criminal offense committed in another jurisdiction which would
constitute an indictable offense under paragraphs A through D if committed
in this state.
4. “Person” means a person who has committed a criminal offense against a
minor, or an aggravated offense, sexually violent offense, or other relevant offense
that involved a minor.
5. “Residence” means the place where a person sleeps, which may include
more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory.
6. “Sexually violent offense” means any of the following indictable offenses:
A. Sexual abuse as defined under Iowa Code Section 709.1.
B. Assault with intent to commit sexual abuse in violation of Iowa
Code Section 709.11.
C. Sexual misconduct with offenders in violation of Iowa Code Section
709.16.
D. Any of the following offenses, if the offense involves sexual abuse
or attempted sexual abuse: murder, attempted murder, kidnapping,
burglary, or manslaughter.
E. A criminal offense committed in another jurisdiction which would
constitute an indictable offense under paragraphs A through D if committed
in this state.
167.03 RESIDENCY RESTRICTION.
1. A person shall not reside within two thousand (2,000) feet of the real
property comprising any of the following:
A. A public park;
B. A public swimming pool;
C. A public library; or
D. A multi-use recreational trail.
CHAPTER 167 RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX
OFFENDERS
2. The distance shall be measured from the closest boundary line of the
residence to the closest boundary line of the public park, property on which the
swimming pool or library is located, or multi-use recreational trail.
167.04 RESIDENCY EXCEPTION. A person residing within two thousand (2,000)
feet of the real property comprising a public park, swimming pool, library, or multi-use
recreational trail does not commit a violation of this chapter if any of the following apply:
1. The person is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility
or other correctional institution or facility.
2. The person is subject to an order of commitment under Chapter 229A of the
Iowa Code.
3. The person has established a residence prior to the effective date of this
chapter (December 22, 2005), or a public park, swimming pool, library or multiuse
recreational trail is newly located on or after the effective date of this chapter
(December 22, 2005) and the person has established a residence prior to the date
of the start of construction of such newly located public park, swimming pool,
library or multi-use recreational trail.
4. The person is a minor or ward under a guardianship.
167.05 VIOLATIONS. Any person who resides within two thousand (2,000) feet of
the real property comprising a public park, swimming pool, library or multi-use
recreational trail in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by fine or imprisonment as provided by Section 1.06 of this Code of Ordinances or shall
be guilty of a municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty as provided by Chapter 4
of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ch. 167 - Ord. 05-40 – Feb. 06 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 1
INDEX TO CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
ABANDONED ANIMALS ................................................................. Sec. 55.04
ABANDONED VEHICLES ............................................................... Ch. 80
Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles
Definitions
Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles
Duties of Demolisher
Extension of Time
Fees for Impoundment
Notice by Mail
Notification in Newspaper
Proceeds from Sales
See also IMPOUNDING VEHICLES ............................................... Sec. 70.06
ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES ...................................................... Ch. 50
ABATEMENT OF TAXES ................................................................ Ch. 8
ACCESS ON PUBLIC STREETS .................................................... Sec. 140.12
ACCOUNTING RECORDS .............................................................. Sec. 7.07
ADDRESS IDENTIFICATION SIGNS ........................................... Sec. 144.04
AIRPORT COMMITTEE ................................................................. Ch. 177
ALARM BUSINESSES AND USERS .............................................. Ch. 134
Action on Alarm Agent Applications
Action on Business License Applications
Administrative Rules
Alarm Agents; Identification Cards
Automatic Dialing Devices
Central Stations – Standards
Direct Connections to Police Department
False Alarms
False Fire Alarms
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 2
ALARM BUSINESSES AND USERS (continued) ........................... Ch. 134
Identification Cards; Form; Return of Cards
Inspection of Alarm Devices and Businesses
Judicial Review
License for Alarm Business
License Renewals
Modified Central Stations – Standards
Notice of Disruption in Service
Revocation of Alarm Licenses
Revocation of Identification Cards
Service by Mail
Statistical Data
Testing of Equipment
ALARMS, FALSE .............................................................................. Sec. 134.19
and Sec. 134.22
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION ................. Ch. 45
Persons Under Legal Age
Public Consumption or Intoxication
See also Alcoholic Beverages in Parks ................................................. Sec. 47.07
See also Open Containers in Motor Vehicles ....................................... Sec. 62.08
See also LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND
BEER PERMITS .......................................................... Ch. 120
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES ................... Ch. 75
Accident Reports
Definitions
General Regulations
Negligence
Places of Operation
AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSES............................................. Ch. 133
Ambulance Service License Required
Application for License
Attendant-Driver Permits
Criteria for License
Definitions
Enforcement
Equipment and Supplies
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 3
AMBULANCES, LICENSING OF (continued) ............................... Ch. 133
Exemptions
Following Ambulance Prohibited
Interference with Duties of Attendant-Driver
Liability Insurance
Liability Limitations
Medical Director
Procedures for License Application
Prohibited Activities
Renewal of License
Reports
Revocation
Standards for Ambulance Service
AMUSEMENT LICENSES ............................................................... Ch. 131
Application for License
Definitions
Fees and Duration of License
Inspection and Investigation
Issuance of the License
License Required
Public Indecent Exposure in Certain Establishments
Regulations
ANIMAL CONTROL ........................................................................ Ch. 55
Abandonment of Cats and Dogs
Animal Neglect
Animals in Parks and On Golf Courses
Annoyance or Disturbance
At Large Prohibited
At Large: Impoundment
Certain Bothersome Animal Permits
Confinement
Confinement of Female Animals in Heat
Damage or Interference
Definitions
Livestock Neglect
Number of Animals
Owner’s Duty
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 4
ANIMAL CONTROL (continued) ..................................................... Ch. 55
Police Service Dogs
Rabies Vaccination
Seizure of Vicious or Dangerous Animals
Tethering of Animals
Unhealthful or Unsanitary Conditions
Vicious Animals
APPOINTMENTS
By Council ................................................................................. Sec. 17.03
By Mayor ................................................................................... Sec. 15.02
ARTS COUNCIL ................................................................................ Ch. 28
ASSAULT ............................................................................................ Sec. 40.01
See also PUBLIC PEACE
AUCTIONEERS ................................................................................. Sec. 130.19
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR ON PUBLIC PROPERTY .................... Sec. 69.05(2)
BARBED WIRE.................................................................................. Sec. 176.35(17)
BEER, LIQUOR AND WINE CONTROL ...................................... Ch. 45
See ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
See also LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE
BEER PERMITS .......................................................... Ch. 120
BICYCLE LICENSING ..................................................................... Ch. 77
Attachment of License Tag
Impoundment of Unlicensed Bicycles
Inspection of Bicycles
Issuance of License
License Fee; Validity
License Required
Lost or Damaged Sticker
Requirements Imposed on Rental Agencies
Transfer of Ownership
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 5
BICYCLE REGULATIONS ................................................................................. Ch. 76
Bicycle Paths
Carrying Articles
Double Riding Restricted
Emerging from Alley or Driveway
Equipment Requirements
Exemptions
Improper Riding
Parking
Riding on Sidewalks
Speed
Towing
Traffic Code Applies
Two Abreast Limit
BILL POSTERS ..................................................................................................... Sec. 130.15
BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS ......................................................................... Ch. 131
BINGO HALLS ...................................................................................................... Ch. 131
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ................................................................................ Sec. 176.36
BONDS
Alarm Businesses ........................................................................................ Sec. 134.02(2)
City Officials ............................................................................................... Sec. 5.02
Excavations ................................................................................................. Sec. 146.05
Pawnbrokers ................................................................................................ Sec. 130.18(1)
Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants ........................................... Sec. 122.13
Sign Contractors .......................................................................................... Sec. 176.31(15)
BOW AND ARROW HUNTING ......................................................................... Sec. 41.09
BUDGET AMENDMENTS
See also FISCAL MANAGEMENT ...................................................................... Sec. 7.06
BUDGET PREPARATION
See also FISCAL MANAGEMENT ...................................................................... Sec. 7.05
BUILDING CODE .................................................................................. Ch. 160
Amendments to the Building Code
Assembly Group A
Attic, Habitable
Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems
Board of Appeals
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 6
BUILDING CODE (continued) ............................................................................ Ch. 160
Certificate of Occupancy
Chimney Enclosures
Code on File
Condominium Conversions
Design Criteria
Educational Group E
Exception (Backwater Valve
Expiration
Exterior Wall Projections
Exterior Walls
Fire Alarms Group R-2
Fire Protection of Floors
Floor-Level Exit Signs
Foundation Drainage Systems
Frost Closure
Fuel Gas Piping
Glazing Adjacent to Doors
Incidental Uses Area Limitations
Incidental Uses Table 509
International Building Code Adopted
Marking and Identification
Name of Jurisdiction
Opening Protection
Public Toilet Facilities
Reinspection Fees
Repeal of Exception (This Door to Remain Unlocked)
Repeal of Section (Window Sills)
Repeal Section – Lighting Systems
Schedule of Permit Fees
Seat Stability
Sewer Depth
Slab on Grade Foundations
Smoke Alarms
Stairs and Exits
Subsurface Landscape Irrigation Systems
Swimming Pool Drainage Systems
Swimming Pools and Spas
Swimming Pools Barrier
Townhouses
Two-Family Dwellings
Valuation
Violations and Penalties
Water Heater Pan Drain Termination
Work Exempt from Permit
BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT ...................................................... Ch. 30
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 7
BUILDING MOVERS........................................................................ Ch. 123
See also HOUSE MOVERS
BUILDING PERMITS ....................................................................... Ch. 160
BURGLAR ALARMS ........................................................................ Ch. 129
BURNING ON STREETS AND ALLEYS ....................................... Sec. 140.08
BUSINESS LICENSES ...................................................................... Ch. 130
Appeal
Application; Fee
Auctioneers
Bill Posters
Dealers in Used Articles
Definitions
Effect of Revocation
Exemptions
Exhibition of Certificate
Junk Dealers
License Required
Pawnbrokers
Persons Entitled to License
Power to Inspect and Investigate
Purchases from Minors
Rebates
Refusal and Appeal
Revocation
Scavengers
Term of License
Transfer
CABLE TELEVISION
Franchise Granted to New Cox Cable ....................................... Ch. 112
Franchise Granted to McLeodUSA ........................................... Ch. 113
CAR WASHING ON STREETS ....................................................... Sec. 140.07
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 8
CEMETERY ....................................................................................... Ch. 115
Cemetery Management
Definition
Perpetual Care
Rates and Charges
Records
Rules and Regulations
Sale of Lots
Vandalism in Cemetery
CHARTER ......................................................................................... Ch. 2
Article I – Powers
Article II – City Council
Article III – City Manager
Article IV – Repeal of Previous Charter
Form of Government
CIGARETTE PERMITS ................................................................... Ch. 121
Application
Definitions
Fees
Issuance and Expiration
Permit Required
Permit Revocation
Persons Under Legal Age
Refunds
Self-service Sales Prohibited
CIRCUSES, RODEOS AND CARNIVALS ..................................... Ch. 131
CITY ATTORNEY ............................................................................. Ch. 19
Appointment and Compensation
Council Meetings
Ordinance Preparation
Power
Prepare Legal Documents
Provide Legal Opinion
Representation of City Employees
Review and Comment
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 9
CITY CHARTER ............................................................................... Ch. 2
CITY CLERK ..................................................................................... Ch. 18
Appointment
Attendance at Meetings
City Seal
City Treasurer
Elections
Issue Licenses and Permits
Maintain Records
Powers and Duties
Publication Requirements
Recording Measures
See also CITY OPERATING PROCEDURES
CITY COUNCIL ................................................................................ Ch. 17
Appointments
Compensation
Meetings
Powers and Duties
See also CITY OPERATING PROCEDURES
CITY ELECTIONS ............................................................................ Sec. 5.14
CITY FORESTER .............................................................................. Sec. 152.03
CITY MANAGER .............................................................................. Ch. 20
Appointment and Compensation
Appointments; Supervision of Other Personnel
Duties
See also City Manager .......................................................................... Sec. 2.04
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES ........................................... Ch. 5
See also CITY OPERATING PROCEDURES
CITY OPERATING PROCEDURES............................................... Ch. 5
Bonds
Books and Records
City Elections
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 10
CITY OPERATING PROCEDURES (continued) ........................... Ch. 5
Conflict of Interest
Duties
Gifts
Meetings
Mileage
Oaths
Place of Residence
Removal of Appointed Officers
Resignations
Transfer to Successor
Vacancies
CITY TREASURER ........................................................................... Sec. 18.14
CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION ...................................................... Ch. 31
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION .................................................... Ch. 25
CLANDESTINE LABORATORIES/GROW OPERATIONS....... Ch. 49A
CLERK ................................................................................................ Ch. 18
See also CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES ................................................................ Ch. 1
Altering Code
Amendments
Catchlines and Notes
City Powers
Codification Service
Definitions
Extension of Authority
General Standards for Action
Indemnity
Personal Injuries
Rules of Construction
Severability
Standard Penalty
Warrants
COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS ...................... Sec. 176.40
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 11
COMPENSATION
City Attorney ............................................................................. Sec. 19.01
City Clerk................................................................................... Sec. 18.01
City Manager ............................................................................. Sec. 20.01
Council Members ...................................................................... Sec. 17.04
Mayor ......................................................................................... Sec. 15.03
Mayor Pro Tem .......................................................................... Sec. 16.04
COMPETITION WITH PRIVATE ENTERPRISES ..................... Ch. 6
CONFLICT OF INTEREST ............................................................. Sec. 5.07
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE PRECURSORS ............................. Ch. 49
COUNCIL ........................................................................................... Ch. 17
COUNCIL MEETINGS ..................................................................... Sec. 17.02
CURFEW............................................................................................. Sec. 46.01
DANCE HALL LICENSE ................................................................. Ch. 131
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS ............................................................. Ch. 150
Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
Alterations, Additions and Repairs
Appeals
Board of Appeals
Compliance with Orders
Conflict of Ordinances
Definitions
Enforcement, General
Extension of Time to Perform Work
Hearing Appeals
Inspection of Work
Interference with Repair or Demolition Work
Notice to Vacate
Notices and Orders Re Buildings
Performance of Work
Recordation of Notice and Order
Repair or Demolition; Recovery of Cost
Repair, Vacation and Demolition
Violations
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 12
DEALERS IN USED ARTICLES ..................................................... Sec. 130.20
DEPOSITS AND INVESTMENTS ................................................... Sec. 7.03(2)
See also FISCAL MANAGEMENT
DISORDERLY CONDUCT .............................................................. Sec. 40.03
See also PUBLIC PEACE
DOGS ................................................................................................... Ch. 55
See also ANIMAL CONTROL
DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS ......................................................... Ch. 145
Definitions
Driveway Construction
Excavations
Fee for Permit
Inspection and Approval
Permit Required
Revocation of Permit
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA .............................................................. Ch. 48
ELECTIONS ....................................................................................... Sec. 5.14
See also CITY CLERK ....................................................................... Sec. 18.12
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE ................................................................. Ch. 111
ELECTRICAL CODE ....................................................................... Ch. 162
Adoption of Codes
Amendments to the Electrical Codes
Counter Tops
Electrical Board of Appeals
Electrical Maintenance Permits
Emergency Work
Paragraphs Added to Article 230
Receptacles
Schedule of Permit Fees
Smoke Detectors
Uses Not Permitted – NM Cable
Uses Permitted – NM Cable
Wiring in or on Public Property
Working Space
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 13
ELECTRICIANS, LICENSING OF ................................................. Ch. 124
EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENTS ................................................... Sec. 5.15
ENGINE BRAKING .......................................................................... Sec. 62.15
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL ....................................... Ch. 155
Appeals
Definitions
Enforcement
Fees Established
Filling Requirements
Inspection, Notice to Comply and Notice of Violation
Major Erosion Control Permit Required
Minor Erosion Control Permit Required
Permit Renewals
Powers of Authority for Inspection
Repair and Clean-up of Damage
Requirements for Sites Covered by Iowa DNR General Permit No. 2
SWPPP Required
SWPPP Requirements
SWPPP Review and Approval Procedure
EXCAVATIONS ................................................................................. Ch. 146
Application
Care of Excavated Material
City’s Right to Restore Surface
Cleanup
Clearance for Fire Equipment
Construction Standards
Damage to Existing Improvements
Definitions
Emergency Action
Excavation Permit
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 14
EXCAVATIONS (continued) ............................................................. Ch. 146
Fees
Inspections
Insurance
Liability of City
Maintain Drawings
Noise, Dust and Debris
Not Applicable to City Work
Preservation of Monuments
Prompt Completion of Work
Property Lines and Easements
Protection of Adjoining Property
Protection of Traffic
Protection of Water Courses
Protective Measures
Removal and Protection of Utilities
Routing of Traffic
Sidewalk Excavations
Surety Bond
Urgent Work
FALSE ALARMS ............................................................................... Sec. 134.19
and Sec. 134.22
FINANCE DIRECTOR...................................................................... Sec. 7.02
See also FISCAL MANAGEMENT
FINANCES .......................................................................................... Ch. 7
See also FISCAL MANAGEMENT
FINANCIAL REPORTS .................................................................... Sec. 7.08
FIRE ALARMS .................................................................................. Ch. 160
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 15
FIRE DEPARTMENT ....................................................................... Ch. 36
Authority to Cite Violations
Calls Outside City Limits
Department Appointments
Establishment and Purpose
Fees for Services
Fire Chief: Duties
Liability Insurance
Organization
Supplemental Paramedics
Worker’s Compensation and Liability Insurance
See also COMPETITION WITH PRIVATE ENTERPRISES ....... Sec. 6.01(2)
FIRE HYDRANTS ............................................................................. Sec. 42.07
FIRE LANES ...................................................................................... Sec. 69.09
FIRE PREVENTION CODE............................................................. Ch. 164
Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
Amendments to Fire Prevention Code
Appeals
Modifications
FIRE PROTECTION IN MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES ..... Sec. 151.25
FIRES IN PARKS............................................................................... Sec. 47.08
FIREWORKS PERMIT .................................................................... Sec. 41.11
See also License for Fireworks Display ............................................... Sec. 131.07
FISCAL MANAGEMENT ................................................................ Ch. 7
Accounting
Budget Amendments
Budget Preparation
Cash Controls
Construction Maintenance Fund
Finance Director
Financial Reports
Fund Control
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 16
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS .................................................... Sec. 176.39
FRAUD ................................................................................................ Sec. 42.05
FUNDS ................................................................................................. Sec. 7.04
GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL ............................... Ch. 105
See also SOLID WASTE
GAS FRANCHISE.............................................................................. Ch. 110
GIFTS, CITY OFFICIALS................................................................ Sec. 5.11
GOLF CART OPERATIONS ........................................................... Sec. 62.12
HANDICAPPED PARKING
See Persons With Disabilities Parking ................................................. Sec. 69.07
HARASSMENT .................................................................................. Sec. 40.02
See also PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY .................................... Sec. 41.04
See also PUBLIC PEACE
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS ............................................. Ch. 37
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION ............................. Ch. 29
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX ....................................................................... Ch. 128
Collection
Effective Date of Tax
Renting and Rent Defined
Restrictions on Use of Revenues
Tax Imposed
HOUSE MOVERS .............................................................................. Ch. 123
Application for Permit
Curb Protection
Damages
Definitions
Display of Permit
Equipment
Insurance
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 17
HOUSE MOVERS (continued) .......................................................... Ch. 123
Issuance of Permit
Permit
Report
Restrictions
Safety
Sewer Connections
Utilities Connections
HOUSING CODE ............................................................................... Ch. 165
Amendments to the Property Maintenance Code
Board of Appeals
Certification of Inspected Housing
Code on File
Definitions
Housing Official
International Property Maintenance Code Adopted
Lead-Based Paint
Overcrowding
Penalties and Corrective Actions
Plans of Inspection
Registration and Fees
Scope
Unsafe Structures and Equipment
HUNTING AND TRAPPING ............................................................ Sec. 47.06
ILLICIT DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM .............. Ch. 91
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 18
IMPOUNDING
Animals ...................................................................................... Sec. 55.18
Vehicles ..................................................................................... Sec. 70.06
and Sec. 80.02
INDECENT EXPOSURE .................................................................. Sec. 131.08
INDUSTRIAL TAX EXEMPTION .................................................. Ch. 8
Amounts Eligible
Applications
Approval
Definitions
Dual Exemptions Prohibited
Limitations
Period of Exemptions
Repealed
INVESTMENTS AND DEPOSITS ................................................... Sec. 7.03(2)
See also FISCAL MANAGEMENT
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES ........................................................ Ch. 51
Definitions
Exceptions
Notice to Abate
Nuisance
Parking Unlicensed Vehicles
JUNK DEALERS................................................................................ Sec. 130.16
LIBRARY ............................................................................................ Ch. 21
Annual Report
Contracting With Other Libraries
Injury to Property
Nonresident Use
Notice Posted
Powers and Duties
Theft
Trustees
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 19
LICENSES
Alarm Businesses and Users ...................................................... Ch. 134
Ambulances ............................................................................... Ch. 133
Amusements .............................................................................. Ch. 131
Auctioneers ................................................................................ Sec. 130.19
Bicycles...................................................................................... Ch. 77
Bill Posters ................................................................................. Sec. 130.15
Bingo Halls ................................................................................ Sec. 131.07
Bowling Alleys .......................................................................... Sec. 131.07
Business ..................................................................................... Ch. 130
Circuses, Rodeos and Carnivals ................................................ Sec. 131.07
Dance Halls................................................................................ Sec. 131.07
Dealers in Used Articles ............................................................ Sec. 130.20
Electricians ................................................................................ Ch. 124
Fireworks Displays .................................................................... Sec. 131.07
Fortune Tellers ........................................................................... Sec. 131.07
Junk Dealers .............................................................................. Sec. 130.16
Liquor ........................................................................................ Ch. 120
Mechanical Contractors ............................................................. Ch. 126
Pawnbrokers .............................................................................. Sec. 130.18
Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants ........................... Ch. 122
Plumbers .................................................................................... Ch. 125
Public Amusements ................................................................... Ch. 131
Scavengers ................................................................................. Sec. 130.17
Sign Contractors ........................................................................ Sec. 176.31(15)
Skating Rinks ............................................................................. Sec. 131.07
Snow Plowers for Hire .............................................................. Sec. 130.22
Solid Waste Collection Vehicles ............................................... Sec. 105.10
Taxicabs ..................................................................................... Ch. 132
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE
AND BEER PERMITS ........................................................... Ch. 120
General Prohibition
License or Permit Required
Location
Nudity Prohibited
Prohibited Sales and Acts
Regulations Covering Business
Teen Nights
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 20
LITTERING
Park Regulations ........................................................................ Sec. 47.04
Solid Waste Control ................................................................... Sec. 105.08
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS, VEHICLES ................. Ch. 66
Load Limits on Bridges
Load Limits on Streets
Permits
Temporary Embargo
Truck Routes
MAJOR STREETS ............................................................................. Sec. 176.38
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES ............. Ch. 151
Area Requirements
Areas for Accessory Uses
Definitions
Density and Bulk Requirements
Electrical Distribution System
Fire Protection
Individual Water Riser Pipes and Connections
Insect and Rodent Control
Manufactured/Mobile Home Sites
Manufactured/Mobile Home Storm Shelters
Manufactured/Mobile Homes Located Outside
of Manufactured/Mobile Home Communities
Natural Gas System
Perimeter Area Requirements
Recreational Vehicles
Refuse Handling
Required Parking Areas
Required Recreation Areas
Responsibilities of Community Management
Responsibilities of Community Occupants
Restriction on Occupancy
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 21
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES (cont.) .. Ch. 151
Sewage Disposal
Site Drainage Requirements
Site Requirements
Soil and Ground Cover Requirements
Street Systems
Variations and Exceptions
Walks
Water Supply
Zoning Required
MARION ARTS COUNCIL .............................................................. Ch. 28
MAYOR ............................................................................................... Ch. 15
Appointments
Compensation
Powers and Duties
See also CITY OPERATING PROCEDURES
MAYOR PRO TEM ........................................................................... Ch. 16
Compensation
Powers and Duties
Voting Rights
MECHANICAL CODE...................................................................... Ch. 163
Amendments to the Mechanical Code
Board of Appeals
Code on File
Conflicts
Fee Refunds
Fuel Gas Pipe Location
Gas Pipe Joints
International Fuel Gas Code
Mechanical Code Adopted
Permit Fees
Violation
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 22
MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF ................... Ch. 126
MINORS .............................................................................................. Ch. 46
Cigarettes and Tobacco
Contributing to Delinquency
Curfew
See also: Billiard and Pool Halls ................................................... Sec. 131.06(3)
Persons Under Legal Age ............................................... Sec. 45.01
Persons Under Legal Age ............................................... Sec. 121.07
Persons Younger Than Eighteen Prohibited................... Sec. 127.18
Possession, Manufacture Or Delivery Of
Drug Paraphernalia By Minors ................................ Sec. 48.07
Purchases from Minors ................................................... Sec. 130.21
and Sec. 130.16(3)
MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES ................................................. Ch. 151
MORATORIUMS............................................................................... Sec. 1.16
and Sec. 176.48
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS .......................................................... Ch. 4
Alternative Relief
Civil Citations
Criminal Penalties
Environmental Violation
Penalties
NAMING OF STREETS .................................................................... Ch. 144
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE ......................................................... Ch. 110
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 23
NOISE .................................................................................................. Ch. 53
Definitions
Enforcement
Noise Prohibitions and Limited Sound Sources
Permits to Exceed Limits
See also: Disorderly Conduct ........................................................... Sec. 40.03(2)
Lights and Noisemakers .................................................... Sec. 122.15
Noise, Dust and Debris...................................................... Sec. 146.28
Quiet Zones ....................................................................... Sec. 62.05
Sound Amplifiers in Parks ................................................ Sec. 47.13
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE .................................... Ch. 50
Abatement by City
Collection of Costs
Emergency Abatement
Failure to Abate
Hearing
Method of Service
Notice to Abate
Nuisance Defined
Other Conditions
OATH OF OFFICE ............................................................................ Sec. 5.01
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS ............................................ Ch. 98
See also SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC ........................................................................ Ch. 68
OPEN MEETINGS ............................................................................. Sec. 5.06
OPERATING PROCEDURES.......................................................... Ch. 5
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED HEATING SYSTEMS ...................... Ch. 41A
PARADES, MARCHES, WALKS AND DEMONSTRATIONS ... Sec. 42.08
PARK BOARD.................................................................................... Ch. 23
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 24
PARK REGULATIONS .................................................................... Ch. 47
Alcoholic Beverages
Dead Wood
Fires
Golf
Hunting and Trapping
Littering
Park Hours
Rockets and Model Airplanes
Sales and Services
Sound Amplifiers
Trees and Plants
Use of Roads Required
Weapons and Dangerous Toys
See also Animals in Parks and on Golf Courses................................... Sec. 55.13
See also PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
PARKING REGULATIONS ............................................................. Ch. 69
Angle Parking – Manner
Fire Lanes
Park Adjacent to Curb
Park Adjacent to Curb – One-way Street
Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal
Parking Limited or Controlled
Parking on Private Property
Parking Prohibited
Persons With Disabilities Parking
Snow Emergency Parking
Snow Routes
Truck Parking Limited
PAWNBROKERS............................................................................... Sec. 130.18
PEACE OFFICERS
Qualifications ............................................................................ Sec. 35.03
See also POLICE DEPARTMENT
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 25
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS ................................................. Ch. 122
Application for License; Issuance
Bond
Definitions
FDA Standard for Pushcart Operators and Vendors
Fees
Hand-washing Facilities
Hours of Operation
Insurance
License Required
License Revocation
License Suspension
Lights and Noisemakers
List of Approved Food and Beverage Items
Potentially Hazardous Foods
Rebates
Restrictions
Sales on Right-of-way
Truck Sales Prohibited
Waste Retention and Refuse Disposal
PEDESTRIANS .................................................................................. Ch. 67
PENALTY, STANDARD ................................................................... Sec. 1.06
See also MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
PERMITS
Alcoholic Beverages in Parks .................................................... Sec. 47.07
Beer and Wine ........................................................................... Ch. 120
Bothersome Animals ................................................................. Sec. 55.20
Building ..................................................................................... Ch. 160
Cigarette..................................................................................... Sec. 121.02
Driveway.................................................................................... Sec. 145.02
Excavations ................................................................................ Sec. 146.02
Fireworks ................................................................................... Sec. 41.11
Flood Plain Development .......................................................... Sec. 176.39(15)
House Mover ............................................................................. Sec. 123.02
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 26
PERMITS (continued)
On-site Wastewater System ....................................................... Sec. 98.04
Parade ........................................................................................ Sec. 42.08
Sewer Connection ...................................................................... Sec. 96.01
Sexually Oriented Businesses .................................................... Sec. 127.04
Signs .......................................................................................... Sec. 176.31(9)
and 176.31(5)(C)(4)(f)(vi)
Teen Night Events in Licensed Establishments ........................ Sec. 120.08
Tree ............................................................................................ Sec. 152.05(1)
Vehicles, Excess Size and Weight ............................................. Sec. 66.02
Vending Machines and Sales Stands on Sidewalks................... Sec. 141.17
See also LICENSES
PETTY CASH FUND ......................................................................... Sec. 7.03(3)
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT.................. Ch. 27
Department Created
Duties of the Department
Duties of the Director
Rules
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION .................................. Ch. 22
Appointed
Compensation
Powers and Duties
Term of Office
Vacancies
PLUMBERS, LICENSING OF ......................................................... Ch. 125
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 27
PLUMBING CODE ............................................................................ Ch. 161
Amendments to the Plumbing Code
Backwater Valve
Board of Appeals
Code on File
Conflicts
Cross Connection Control
Fee Refunds
Gas Pipe Joints
International Fuel Gas Code
Plumbing Code Adopted
Schedule of Fees
Uniform Plumbing Code
Violation
POLICE DEPARTMENT.................................................................. Ch. 35
Organization
Peace Officers Appointed
Peace Officer Qualifications
Police Chief Duties
Police Service Dog
Summoning Aid
Taking Weapons
Training
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 28
POLICE SERVICE DOGS ................................................................ Sec. 35.09
and Sec. 55.19
PRECINCTS AND WARDS .............................................................. Ch. 3
PRIVATE PROPERTY ..................................................................... Ch. 42
See also PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE ......................................................... Ch. 153
Amendments to the Property Maintenance Code
Authority for Enforcement
Code on File
Definitions
Emergency Abatement Measures
Interference With the Property Maintenance Official
International Property Maintenance Code Adopted
Notice to Abate
Nuisances
Overcrowding
Purpose
Request for Hearing
Scope
Unsafe Structures and Equipment
PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT .................................................... Ch. 8
See also INDUSTRIAL TAX EXEMPTION
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY ................................................... Ch. 41
Abandoned Appliances
Antenna and Radio Wires
Bow and Arrow Hunting
Discharging Weapons
Distributing Dangerous Substances
False Reports to and Communications with
Public Safety Entities
Fireworks Permit
Harassment of Public Officers and Employees
Refusing to Assist Officer
Throwing or Shooting
Urinating and Defecating
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 29
PUBLIC OFFENSES
See PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY;
PUBLIC PEACE; and PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY............................................ Ch. 42
Criminal Mischief
Defacing Proclamations or Notices
Fire Hydrants
Fraud
Parades, Marches, Walks and Demonstrations
Theft
Trespassing
Unauthorized Entry
PUBLIC PEACE ................................................................................. Ch. 40
Assault
Disorderly Conduct
Failure to Disperse
Harassment
Public Nudity
Unlawful Assembly
PUBLIC SERVICES BOARD ........................................................... Ch. 26
PUBLICATION REQUIREMENTS ................................................ Sec. 18.05
See also CITY CLERK
PUSHCARTS ...................................................................................... Ch. 122
RECYCLING ...................................................................................... Sec. 105.04(4)
REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS
AND EMPLOYEES ................................................................ Sec. 5.09
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 30
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM – BENEFITED DISTRICT
SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES ................................... Ch. 100
Connection Charge Required
Definitions
General Provisions
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM - BUILDING SEWERS
AND CONNECTIONS ............................................................ Ch. 96
Abatement of Violations
Connection Charge
Connection Requirements
Inspection Required
Mobile Home Park Sewer Extensions
Permit
Permit Fee
Pipelayer or Plumber Required
Property Owner’s Responsibility
Public Sewer Extensions
Sewer Tap
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM -
GENERAL PROVISIONS...................................................... Ch. 95
Prohibited Acts
Right of Entry
Service Outside City
Sewer Connection Required
Special Penalties
Use of Easements
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM - ON-SITE
WASTEWATER SYSTEMS .................................................. Ch. 98
Compliance with Regulations
Discharge Restrictions
Disposal of Septage
Maintenance of System
Permit Required
Systems Abandoned
When Prohibited
When Required
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 31
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM -
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES ............................................. Ch. 99
Lien for Nonpayment
Payment of Bills
Rate
Sewer Service Charges Required
See also BENEFITED DISTRICT SEWER
CONNECTION CHARGES........................................... Ch. 100
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM -
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS ................................................... Ch. 97
Prohibited Discharges
Restricted Discharges
Storm Water
SCAVENGERS ................................................................................... Sec. 130.17
SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS ........................................................... Ch. 82
SEWER RATES.................................................................................. Ch. 99
See also SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM -
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
SEWERS
See SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS ........................ Ch. 167
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES ......................................... Ch. 127
Additional Regulations for Adult Motels
Classification and Standards of Conduct and Operation
Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited
Definitions
Exemptions
Expiration of Permit
Exterior Portions of Sexually Oriented Businesses
Fees
Injunction
Inspection
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 32
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES (continued) ...................... Ch. 127
Issuance of Permit
Location Restrictions
Massages or Baths Administered by
Person of Opposite Sex
Nonconforming Uses
Notices
Permit Required
Persons Younger Than Eighteen Prohibited
Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually
Explicit Films or Videos
Revocation
Signage
Suspension
Transfer of Permit
SHOOTING GALLERIES ................................................................ Ch. 131
SIDEWALKS ...................................................................................... Ch. 141
Barricades
Construction Ordered
Debris
Defacing
Definitions
Encroachment
Failure to Repair
Fires
Maintenance
Merchandise Displays
Openings and Enclosures
Repairs Ordered
Sales Stands
Snow and Ice Removal
Standards
See also Vehicles on Sidewalks ............................................................ Sec. 62.03
SIGNS .................................................................................................. Sec. 176.31
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 33
SKATING RINKS .................................................................................. Ch. 131
SNOW PLOWERS FOR HIRE ............................................................ Sec. 130.22
SNOW REMOVAL
From Sidewalks ............................................................................ Sec. 141.03
From Streets .................................................................................. Sec. 140.11
Parking .......................................................................................... Sec. 69.10
and Sec. 69.11
SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES ....................... Ch. 75
Accident Reports
Definitions
General Regulations
Negligence
Places of Operation
SOLICITATION PROHIBITED .......................................................... Sec. 67.04
SOLICITORS ......................................................................................... Ch. 122
See also PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
SOLID WASTE CONTROL ................................................................. Ch. 105
Authority to Establish Rules
Collection Containers
Compliance
Definitions
Disposal Hierarchy
Elderly or Disability Exemption and Rates
Feedstock Collection – All Properties
Feedstock Collectors
Garbage, Refuse and Rubbish
Littering Prohibited
Municipal Collection
Private Haulers
Prohibited Practices
Rates
Sanitary Disposal Required
Tree and Brush Hauling
Vehicle Licenses
SPECULATIVE SHELL BUILDINGS ................................................ Ch. 166
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 34
SPEED REGULATIONS ....................................................................... Ch. 63
General
Minimum Speed
Parks, Cemeteries and Parking Lots
Special Speed Restrictions
State Code Speed Limits
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED ............................................................ Ch. 65
School Stops
Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
Stop or Yield
Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks
Yielding the Right-of-Way to School Crossing Guards
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT .................................................... Ch. 156
Application
Definitions
Erosion Control
Exemptions
Financing
Goal
Maintenance
Penalties
Related Ordinances
Site Plan Submittal
Storm Water Management Requirements
Sump Pump Connections
Waiver and Appeal
STORM WATER UTILITY.................................................................. Ch. 157
STREETS AND ALLEYS ..................................................................... Ch. 140
Access on Public Streets; Variances
Burning on Prohibited
Dumping of Snow
Encroachments
Maintenance of Parkings and Terraces
Obstructing and Defacing
Placing Debris on
Playing in
Removal of Warning Devices
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 35
STREETS AND ALLEYS (continued) .............................................. Ch. 140
Traveling on Barricaded Prohibited
Use for Business Purposes
Washing Vehicles on
STREET AND ALLEY VACATION AND DISPOSAL ................. Ch. 142
Disposal By Gift Limited
Disposal Procedure
Findings Required
Hearing
Planning and Zoning Commission
Power to Vacate
STREET NAMES ............................................................................... Ch. 144
Changing Name
Naming New Streets
Recording Names
STREET AND SIDEWALK GRADES ............................................ Ch. 143
Established
Record Maintained
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ..................................................... Ch. 175
Construction Maintenance Self-insurance Fund
Definitions
General Provisions
Improvements
Maintenance Bonds
Park and Open Space Dedication
Procedures and Submission Requirements for Plats
Standards for Design of Subdivisions
SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS AND BURGLAR ALARMS ........ Ch. 129
Burglar Alarms
Definitions
Exemptions
Surveillance Camera Required
Video Recording Equipment
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 36
SWITCH-BLADE KNIVES .............................................................. Sec. 41.12
TAX ABATEMENT ........................................................................... Ch. 8
See also INDUSTRIAL TAX EXEMPTION
TAXICAB AND LIMOUSINE CODE ............................................. Ch. 132
Adoption and Scope
City Taxi/Limo Driver’s License
Definitions
Duty to Carry Orderly Passengers
Illegal Use
Information
No Smoking Allowed
Rates
Revocation for Violations and Injunctive Remedy
Solicitation
Taxicab and Limousine Business License
Taximeters
Vehicle License
TERMS OF OFFICE
City Manager ............................................................................. Sec. 20.01
Clerk .......................................................................................... Sec. 18.01
Council....................................................................................... Sec. 2.03(4)
Mayor ......................................................................................... Sec. 2.03(7)
THEATERS, LICENSING OF.......................................................... Ch. 131
THEFT ................................................................................................. Sec. 42.06
TOWERS AND ANTENNAS ............................................................ Sec. 176.40
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 37
TRAFFIC CODE
See ONE-WAY TRAFFIC; PARKING REGULATIONS;
PEDESTRIANS; SPEED REGULATIONS;
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED; LOAD AND WEIGHT
RESTRICTIONS; TURNING REGULATIONS;
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
TRAFFIC CODE - ADMINISTRATION OF .................................. Ch. 60
Administration and Enforcement
Definitions
Obedience to Peace Officers
Peace Officer’s Authority
Power to Direct Traffic
Traffic Accidents: Reports
TRAFFIC CODE - ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES................. Ch. 70
Arrest or Citation
Impounding Vehicles
Parking Violations
Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
Scheduled Violations
TRAFFIC CODE - GENERAL REGULATIONS .......................... Ch. 62
Careless Driving
Clinging to Vehicles
Funeral Processions
Golf Cart Operations
Obstructing View at Intersections
Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
Play Streets Designated
Quiet Zones
Reckless Driving
Tampering with Vehicle
Vehicles on Sidewalks
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 38
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES..................................................... Ch. 61
Compliance
Crosswalks
Installation
Necessity of Signs
Standards
Traffic Control Devices
Traffic Lanes
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS ............................................................ Ch. 122
See also PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
TREASURER ...................................................................................... Sec. 18.14
TREES ................................................................................................. Ch. 152
Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice
City Forester
Definition
Enforcement
Tree Board
Trees on Private Property
Trees on Public Property
TRESPASSING................................................................................... Sec. 42.01
See also PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
TRUCK PARKING LIMITED ......................................................... Sec. 69.08
See also PARKING REGULATIONS
TRUCK ROUTES .............................................................................. Sec. 66.05
See also LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
TURNING REGULATIONS ............................................................. Ch. 64
Authority to Mark
Left Turn for Parking Prohibited
U Turns
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 39
URBAN CHICKENS AND DUCKS ................................................. Ch. 55A
URBAN RENEWAL .......................................................................... Ch. 9
URBAN REVITALIZATION ............................................................ Ch. 10
URINATING AND DEFECATING IN PUBLIC ............................ Sec. 41.10
UTILITY BOARD
See WATER UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES ........................... Ch. 24
VACANCIES IN OFFICE ................................................................. Sec. 5.10
See also CITY OPERATING PROCEDURES
VACATING STREETS OR ALLEYS.............................................. Ch. 142
VENDORS ........................................................................................... Ch. 122
VOTING PRECINCTS ...................................................................... Ch. 3
WARDS ............................................................................................... Ch. 3
WARRANTS ....................................................................................... Sec. 1.13
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM ........................................................... Ch. 90
Board of Trustees
Lien for Nonpayment
Regulations
Wells
WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION ................................................... Ch. 154
WATER UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES ................................. Ch. 24
WEAPONS .......................................................................................... Sec. 41.07
and Sec. 47.05
WEEDS ................................................................................................ Ch. 52
Authority for Enforcement
Control of Weeds or Other Vegetation
Definitions
Emergency Control Measures
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 40
WEEDS (continued) ............................................................................ Ch. 52
Enforcement
Habitual Violators
Interference with Weed Official
Natural Areas
Nuisances
WELLS ................................................................................................ Sec. 90.03
WINE
See ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
and LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS & ANTENNAS ...... Sec. 176.40
YIELD REQUIRED ........................................................................... Ch. 65
ZONING REGULATIONS ................................................................ Ch. 176
A-1 Rural Restricted
Accessory Building and Uses
Administration and Enforcement
Adoption
Amendments
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
C-2 Central Business District Commercial
C-3 General Commercial
C-3P Commercial Park
C-4 Warehouse/Commercial
Central Corridor Overlay District
Cluster Development Option
Compatibility with Community Plan
Establishment of Districts and Map
EU-1 Exclusive Use Zone 1 Sanitary Landfill
Exclusive Use Zones
Flood Plain Regulations
General Provisions
Home Occupations
I-1 Restricted Industrial
I-1P Industrial Park
I-2 General Industrial
Intent and Purpose
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 41
ZONING REGULATIONS (continued) ............................................ Ch. 176
Major Streets
Manufactured/Mobile Home Communities
Nonconforming Uses, Buildings and Structures
O-1 Office/Transitional
O-2 Office Park
Parking and Loading Regulations
Planned Development Districts
R-1 Low Density Single-Family Residential
R-2 Medium Density Single-Family Residential
R-3 Two-Family Residential
R-4 Four-Family Residential
R-5 Moderate Density Multiple-Family Residential
R-6 High Density Multiple-Family Residential
R-6A Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential
RT-1 Residential/Transitional Use
Rules and Definitions
Signs
Supplemental Regulations
Violation and Penalty
Wind Energy Conversion System
Wireless Communication Towers and Antennas
Zoning Board of Adjustment
Zoning District Map
INDEX CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER OR SECTION
NUMBER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, MARION, IOWA
INDEX - 42
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
ORDINANCE 19-17
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING SECTION 176.50, CENTRAL CORRIDOR INTERIM
DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY OF THE MARION CODE OF ORDINANCES AND REESTABLISHING
SECTION 176.50 AS TO CENTRAL CORRIDOR ZONING DISTRCTS.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MARION, IOWA:
Section 1. That Section 176.50, Central Corridor Interim Development Overlay of the
Marion Code of Ordinances is amended by deleting said section in its entirety and inserting in lieu
thereof the following:
176.50 Central Corridor Zoning Districts.
1. Purpose: The purpose of the Central Corridor Zoning Districts is to promote a built
environment which is street-oriented while encouraging pedestrian activity, and residents
living, working and shopping along the corridor.
2. Applicability: The zoning districts, design standards, and permitted uses indicated
within the Marion Central Corridor Districts Plan – 2019 are hereby adopted as an
amendment to the Zoning Code and shall be illustrated on the Zoning Map. Where
inconsistencies exist between the Central Corridor regulations and other provisions of the
Municipal Code, the Central Corridor regulations shall apply.
3. District and Sub-District Boundaries: The Central Corridor District is known as the
area generally between 2nd Street & 31st Street and 5th Avenue and 9th Avenue. The District
incorporates the sub-districts of the Uptown Marion Main Street District and locally and
nationally recognized Historic Districts. Both sub-districts will have additional review
processes outlined within this ordinance and said sub-district boundaries shall be applied
to the base district designation.
Uses Per Floor
Building Placement
L
Build-to-Line (Distance from Property Line)
Front 0’
Side Street, Corner Lot 0’
Setback
Side 0’
Rear
Adjacent to Residence 15’ min.
Adjacent to any other use 10’ min.
Building Form
Primary Street - Bldg. frontage on BTL 90% min.*
Lot Width 18’ min.
Lot Depth 120’ min.
Lot Coverage 90% max.
* Street facades must be built to BTL within 30’ of every corner.
1st Floor Retail/Service, Cultural,
Recreational & Entertainment,
Government & Institutional
Upper Floors Residential, Personal Service
Building Minimum 2 stories
Building Maximum 4 stories
Ground Floor Finish Elevation 12” max. above sidewalk
Notes
All floors must have a primary ground-floor entrance that faces
primary or side street.
Rear-facing buildings, loading docks, overhead doors, and
other service entries are prohibited on street-facing facades.
Any building over 60’ wide must be broken down to read as a
series of buildings no wider than 60’ each.
Mansard roof forms are not allowed.
Buildings greater than 16 units must provide adequate common
space for residents in the form of community rooms, roof
terraces or courtyards.
Any section along the BTL not defined by a building must be
defined by a 4’6” high architectural element.
Height
A
B
C
DD
E
G
H
I
J
K
K
L
A
B
C
D
G
H
E
K
I
J
Key
4. Uptown 1 (U-1) District Standards: The U-1 Uptown District is the Central Business
District which includes the Central Business Historic District. The intent of the U-1 district is
to preserve and promote the quality of life and historic business district. These regulations
are intended to preserve the historic buildings and in turn ensure the continued commercial
viability by maintaining the use of quality building materials, encouraging pedestrian traffic,
and preserving and enhancing community gathering spaces. The historic reference for this
type of urban form is seen on the north side of 7th Avenue, between 10th and 13th Street.
As such, new development and preservation of existing buildings are required to emulate
this historic urban form.
Setback Encroachments
O
P
Q
U
V
W
Key Key
R
Location
Front 8’ max.
Side Street 8’ max.
Rear 5’ max.
Notes
Canopies, awnings, and balconies may encroach over the BTL
into the right-of-way on the street sides and into the setback on
the rear, as shown in the shaded areas. Encroachments shall not
be within two (2’) feet of the back-of-curb (BOC).
Special exceptions may be allowed with the approval of the
Community Development Director.
Forecourts
Depth 20’ min., not to exceed width
Width 20’ min., 50% of lot width max.
Stoops
Depth 4’ min., 6’ max.
Storefront
Depth 0’ min., 6’ max.
Frontage Types
U
W
V
Parking
Location (Distance from Property Line)
Front Setback 20’
Side Setback 0’
Side Street Setback* 5’
Rear Setback 0’
* Setback may be waived when a screening element is provided
in the form of a solid wall, or densely planted compact hedge.
Such screening shall be not less than four (4) feet in height and
shall be adequately maintained. The design of the screening
element is subject to approval by the Community Development
Director.
Required Parking Spaces
Off-street parking is not required.
Notes
Parking not allowed between building and curb.
On corner lots, primary parking drive shall not be located on
primary street.
Connectivity is encouraged between adjacent lots.
Parking may be provided off-street within 300’ or as shared
parking.
O
P
R
Q
Building Placement
Setback (Distance from Property Line)
Front 12’ max.
Side Street, Corner Lot 12’ max.
Side 12’ max.
Rear
Adjacent to Residence 15’ min.
Adjacent to any other use 10’ min.
Building Form
Primary Street - Percent of bldg. on SB line 80%
Lot Width 18’ min.
Lot Depth 120’ min.
Lot Coverage 90% max.
Notes
N/A
Building Minimum 2 stories
Building Maximum 4 stories
Ground Floor Finish Elevation 12” max. above sidewalk
Notes
All floors must have a primary ground-floor entrance that faces
primary or side street.
Rear-facing buildings, loading docks, overhead doors, and other
service entries are prohibited on street-facing facades.
Any building over 75’ wide must be broken down to read as a
series of buildings no wider than 75’ each.
Mansard roof forms are not allowed.
Buildings greater than 16 units must provide adequate common
space for residents in the form of community rooms, roof
terraces or courtyards.
Height
A
B
C
D
G
H
K
K
L
5. Uptown 2 (U-2) District Standards: The U-2 Uptown District is located adjacent to
the U-1 District and in context with the roundabouts at 7th Street and 15th Street. The U-2
District is intended to be a more intensive use district than the U-1 District and allows for
full block buildout and higher densities. The District encourages residential, service, and
retail uses to develop in a mixed-use environment that supports Uptown living, shopping
and working. Similar to the U-1 District, quality materials, and pedestrian circulation and
amenities are encouraged to provide community gathering spaces.
D
E
E
A
B
C
G
H
D
K
L
Key
Parking Setback Encroachments
Location (Distance from Property Line)
Front Setback* 5’
Side Setback 0’
Side Street Setback* 5’
Rear Setback 10’
* Setback may be waived when a screening element is provided
in the form of a solid wall, or densely planted compact hedge.
Such screening shall be not less than four (4) feet in height and
shall be adequately maintained. The design of the screening
element is subject to approval by the Community Development
Director.
Required Parking Spaces
Off-street parking is not required.
Notes
Parking not allowed between building and curb.
On corner lots, primary parking drive shall not be located
on primary street.
Connectivity is encouraged between adjacent lots.
Parking may be provided off-street within 300’ in parking lots.
Location
Front 8’ max. into the setback area.
Side Street 8’ max. into the setback area.
Rear 5’ max. into the setback area.
Notes
Storefronts, Stoops, balconies, bay windows and awnings may
encroach into the setback area.
Terrace
Depth 8’ min.
Forecourts
Depth 20’ min., not to exceed width
Width 20’ min., 50% of lot width max.
Stoops
Depth 4’ min., 6’ max.
Storefront
Depth 0’ min., 6’ max.
Notes
Landscape buffer is required between U-2 and adjacent
residential, consistent with Section 176.43
Frontage Types
O
P
R
U
Q W
V
T
Key Key
Parking lot screening per Sec. 176.29-2.H.(7)
P
O
Q
R
W
V
U
T
Building Placement
D
G
A
K
B
C
H
E
Setback (Distance from Property Line)
Front 7’ min.; 15’ max.*
Side Street, Corner Lot 7’ min.; 15’ max.
Side 7’ min.
Rear 20’ min.
* 20’ to front of garage.
Building Form
Primary Street - Percent of bldg. on SB line 60%
Lot Width 18’ min.; 120’ max.
Lot Depth 120’ max.
Lot Coverage 70 %
Accessory Buildings
Front Setback 20’ plus front yard
Side Setback 5’ min. (or existing building setback)
Rear Setback 5’ min.; 10’ to an alley
Notes
N/A
Building Minimum 1 story
Building Maximum 3 stories
Accessory Building Max. 1 story
Notes
Rear-facing buildings, loading docks, overhead doors, and other
service entries are prohibited on street-facing facades.
Upper floor residential units must have a visible ground floor
entrance that faces the street.
Mansard roof forms are not allowed.
Buildings greater than 16 units must provide adequate common
space for residents in the form of community rooms, roof
terraces or courtyards.
Height
E
A
B
C
D
H
K
K
Key
6. Urban Transition Residental 1 (UTR-1) District Standards: The UTR-1, Urban
Transition Residential District is a transitional zoning district located between 7th and 8th
Avenues. This District is adjacent to exiting low density residential areas north of 8th
Avenue and generally shares a rear property line with more intense commercial development
adjacent to 7th Avenue. The intent of the district is to promote residential development in
medium densities to serve as a buffer between commercial development and primarily low
density residential neighborhoods. Lower density multi-unit development is encouraged in
the district.
G
Parking Setback Encroachments
P
O
Q
R
Key Key
Location (Distance from Property Line)
Front Setback 12’
Side Setback 0’
Side Street Setback 10’
Rear Setback 5’
Adjacent Residential 15’ w/buffer
Required Parking Spaces*
1 to 2 family residential 1.0 / dwelling
3 or more family residential 1.5 / dwelling
3 or more bedrooms 2.0 / dwelling
Retail/Service 3.5 space/1,000 GSF
Lodging 1.0 space/room
* Reference Section 176.29-2 Parking and Loading for uses not
specified; Parking lot screening per Secection 176.29-2.H.(7);
For Mixed Use developments, parking requirements can be reduced
by the shared parking factor.
Notes
On corner lots, primary parking drive shall not be located on
primary street.
Parking not allowed between primary building and curb. Single
Family front loaded garages excluded.
Connectivity is encouraged between adjacent lots.
Parking only allowed to the back or side of building or in parking
garage which is to be located to the back or side of building.
Landscape buffer is required between UTR-1 and
Uptown/Commercial Districts and adjacent residential.
Location
Front 8’ max.
Side Street 0’
Rear 0’
Notes
Porches, balconies, bay windows and awnings, may encroach
into the setback.
Common Lawn
Depth Within the front setback
Porches
Depth 8’ min.
Height 1 story max.
Terrace
Depth 8’ min.
Forecourts
Depth 20’ min., not to exceed width
Width 20’ min., 50% of lot width max.
Stoops
Depth 4’ min., 6’ max.
Frontage Types
O
P
R
U
Q W
V
W
V
U
R
Building Placement
D
G
A
K
B
C
H
E
Setback (Distance from Property Line)
Front 7’ min.; 15’ max.*
Side Street, Corner Lot 7’ min.; 15’ max.
Side 7’ min.
Rear 20’ min.
*20’ to front of a garage.
Building Form
Primary Street - Percent of bldg. on SB line 60%
Lot Width 18’ min.
Lot Depth NA
Lot Coverage 70%
Accessory Buildings
Front Setback 20’ plus front yard
Side Setback 5’ min. (or existing building setback)
Rear Setback 5’ min.; 10’ to an alley
Notes
N/A
Building Minimum 1 story
Building Maximum 4 stories
Accessory Building Max. 1 story
Notes
Rear-facing buildings, and service entries are prohibited on
street-facing facades.
Upper floor residential units must have a visible ground floor
entrance that faces the street.
Mansard roof forms are not allowed.
Buildings greater than 16 units must provide adequate common
space for residents in the form of community rooms, roof
terraces or courtyards.
Height
A
B
C
D
G
H
K
K
Key
7. Urban Transitional Residential 2 (UTR-2) District Standards: The UTR-2, Urban
Transition Residential District is located between 5th and 6th Avenue; east of 15th Street.
Formerly containing warehouse and light industrial uses and is directly adjacent to existing
medium density residential areas. The intent of the district is to encourage medium and high
density residential development with limited support commercial activities that would buffer
the existing single-family neighborhoods from more intensive commercial development
along 6th Avenue. Development is encouraged to respect the relationship to the existing
lower density residential neighborhoods south of 5th Avenue. Medium and high-density
developments are encouraged to orient to 6th Avenue.
E
Parking Setback Encroachments
P
O
Q
R
Key Key
Location (Distance from Property Line)
Front Setback 12’; same as building
Side Setback 0’
Side Street Setback 10’
Rear Setback 5’
Adjacent Residential 15’ w/buffer
Required Parking Spaces*
1 to 2 family residential 1.0 / dwelling
3 or more family residential 1.5 / dwelling
3 or more residential bedrooms 2.0 / dwelling
Commercial/Retail/Service 3.0 space/1,000 GSF
* Reference Section 176.29-2 Parking and Loading for uses not
specified; Parking lot screening per Section 176.29-2.H.(7); For
Mixed Use developments, parking requirements can be reduced
by the shared parking factor.
Notes
On corner lots, primary parking drive shall not be located on
primary street.
Parking not allowed between primary building and curb. Single
Family front loaded garages excluded.
Connectivity is encouraged between adjacent lots.
Parking only allowed to the back or side of building or in parking
garage which is to be located to the back or side of building.
Landscape buffer is required between UTR-2 and
Uptown/Commercial Districts and adjacent residential.
Location
Front 8’ max.
Side Street 0’
Rear 0’
Notes
Porches, balconies, bay windows, stoops and awnings, may
encroach into the setback.
Common Lawn
Depth Within the front setback
Porches
Depth 8’ min.
Height 1 story max.
Terrace
Depth 8’ min.
Forecourts
Depth 20’ min., not to exceed width
Width 20’ min., 50% of lot width max.
Stoops
Depth 4’ min., 6’ max.
Frontage Types
O
P
R
U
Q W
V
W
V
U
R
Building Placement
D
G
A
K
L
C
H
E
Setback (Distance from Property Line)
Front 5’ min.; 15’ max.
Side Street, Corner Lot 5’ min.; 15’ max.
Side 0’
Rear
Adjacent to Residence 15’
Adjacent to any other use 5’
Building Form
Primary Street - Bldg. Frontage on Setback 60%
Lot Width 300’ max.
Lot Depth 120’ max.
Lot Coverage 70% max.
Accessory Buildings
Front Setback 20’ plus front yard
Side Setback 5’ min. (or existing building setback)
Rear Setback 5’ min.; 10’ to an alley
Notes
N/A
Building Maximum 3 stories
Accessory Building Max. 1 story
Ground Floor Finish Elevation 12” max. above sidewalk
Notes
Rear-facing buildings, loading docks, overhead doors, and other
service entries are prohibited on street-facing facades.
Any building over 75’ wide must be broken down to read as a
series of buildings no wider than 75’ each.
Upper floor residential units must have a visible ground floor
entrance that faces the street.
Mansard roof forms are not allowed.
Buildings greater than 16 units must provide adequate common
space for residents in the form of community rooms, roof
terraces or courtyards.
Height
A
B
C
D
G
H
L
K
Key
8. Urban Transition Commercial 1 (UTC-1) District Standards: The UTC-1, Urban
Transition Commercial District is a transitional zoning district located on the north side of
7th Avenue south of Pucker Street Historic District and on either side of 7th Avenue west
of 6th Street. The district provides a buffer to residential areas north of the traditional
Central Business District. The intent of the district is to promote commercial development
which respects the relationship to adjacent residential neighborhoods. Development
will be encouraged to orient entrances to the primary street frontage and respect and be
compatible with adjacent residential uses.
E
B
D
Parking Setback Encroachments
P
O
Q
R
Key Key
Location (Distance from Property Line)
Front Setback Same as building
Side Setback 0’
Side Street Setback 10’
Rear Setback 5’
Adjacent Residential 15’ w/buffer
Required Parking Spaces*
Multi-Unit, Upper Level Dwellings 1.5 space/unit
Commercial/Retail/Service 3.5 space/1,000 GSF
Medical Office 1.0 space/150 GSF
Lodging 1.0 space/room
Bicycle Parking 1.0 space/10 vehicle space
* Reference Section 176.29-2 Parking and Loading for uses not
specified; Parking lot screening per Section 176.29-2.H.(7); For
Mixed Use developments, parking requirements can be reduced
by the shared parking factor.
Notes
On corner lots, primary parking drive shall not be located on
primary street.
Parking not allowed between Primary building and curb.
Connectivity is encouraged between adjacent lots.
Parking only allowed to the back or side of building or in parking
garage which is to be located to the back or side of building.
Landscape buffer is required between UTC-1 and adjacent
residential.
Location
Front 4’ max.
Side Street 0’ max.
Rear 0’ max
Notes
Porches, commercial storefronts, balconies, bay windows,
stoops and awnings, may encroach into the setback, as shown
in the shaded areas.
Awnings
Depth 10’ max.
Forecourts
Depth 20’ min., not to exceed width
Width 20’ min., 50% of lot width max.
Stoops
Depth 4’ min., 6’ max.
Porches
Depth 8’ min.
Height 1 story max.
Frontage Types
O
P
R
U
Q W
V
W
V
U
Building Placement
G D
A
K
C
H
E
Setback (Distance from Property Line)
Front 5’ min.; 15’ max.
Side Street, Corner Lot 5’ min.; 15’ max.
Side 0’
Rear
Adjacent to Residence 15’
Adjacent to any other use 10’
Building Form
Primary Street - Bldg. Frontage on Setback 60%
Lot Width 300’ max.
Lot Depth N/A
Lot Coverage 70% max.
Accessory Buildings
Front Setback 20’ plus front yard
Side Setback 5’ min. (or existing building setback)
Rear Setback 5’ min.; 10’ to an alley
Notes
N/A
Building Maximum 4 stories
Accessory Building Max. 1 story
Notes
All floors must have a primary ground-floor entrance that faces
the primary or side street.
Rear-facing buildings, loading docks, overhead doors, and
other service entries are prohibited on street-facing facades.
Mansard roof forms are not allowed.
Buildings greater than 16 units must provide adequate common
space for residents in the form of community rooms, roof
terraces or courtyards.
Height
A
B
C
D
G
H
K
Key
9. Urban Transitional Commercial 2 (UTC-2) District Standards: The UTC-2, Urban
Transitional Commercial District is located primarily between 6th and 7th Avenue east of
the traditional Central Business District. There is a commercial focus to the District with
an intent to encourage pedestrian oriented development yet provide for limited off-street
parking. Buildings are encouraged to be close to the front and side property lines with
parking being directed to the center of the lot. Development in the district is encouraged to
provide frontage to 6th and 7th Avenues.
E
B
D
Parking Setback Encroachments
P
O
Q
R
Key Key
Location (Distance from Property Line)
Front Setback 10’
Side Setback 0’
Side Street Setback 10’
Rear Setback 5’
Adjacent Residential 15’ w/buffer
Required Parking Spaces*
Multi-Unit, Upper Level Dwellings 1.5 space/unit
Commercial/Retail/Service 3.5 space/1,000 GSF
Medical Office 1.0 space/150 GSF
Lodging 1.0 space/room
Bicycle Parking 1.0 space/10 vehicle space
* Reference Section 176.29-2 Parking and Loading for uses not
specified; Parking lot screening per Section 176.29-2.H.(7); For
Mixed Use developments, parking requirements can be reduced
by the shared parking factor.
Notes
On corner lots, primary parking drive shall not be located on
primary street.
Parking not allowed between primary building and curb.
Connectivity is encouraged between adjacent lots.
Parking only allowed to the back or side of building or in parking
garage which is to be located to the back or side of building.
Landscape buffer is required between UTC-2 and adjacent
residential.
Location
Front 8’ max.
Side Street 0’ max.
Rear 0’ max
Notes
Porches, commercial storefronts, balconies, bay windows,
stoops and awnings, may encroach into the setback, as shown
in the shaded areas.
Forecourts
Depth 20’ min., not to exceed width
Width 20’ min., 50% of lot width max.
Stoops
Depth 4’ min., 6’ max.
Storefront
Depth 0’ min., 6’ max.
Frontage Types
O
P
R
U
Q W
V
W
V
U
T
T
R
Building Placement
D
G
A
K
B
C
H
Setback (Distance from Property Line)
Front 10’ min.
Side Street, Corner Lot 10’ min.
Side 10’ min.
Rear
Adjacent to Residence 25’
Adjacent to any other use 5’
Building Form
Primary Street - Bldg. Frontage on Setback 60%
Lot Width 150’ min.
Lot Depth N/A
Lot Coverage 70%
Accessory Buildings
Front Setback 20’ plus front yard
Side Setback 5’ min. or existing building setback
Rear Setback 5’ min.; 10’ to an alley
Notes
N/A
Building Maximum 4 stories
Accessory Building Max. 1 story
Notes
Rear-facing buildings, loading docks, overhead doors, and other
service entries are prohibited on street-facing facades.
Mansard roof forms are not allowed.
Buildings greater than 16 units must provide adequate common
space for residents in the form of community rooms, roof
terraces or courtyards.
Height
A
B
C
D
G
H
K
Key
10. Urban Commercial 1 (UC-1) District Standards: The UC-1 Urban Commercial
District is similar to Marion’s current C-3 General Commercial zoning district. Located on
the east end of Marion’s Central Corridor the District serves as a transition district to the
standard zoning districts east of the Central Corridor.
E
E
D
Parking
P
O
Q
R
Key
Location (Distance from Property Line)
Front Setback 10’
Side Setback 0’
Side Street Setback 10’
Rear Setback 5’
Adjacent Residential 15’ w/buffer
Required Parking Spaces*
Upper Level Dwellings 1.5 space/unit
Commercial/Retail/Service 3.5 space/1,000 GSF
Medical Office 1.0 space/150 GSF
Lodging 1.0 space/room
Bicycle Parking 1.0 space/10 vehicle space
* Reference Section 176.29-2 Parking and Loading for uses not
specified; Parking lot screening per Section 176.29-2.H.(7); For
Mixed Use developments, parking requirements can be reduced
by the shared parking factor.
Notes
On corner lots, primary parking drive shall not be located on
primary street.
Connectivity is encouraged between adjacent lots.
Landscape buffer is required between UC-1 and adjacent
residential.
O
P
R
Q
T
T
R
Private Frontage Types
Shared Parking Factor
Private Frontage Types
Common Yard: A planted frontage wherein the building is setback
substantially from the property line/right-of-way line. The front
yard created remains unfenced and is visually continuous with
adjacent yards, supporting a common landscape. The deep
setback provides a buffer from the higher speed thoroughfares.
Porch: A planted frontage where the building is setback from the
property lin/right-of-way line with an attached porch permitted
to encroach.
Terrace: A frontage wherein the building is setback from the
property line/right-of-way line by an elevated terrace. This type
buffers residential uses from urban sidewalks and removes the
private yard from public encroachment. Terraces are suitable for
conversion to outdoor cafes.
Forecourt: A frontage wherein the building is close to the
property line/right-of-way line and the central portion is set
back. The forecourt created is suitable for vehicular drop-offs.
This type should be located in conjunction with other Frontage
types. Large trees within the forecourts may overhang the
sidewalk.
Stoop: A frontage wherein the building is aligned close to the
property line/right-of-way line with the first story elevated from
the sidewalk sufficiently to ensure privacy for the windows. The
entrance is usually an exterior stair and landing. This type is
recommended for ground-floor residential uses.
Storefront: A frontage wherein the building is aligned close to
the property line/right-of-way line with the building entrance at
sidewalk grade. This type is conventional for retail uses. It has
substantial glazing on the sidewalk level and an awning that
should overlap the sidewalk.
For Mixed Use developments, parking requirements can be
reduced by the shared parking factor.
The Shared Parking Factor reduces the required number of
parking spaces required when calculated each separate use,
i.e. residential and comm/office, and dividing it by the Shared
Parking Factor such as 1.4 in the case of a residential and
comm/office mixed use building. The uses must be in the same
building.
Common Yard
Porch
Terrace
Forecourt
Stoop
Storefront
11. Central Corridor Design Standards: In the interest of promoting the general welfare
of the community and to protect the value of buildings and property, the image and character
of a community is considered important.
Architecture
Design Guidelines
Sign Regulations
Exterior Facade Materials
It is recognized that the community should be visually attractive,
as well as financially prosperous and the manner in which
a use is accomplished is as important as the use. The quality
of architecture and building construction is important to the
preservation and enhancement of building and property values,
prevention of the physical deterioration of buildings and the
promotion of the image of the community and the general
welfare of its citizens. Architectural design and use of materials
for the construction of any building shall be subject to the
approval of the City Council.
Consideration of exterior building materials on all sides,
coloration of materials, building height, roof line, size and
location of windows and doors, roof mounted appurtenances,
and facades.
Proportion
The relationship of width and height of the front elevations of
adjacent buildings shall be considered in the construction or
alteration of a building. The relationship of width and height of
windows and doors of adjacent buildings shall be considered in
the construction or alteration of a building. Particular attention
must be given to the scale of street level doors, walls and
windows. Large expanses of blank wall spaces at street level are
to be discouraged.
Coloration
Building colors should emphasize light and muted colors, with
light earth tones dominant. Saturated hues and bright colors
except for use in small areas is not encouraged.
Architectural Features
These features include, but are not limited to cornices,
entablatures, doors, windows, shutters, fanlights, and other
elements prevailing in the area shall be considered in the
construction or alteration of a building. It is not intended that
the details of existing buildings be duplicated precisely, but
those features should be suggestive of the extent, nature, and
scale of details that would be appropriate on new buildings or
associated with building alterations.
Exterior Facade Materials
Primary Material 75% of the wall area
(excluding glass).
Primary Exterior Material Fired Clay brick, natural
stone, glass, architectural
concrete panels, textured
concrete block, or architectural
steel,or stone panels.
Trim Not to exceed 25%
(excluding glass)
Trim Includes Moldings, cornices, parapet,
frieze, sills, lintels,
string-course, quoining,
and ledgement.
Proposed new buildings, additions, and renovations of buildings
are subject to the Central Corridor District Standards.
No wood, Masonite, asphaltic exterior wall or roof material,
aluminum or steel siding, non-architectural sheet metal, ontextured
concrete block, stucco, vinyl, E.I.F.S. (Exterior Insulation
and Finish Systems) or other similar materials shall constitute a
portion of any building, except as trim.
In order to achieve continuity along this corridor, buildings
abutting or within 300 feet of 7th Avenue/Business 151 or 6th
Avenue, shall be designed in conformance with the guidelines
herein.
Unsightly/utilitarian aspects of buildings (loading docks,
loading areas, outside storage areas, garbage dumpsters and
HVAC mechanical units) shall be screened from any public street
and adjoining properties. Preference is given to siting loading
docks or loading areas out of view from public streets.
All signage shall conform to requirements of Chapter 176.31
Signs, except as provided for below:
Electric Message Center Signs shall not be permitted within the
Central Corridor.
Other Provisions
Landscape Regulations Section 176.43
Temporary Uses Regulations Section 176.35
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
A = Permitted as Accessory Use
Artist Live/Work Space P P Y
Assisted Living Facility P
Dwelling Unit, Auxiliary (attached) P P Y
Dwelling Unit, Auxiliary (detached) P P Y
Dwelling, Efficiency/Micro P P
Dwelling, One Unit P P
Dwelling, Townhouse P P
Dwelling, Two-unit (duplex) P P
Dwelling, Three-unit (triplex) P P
Dwelling, Four-unit P P
Dwelling, Multi-Unit P P P
Dwelling, Upper level P P P P P P
Family Home P P
Group Home, Large P Y
Group Home, Small P Y
Independent Living Facility P
Bank P P P P P
Bed and Breakfast C Y
Car Wash P Y
Coffee or Tea Room C
Day Care Center C C C
Delayed Deposit C C Y
Drive-Thru Facility C P Y
Financial Institution P P P P P
Firework Sales
Funeral Home / Mortuary
Gas Station C C Y
Grocery P P
Grocery - Neighborhood P P P P P
Heavy Retail and Service
Home Improvement Center
Hotel/Motel P P P P P
Kennel Y
Medical Cannabidiol Dispensaries (Sales) Y
Medical/Dental Clinic P P P P
Medical/Dental Clinic, Not exceeding 2500
gross floor area. P P P P P
Microbrewery/Micro-Distillery/Micro-Winery P P P P
RETAIL AND SERVICE USES
RESIDENTIAL USES
U-1 UTR-1 Specific Use Standards
Zoning Districts -- Permitted and Special Uses
U-2 UTR-2 UTC-1 UTC-2 UC-1
12. Permitted Uses:
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
A = Permitted as Accessory Use
U-1 UTR-1 Specific Use Standards
Zoning Districts -- Permitted and Special Uses
U-2 UTR-2 UTC-1 UTC-2 UC-1
Motor Vehicle Rental
Motor Vehicle Sales and Leasing Y
Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Major Y
Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor Y
Office, Business and Professional P P P P P
Outdoor Sales, Permanent Y
Outdoor Sales, Temporary A A A A A Y
Pawn Shop P P
Personal Services P P P P P
Personal Services, Limited P P P P P
Professional Training Center P P P P P
Restaurant P P P P P
Retail Sales Not exceeding 2,500 gross floor
area A A C A A A
Retail Sales Large
Retail Sales, Medium P P
Retail Sales, Small P P P P P
Retail Sales, Specialty P P P P P
Sexually Oriented Business Chapter 127, Code of Ord.
Tattoo Parlor / Body Piercing Studio P P P P P
Tavern/Bar P P P P P
Veterinary Office/Animal Hospital P P Y
Art Gallery/Studio P P P P P
Carnival (as temporary use) Y
Convent/Monastery C
Cultural Facility P P P P P
Golf Course
Indoor Recreation and Amusement P A P P P
Live Entertainment A A A A A
Lodge or Private Club P P P P P
Outdoor Dining P P P P P
Outdoor Amusement
Outdoor Recreation
Outdoor Entertainment, Temporary P P P P P
Park, Neighborhood
Place of Worship C C C C C C C
Public Plaza P P P P P
Theater (Small/Large) P P P P P
CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS, RECREATIONAL AND ENTERTAINMENT USES
P
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
A = Permitted as Accessory Use
U-1 UTR-1 Specific Use Standards
Zoning Districts -- Permitted and Special Uses
U-2 UTR-2 UTC-1 UTC-2 UC-1
Cemetery
College/University P P P
Correctional Facility
Emergency Medical Center P
Fairground
Homeless Shelter C
Hospice
Hospital P
Library P P P P P
Nursing Home
Office, Government P P P P P
Post Office P
Police Firearms Training Range
Public Service Facility C C C C C
School, Specialized Instructional P P P P
School, Primary or Secondary C C
Horse Stables, Private
Parking Garage/Structure P P C C C
Parking Lot, Private C C A A A
Parking Lot, Public P P P P P
Transportation Operations Facility C C
Communication Tower Chapter 176.40, Code of Ord.
Communication Antenna A A A A A Chapter 176.40, Code of Ord.
Urban Agricultural A A A A A A A
Utility, Community/Regional C C C C C
Utility, Local C C C C C C C
Wind Turbine, Structure Mounted Chapter 176.46, Code of Ord.
Wind Turbine, Tower Mounted C C C C C Chapter 176.46, Code of Ord.
OTHER
GOVERNMENTAL AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
13. Site and Building Plan Review Process: Any proposed substantially improved or
new building structure or development, must submit a detailed site plan, building plan and
color renderings for review as established below:
A. "Substantial improvement" includes the following:
(1) Any new building construction within the Central Corridor or any
renovation of an existing structure that involves any modification of the
exterior appearance of the structure by virtue of adding or removing exterior
windows or doors or altering the color or exterior materials of existing walls.
(2) All facade improvements, changes, alterations, modifications or
replacement of existing facade materials will be considered a substantial
improvement.
(3) A substantial improvement also includes any increase or decrease
in existing building height and/or alteration of the existing roof pitch or
appearance.
(4) Routine repair or replacement of existing roof materials that do not
materially change the appearance, shape or configuration of the existing
roof will not be considered a "substantial improvement".
(5) Owner-occupied detached single-family residences will not be
subject to these regulations.
(6) Within the Uptown Marion Sub-District "substantial improvement"
also includes:
a. New, modified or replacement awning structures or similar
material extensions over the public sidewalk area.
b. Demolition or removal of any portion of a building otherwise
not specified by these regulations.
B. Standard Review: Any proposed substantial improvement or new building
structure located in the Central Corridor boundary, including proposed residential
facilities, must submit a detailed site plan, colored renderings, elevations, material
list, and building plan for review and approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council.
C. Uptown Marion Sub-District Review: Any proposed substantial improved or
new building structure located within the Uptown Marion Sub-district including
proposed residential facilities, must submit a detailed site plan, colored renderings,
elevations, material list, and building plan for review and recommendation by the
Uptown Marion Street Board of Directors or their designee for consistency with the
Uptown Marion Design Guidelines prior to the project being reviewed by the City
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
D. Historic Sub-District Review: Any proposed substantial improvement or
new building structure located within any local or national historic district within the
Central Corridor boundary, including proposed residential facilities, must submit a
detailed site plan, colored renderings, elevations, material list, and building plan
for review and recommendation by the Historic Preservation Commission or their
designee, and a report provided to determine whether the project would be
consistent with the historic district. Any substantial improvement or new building
structure located within the Historic Sub- District that is determined to detract from
the historic district shall be denied.
E. Signage Review: Typical business signage shall be permitted without
mandatory site plan review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council. All signage shall conform to requirements of the Chapter 176. 31 Signs,
except as provided for below:
1) Electronic Message Center Signs shall not be permitted within the
Central Corridor IDO.
2) In Uptown Marion Sub- District and the Historic Sub- District,
signage shall be reviewed by the Uptown Marion Street Board of Directors or their
designee for consistency with the Uptown Marion Design Guidelines adopted May
7, 2014 prior to approval of a sign permit.
14. Emergency Repairs: In the case of emergency repairs needed as the result of
unanticipated building or facade damages due to events such as fire, vandalism, or
weather- related damages, site plan review will not be required, provided that the needed
repairs do not alter the appearance of the structure prior to the event causing the
unanticipated damages.
Section 2. That all other chapters shall remain unchanged by this ordinance.
Section 3. That all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the same are hereby
repealed.
Section 4. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
publication as provided by law.
Passed and approved this day of n ,,,.2.0 1 ,9
c...-I--L,‘e,„i - 1 6„4„,,,
Nicolas AbouAssaly,(Mayor
ATTEST:
I, Rachel Bolender, City Clerk of the City of Marion, Iowa hereby certify that at a meeting of the
City Council of said City, held on the above date, among other proceedings the above was
adopted.
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE
i„ z a The undersigned Ci Clerk of Marion, Iowa
4,4_ 1., 1.- L4.-/ i mitis that the t '___ '1.L _
Rachel Bolender, City Clerk
shown immediately above was published in the
tilMOAAVOLS on the__ day of
t a VA, 20 t. 1
A
City Clerk
175.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
1. Application. The regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to the
subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts or other
divisions of land for the purpose of sale, transfer, or of building development,
whether immediate or future, including the resubdivision or replatting of lots or
land. They shall also apply to each situation where there is a dedication of streets,
alleys, easements or land for other public use.
A. Any subdivision of land as described above shall not create
substandard lots as defined or set out by any existing applicable ordinances.
B. The above provisions shall not be construed to limit the acceptance
of deeds, right-of-way or other land by the Council when such acceptance
is in the public interest.
C. These provisions shall not be construed to prohibit the sale of a
portion of a legally platted lot by one owner to the owner of an adjoining
legally platted lot provided: (a) the grantor’s lot is not rendered
substandard by being in violation of any of the provisions of the building,
zoning, or subdivision ordinances of the City; and (b) the number of
building parcels is not increased as a result of such conveyance.
D. The conveyance of an easement shall not be considered a
subdivision for the purpose of this chapter.
2. Authority. These regulations are adopted pursuant to Chapter 354 of the
Code of Iowa.
3. Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction. Pursuant to Section 354.9 of the Code of
Iowa, the City hereby establishes its authority to review and approve subdivisions
located within two (2) miles of its corporate boundaries.
4. Interpretation. The provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general
welfare.
5. Conflicts. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate,
limit, repeal, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, provision of
law, or easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction. Where any
provision of these regulations imposes a restriction different from those imposed
by any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or
regulation, statute or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose a higher standard shall control and prevail.
6. Variances. Where it can be shown that strict compliance with the
requirements of this chapter will result in hardship to the applicant, the Council
may vary, modify, or waive the requirements of this chapter so substantial justice
may be done and the public interest secured. No such variance, modification, or
waiver should have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter.
In no case shall any variance or modification be more than minimum easing of the
requirements as necessary to eliminate the hardship. In so granting a variance, the
Council may impose such additional conditions as are necessary to substantially
secure the objectives of the requirements so varied, modified, or waived. A
request for a variance must be submitted in writing to the Council. The request
shall state the grounds for the request and all the pertinent facts of the case.
7. Waivers for Subdivisions of Existing Platted Lots. The Council may waive
the requirements of this chapter where existing platted lots are subdivided if all of
the following conditions are satisfied:
A. The resulting lots are not substandard as defined or set out by
existing applicable ordinance.
B. All public improvements are installed or will be installed as a
condition of the waiver of said platting requirements.
C. All necessary public right-of-way or easements are provided.
D. A restrictive covenant is filed of record or other sufficient assurance
is provided to deter or prohibit further re-subdivision without compliance
with this chapter.
E. No more than two lots are created as a result of the subdivision.
8. Exceptions for Industrially Zoned Real Estate. The requirements of this
chapter shall be inapplicable to industrially zoned real estate within the City when all
of the following circumstances exist:
A. The parcel to be divided is a lot within a subdivision previously
approved by the Council and has not previously been subdivided.
B. The proposed subdivision will divide such legal lot into no more than
two parts.
C. The proposed subdivision shall not create a substandard lot as defined
or set out in this chapter.
9. Recording of Plat. No subdivision of land within the area of jurisdiction of
these regulations shall be filed for record with the County Recorder until such
subdivision has been reviewed and approved pursuant to this chapter. Upon the
approval of a final plat by the Council, it shall be the duty of the subdivider to
immediately file such plat with the County Recorder as provided by Chapter 354 of
the Code of Iowa. Unless such plat has been duly recorded and evidence thereof filed
with the Clerk within ninety (90) days of approval by the Council, such approval shall
be revocable by the Council.
10. Enforcement, Violations and Penalties:
A. No building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued for any
parcel or plat of land divided contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Planning and Development Director shall enforce these regulations
and shall bring to the attention of the City Attorney any violations or lack of
compliance herewith.
C. No owner, or agent of an owner, of land shall transfer or sell any lot or
parcel divided from a larger parcel except in compliance with these
regulations.
D. Any person who fails to comply with or violates this chapter shall be
subject to penalties as provided in Section 1.10 and/or Chapter 4 of this Code
of Ordinances.
E. Nothing contained herein shall in any way limit the City’s right to any
other remedies available to the City for the enforcement of this chapter.
F. The Council shall establish, from time to time, by resolution, fees for
the review of plats. No plat for any subdivision or resubdivision shall be
considered filed with the Clerk until all fees applicable to the plat have been
received.
G. Preliminary and final plats of owners may be rejected for processing
under this chapter of the Code of Ordinances when the owner has another
subdivision in process and with respect thereto is failing or refusing to meet
the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 02-16 – Aug. 02 Supp.)
175.02 DEFINITIONS. Terms defined in other chapters of this Code of Ordinances,
including the Zoning Ordinance, Storm Water Management and Erosion and Sediment Control
chapters, also apply to this chapter unless they conflict with a specific definition contained
herein. The following words are defined for use in this chapter and shall be interpreted as
follows:
1. “Abutting” means having a common boundary.
2. “Addition” means subdivision.
3. “Adjacent” means nearby (may or may not be abutting).
4. “Aliquot part” means a one-half, one-quarter, one-half of one-quarter or onequarter
of one-quarter fractional part of a section within the United States public land
survey system.
5. “Alley” means a minor right-of-way dedicated to the public use, which is
primarily for vehicular access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting
on a street.
6. “Auditor’s Plat” – See “Plat, Auditor’s.”
7. “Block” means a land area within a subdivision which is entirely surrounded by
public streets, streams, railroad rights-of-way, etc., or a combination thereof.
8. “Buildable area” means the area of a lot remaining, which may be built upon,
after requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and the Flood Plain regulations, any
easements and site specific physical limitations have been observed.
9. “City Engineer” means the City Engineer of the City.
10. “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
11. “Comprehensive Development Plan” means the plan or series of plans made for
the future development of the area as approved and adopted from time to time by the
Council. Such plans may indicate the general locations recommended for major streets,
parks, public facilities, land uses, and other public improvements. Such plans may also
contain statements of
policy of the City with respect to the physical development of the community.
12. “Conveyance” means a legal instrument filed with the County Recorder as
evidence of the transfer of title to land, including any form of deed or contract.
13. “Cul-de-sac” means a dead-end street having its closed end terminated in a
vehicular turn-around or a circular paved area used for a vehicular turn-around at
the end of a dead-end street.
14. “Days” means, unless otherwise specified, calendar days.
15. “Dedication” means a grant by the owner of title in fee simple of real property
to the City for use as a public street, park, or other public facility.
16. "Design Standards Manual" means the latest edition of SUDAS as approved
by the City Council.
(Ord. 15-24 – Feb. 16 Supp.)
17. “Developer” – See “Subdivider.”
18. “Division” means dividing a tract or parcel of land into two parcels of land
by conveyance or for tax purposes. The conveyance of an easement, other than a
public highway or street easement, shall not be considered a division for the purpose
of this chapter.
19. “Easement” means authorization by a property owner for the use by another
of any designated part of said person’s property for a specified purpose.
20. “Engineering Department” means the Engineering Department of the City.
21. “Escrow” means a deposit of cash with the local government in lieu of an
amount required and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond. Such
escrow funds shall be deposited by the Finance Director in a separate account.
22. “Final plat” means the map or plan or record of a subdivision and any
accompanying material, as described in these regulations.
23. “Flood hazard area” means any land susceptible to being inundated by water
as a result of a flood, and specifically, any land subject to flooding by a one percent
(1%) probability flood, otherwise referred to as a one hundred (100) year flood; as
designated by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, the Federal Insurance
Administration, or specific engineering studies conducted on behalf of the City.
24. “Flood hazard area regulations” means Section 176.39 of this Code of
Ordinances.
25. “Flood plain” – See flood hazard area.
26. “Frontage” means that side of a lot abutting on a street and ordinarily
regarded as the front of the lot.
27. “Grade” means the slope of a road, street, or other public way expressed in
terms of the ratio of rise to run as a percent.
28. “Grading plan” means a drawing of a proposed subdivision on a contour or
topographic map showing existing and proposed contours at a contour interval of
not more than five (5) feet and a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the
inch.
29. “Improvements” means the furnishing of all materials, equipment, work and
services, including plans and engineering services, staking and supervision
necessary. Changes and additions to land necessary to prepare it for building sites,
including but not limited to street paving and curbing, grading, monuments,
drainage ways, sewers, fire hydrants, water mains, sidewalks, street trees, pedestrian
ways and other public and private works and appurtenances.
30. “Improvements, plan of” means maps, engineering drawings, specifications,
plans, and such other information as may be necessary to define and describe the
location, design, capacity, materials, and other characteristics of a proposed
subdivision improvement.
31. “Legal description” means a description defining land boundaries legally
sufficient for the purpose of sale and conveyance, tax assessment and collection,
and recording.
32. “Lot” means a tract of land represented and identified by a number or letter
designation on an official plat.
33. “Lot, corner” means a lot with frontage on two intersecting streets.
34. “Lot, double frontage” means a lot which is not a corner lot with frontage on
two streets.
35. “Lot of record” means a lot in a subdivision, the plat of which, or parcel of
land, the deed of which was filed in the office of the County Recorder prior to March
24, 1962.
36. “Lot width” means the width of a platted lot measured at the front setback
line and/or the front lot line.
37. “Lot, zoning” means an area of contiguous land which is designated by the
owner or developer to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single or
unified ownership or control. A zoning lot may be a part of a single platted lot or a
combination of several platted lots or parcels.
38. “Metes and bounds description” means a legal description of land, which
describes the boundaries of the parcel by using distances and angles or bearings, or
by reference to physical features of the land.
39. “Owner” means the legal entity holding title to or having proprietary interest
in the land being subdivided or such representative or agent as is fully empowered
to act on its behalf.
40. “Parcel” means a part of a tract of land.
41. “Performance bond” means a surety bond or cash deposit made out to the
City in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements which are required by
these regulations for a final plat, said cost being estimated by the City Engineer, and
said surety bond or cash deposit being legally sufficient to secure to the City that
the said improvements will be constructed in accordance with this chapter.
42. “Permanent real estate index number” means a unique number or
combination of numbers assigned to a parcel of land pursuant to Section 441.29 of
the Code of Iowa.
43. “Planning and Development Director” means the Planning and Development
Director of the City.
44. “Plat” means the map or other graphical representation and supporting
documentation of the subdivider’s plan for division of land.
45. “Plat, auditor’s” means a subdivision plat required by either the auditor or
the assessor, prepared by a registered land surveyor under the direction of the
County Auditor in accordance with Section 354.13 through 354.17 of the Code of
Iowa.
46. “Plat, final” means a subdivision plat map drawn to the standards of Section
355.8 of the Code of Iowa and satisfying the provisions of Sections 354.6 through
354.11 of the Code of Iowa which is presented for approval pursuant to this chapter
prior to filing with the County Recorder, Auditor and Assessor.
47. “Plat, final bound copy” means a final plat with all required certificates and
documents for filing with the County Recorder, Auditor and Assessor.
48. “Plat, official” means either an auditor’s plat or a subdivision plat, which has
been filed for record in the offices of the County Recorder, Auditor and Assessor.
49. “Plat, preliminary” means a drawing and supportive information as required
in Section 175.03 indicating the proposed manner of layout of the subdivision to be
approved by the Commission and the Council upon finding conformance with the
requirements and standards of this chapter, the Comprehensive Development Plan,
and other City policies.
50. “Plat, sketch” means a sketch of a proposed layout of lots, blocks, streets,
and public improvements prepared for a pre-subdivision conference prior to
submittal of a preliminary plat.
51. “Plat, subdivision” means the graphical representation of the subdivision of
land, prepared by a registered land surveyor, having a number or letter designation
for each lot within the plat and a succinct name or title that is unique within Linn
County.
52. “Plat of survey” means the graphical representation of a survey of one or
more parcels of land, including a complete and accurate description of each parcel
within the plat, prepared by a registered land surveyor. The plat of survey is limited
under these regulations to use for conveyance of single parcels of land, unless the
requirements to file a subdivision plat are waived by the Council.
53. “Proprietor” means a person who has a recorded interest in land, including a
person selling or buying land pursuant to a contract, but excluding persons holding
a mortgage, easement, or lien contract.
54. “Replat, re-subdivision” means a subdivision plat representing land that has
previously been included in an official plat.
55. “Right-of-way” means a parcel of land intended to be occupied for streets,
sidewalks, utilities, and other public purposes. In a plat, rights-of-way are to be
separate and distinct from other lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for public
facilities shall be dedicated to public use and title transferred to the appropriate
public agency.
56. “Street” means a right-of-way serving more than one parcel of land which
provides principal vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. Also, the
paved area for vehicular travel located within such a right-of-way.
57. “Street, dead-end” means a street having only one end open to traffic.
58. “Street, frontage/backage” means a street located parallel to an expressway,
major arterial street, or railroad to provide access to abutting properties.
59. “Subdivider” means the owner or agent under legal authority of the owner
who undertakes to cause a parcel of land to be designed, constructed, and recorded
as a subdivision.
60. “Subdivision” means a division of a tract of land into two (2) or more lots or
parcels.
61. “Subdivision, major” means any subdivision which is not a minor
subdivision because it requires either the construction of any public improvements
or proposes new public or private streets or contains more than four (4) lots. Unless
otherwise specified, the term subdivision as used within this chapter shall be
assumed to refer to a major subdivision.
62. “Subdivision, minor” means any subdivision in which no new streets, public
or private, are proposed and which does not require the construction of any public
improvements and which contains no more than four (4) lots.
63. “Surveyor” means a registered land surveyor who engages in the practice of
land surveying pursuant to Chapter 355 of the Code of Iowa.
64. “Tract” means an aliquot part of a section, a lot within an official plat or a
government lot.
65. “Utility” means the services and facilities required to provide for the physical
functions and activities in developed real property. “Utilities” includes but is not
limited to sanitary sewer, water, natural gas, electricity, telephone, cable television
and other facilities and services. Utilities may either be provided by public or
private agencies.
175.03 PROCEDURES AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS FOR PLATS.
1. Classification of Plats and Subdivisions. Plats and subdivision shall be
classified as minor subdivisions, major subdivisions and auditor’s plats, as those
terms are defined in Section 175.02.
2. Pre-subdivision Conference. Whenever a major or minor subdivision is
proposed within the platting jurisdiction of the City, the subdivider may request a
pre-subdivision conference with City staff, utility company representatives, and
the parties responsible for the development of platting documents. The purpose of
the pre-subdivision conference is to acquaint the City staff and utility company
representatives with the proposed subdivision and to acquaint the subdivider with
the procedures and standards of the City and utility companies with respect to the
proposed subdivision.
3. Sketch Plat. The subdivider may provide a map or sketch plat showing the
location of the subdivision, the general location of any proposed streets and other
improvements, and the general layout and arrangement of intended land uses, in
relation to the surrounding area. The subdivider may request that the sketch plat
be submitted to the Commission and/or the Council for review prior to preparation
of preliminary and final plats in order to determine the acceptability of the
concepts for development of the land contained therein.
4. Plats Required. In order to secure approval of any proposed subdivision,
the subdivider shall submit plats and other information to the City as required by
this chapter.
A. Major Subdivision Plats Required. The subdivider of any major
subdivision shall comply with the submittal requirements for a preliminary
plat and for a final plat.
B. Minor Subdivision Plats Required. The subdivider of any minor
subdivision is not required to submit a preliminary plat. Specific portions
of the documents required for a preliminary plat may be required as part of
the final plat submission if requested by City staff, the Commission, or
Council.
5. Requirements for a Preliminary Plat. The subdivider shall prepare the
preliminary plat and supportive materials in accordance with the Linn County
Regional Planning Area Submission Requirement for Preliminary Plats as adopted
by resolution of the Marion City Council.
(Ord. 00-44 – Feb. 01 Supp.)
6. Procedure for Review of Preliminary Plats.
A. Filing. The subdivider shall file the appropriate number of copies of
the preliminary plat materials with the Planning and Development
Department in accordance with established administrative procedures.
(1) Filing Fee. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a
filing fee in accordance with a schedule of filing fees as adopted by
the Council.
(2) Deadline. The preliminary plat shall be filed in accordance
with the filing schedule as may be established by the Commission
and/or Council. Preliminary plats filed without all required
documentation or filed later than this deadline will not be placed on
the Commission agenda.
B. Distribution. The Planning and Development Department shall
distribute copies of the preliminary plat and supporting documentation to
the Council, the Commission, and the appropriate City Departments, and
shall schedule the plat for consideration by the Commission. The
subdivider shall distribute copies of the preliminary plat and supporting
documentation to the public utilities and such other persons as necessary to
review the plat.
C. Staff Review. The appropriate City staff shall review the
preliminary plat and prepare reports of their findings and comments to the
Commission and the Council.
D. Commission Review. The Commission shall examine the plat and
staff reports and such other information as it deems necessary or desirable,
to ascertain whether the plat conforms to the ordinances of the City, the
Comprehensive Development Plan and other duly adopted plans and
policies of the City. The Commission shall, within sixty (60) days of filing
of the preliminary plat and all required supportive documentation, forward
a report and recommendation regarding the preliminary plat to the Council.
If such recommendation is for disapproval of the plat, the reasons therefor
shall be set forth in writing and a copy of the report and recommendation
shall be provided to the subdivider.
E. Council Review.
(1) The Council shall examine the preliminary plat and the
reports of the Commission, staff, and such other information, as it
deems necessary or desirable. The Council shall ascertain whether
the plat conforms to the Ordinances of the City, the Comprehensive
Development Plan, and other duly adopted plans and policies of the
City.
(2) The Council may approve, approve subject to conditions, or
disapprove the plat. If the Council disapproves the plat, the reasons
therefor shall be set forth in writing by the Council.
(3) The Council shall take action on the preliminary plat within
forty-five (45) days of the recommendations of the Commission,
unless the time period is extended by agreement of the subdivider and
the City. If information or modifications are required before an
approval can be granted, the Council may table the matter until the
conditions have been met or the necessary information provided.
F. Submittal of the Approved Preliminary Plat. Following Council
approval of a preliminary plat but prior to the submittal of the plan of
improvements to the City Engineer, the subdivider shall file the appropriate
number of copies of the approved preliminary plat with the Planning and
Development Department in accordance with established administrative
procedures.
G. Distribution of the Approved Preliminary Plat. The approved
preliminary plat shall be stamped and signed by the Planning and
Development Director. The Planning and Development Department shall
distribute the stamped and signed copies of the approved preliminary plat to
the appropriate City Departments, the public utilities and such other persons as
necessary.
H. Duration of Approval of Preliminary Plat. The approval of a
preliminary plat by the Council shall be valid for a period of two (2) years
from the date of such approval, except that every preliminary plat or portion
thereof not final platted shall be subject to a requirement of being re-platted in
order to comply with any municipal, state or federal laws or regulations that
have taken effect after approval of the preliminary plat. After a period of two
(2) years, such approval of the preliminary plat shall be void unless some
portion of the preliminary plat is filed as a final plat or the Council approves
an extension on the period of validity. If the preliminary plat expires, the
subdivider shall be required to resubmit a new preliminary plat for approval
subject to the then current subdivision and zoning regulations before any
development of the subdivision will be allowed. (Ord. 03-25 –
Feb. 04 Supp.)
7. Requirements for Final Platting. The subdivider shall prepare the final plat
and supportive materials in accordance with the Linn County Regional Planning Area
Submission Requirement for Final Plats as adopted by resolution of the Marion City
Council. (Ord. 00-44 – Feb. 01 Supp.)
8. Procedure for Review and Approval of Final Plats.
A. Filing. To initiate consideration of a final plat, the subdivider shall
file copies of the final plat map with the Planning and Development
Department of the City in accordance with established administrative
procedures. The final plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee in
accordance with a schedule of filing fees as adopted by the Council. The
final plat shall also be accompanied by payment of the storm water
management fee, as required by the Storm Water Management ordinance.
The final plat shall be filed in accordance with the filing schedule as may
be established by the Commission or Council. Final plats submitted
without filing fees paid or filed later than the deadline or not in complete
form will not be placed upon the Commission agenda.
B. Commission Review. The Planning and Development Department
shall schedule the final plat for consideration by the Commission as
required below. If the final plat is in conformance with an approved
preliminary plat for the area, no review or recommendation by the
Commission is required.
C. If there is no approved preliminary plat or the final plat is not
substantially in conformance with the approved preliminary plat, the
Commission shall examine the final plat and the reports of the City
Engineer and the Planning and Development Director and such other
information as it deems necessary or desirable, to ascertain whether the plat
conforms to the approved preliminary plat, the Ordinances of the City, the
Comprehensive Development Plan, and other duly adopted plans and
policies of the City. The Commission shall, within sixty (60) days of filing
of the final plat with the Planning and Development Department, forward a
report and recommendation regarding the plat to the Council. If the
recommendation is for disapproval of the plat, the reasons therefor shall be
set forth in writing and a copy of the report and recommendation shall be
provided to the subdivider.
D. Council Review. The Council shall examine the final plat, the
reports of the Commission, the Planning and Development Director, the
City Engineer and such other information as it deems necessary or
desirable. Upon completion of such examination, the Council shall
ascertain whether the final plat conforms with an approved preliminary plat,
the ordinances of the City, the Comprehensive Development Plan, other
duly adopted plans and policies of the City. If all findings are affirmative,
the Council shall approve the final plat.
E. The Council may refuse to consider a final subdivision plat
submitted by a subdivider if that subdivider is not in compliance with the
terms and conditions of a previously approved final plat of the same
subdivider.
F. The Council shall take action on the final plat within twenty-one
(21) days following the most recent date of receipt of:
(1) The report of the Commission,
(2) The bound copies of the final plat as described in subsection 7
of this section, or
(3) Evidence that all required public improvements associated
with the subdivision have either been installed or assurance provided
as required in Section 175.04(3).
175.04 IMPROVEMENTS.
1. General Requirements for Improvements.
A. Improvements Required. The subdivider shall, at his/her expense,
construct the improvements required by this chapter. The required
improvements shall be designed in accordance with the requirements set
forth in the Design Standards Manual. The drawings and technical
specifications shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to commencing
construction of the proposed improvements. The proposed improvements
shall be constructed in accordance with the drawings and technical
specifications as approved by the City Engineer.
B. Plans Required. Plans and specifications shall be in essential
conformity with the approved preliminary plat and grading plan and shall
conform to standard engineering practices and the Design Standards
Manual of the City.
C. City Engineer’s Review. The City Engineer shall review the plan of
improvements for conformance to the Design Standards Manual and the
approved preliminary plat and grading plan and shall either approve,
approve with conditions or disapprove the plan of improvements by written
statement within a reasonable time after their filing. If the City Engineer’s
review of the plans as submitted reveals a deficiency or error requiring the
material revision and resubmittal of the plans, the approval process shall
recommence at the time of submittal of the revised plans. The developer
may seek a variance from the required standards or file an appeal of any
portion of the City Engineer’s decisions or interpretations to the Council.
The plan of improvements shall be reviewed by the City Engineer prior to
the Commission and/or Council consideration of the final plat. The final
plat shall not be considered by the Council until the plan of
improvements has been approved by the City Engineer. No construction
shall begin on subdivision public improvements until the plan of
improvements has been approved. No construction field changes shall be
made without the written approval of the City Engineer.
D. Installation of Improvements. Before the final plat of any
subdivision is approved and recorded, the public improvements required
under this section shall have been either installed or assured as provided
under subsection 3 of this section.
E. Improvement Requirements for Extraterritorial Subdivisions.
Whenever, pursuant to Section 175.01(3), the City reviews a subdivision
located in its extraterritorial review jurisdiction, the City may require, in
lieu of construction and installation of sanitary sewers, sidewalks, storm
sewers, Portland cement concrete street paving, municipal water service, or
any one or more of these public improvements, that the subdivider enter
into an agreement to pay for said improvements or to allow for the
installation and assessment of all the costs of said improvements at the time
of or subsequent to voluntary or involuntary annexation.
2. Required Improvements.
A. Monuments. Monuments shall be made of a permanent material
sensitive to a dip needle and shall be 5/8-inch in diameter or larger and
shall extend at least 30 inches below the finished grade. Permanent
monuments shall be placed at all section and quarter section corners within
the subdivision and at each block corner, lot corner, point of curvature, and
points of tangency of street lines and at each angle point. Deviations from
and/or substitutions for these standards must have the prior approval of the
City Engineer.
B. Grading of Lots. The subdivider shall grade any or all portions of
the property subdivided with lots so that each lot will be suitable and usable
for the erection of residential or other structures thereon and according to
the approved Grading Plan.
C. Erosion and Sediment Control. All development shall comply with
the applicable City, State, and Federal erosion and sediment control and
storm water quality regulations. Storm sewers shall not outlet onto
undeveloped property unless adequate erosion control measures are taken to
assure compliance with the State Erosion Control Law and Chapter 155 of
this Code of Ordinances. The subdivider shall execute an erosion control
affidavit in the form prescribed by the Soil Conservation Service prior to
any significant soil disturbing activity.
D. Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of
the street in all subdivisions in conformance with the Design Standards
Manual. Construction of sidewalks adjacent to lots in subdivisions may be
deferred until a Building Permit has been issued for the adjacent lot,
however said deferral shall not include corner ramp improvements or
exceed 5 years beyond approval of the final plat of which the lot is located.
The deferral of sidewalks within a final plat beyond the established 5 years
shall not be extended unless specifically approved by City Council. No
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until such time as the sidewalks
have been constructed.
Deferral of sidewalks as provided for in this section will require the
subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete sidewalk improvements.
The performance of such construction shall be secured consistent with
Section 175.04(3), Guarantees of Performance.
Notwithstanding the above, the Council may defer the requirement for
installation of required sidewalks at the time of construction of
improvements for the subdivision in excess of the aforementioned
timeframe if it is determined that there is no public need for sidewalks. If
no public need has been determined to exist, the subdivider shall enter into
an agreement to install sidewalks at such time in the future as the City
Council may pass a resolution of necessity for said sidewalks.
Additionally, the subdivider shall provide performance of such construction
consistent with Section 175.04(3), Guarantees of Performance.
(Ord. 14-11 – Aug. 14 Supp.)
E. Street Construction. When the subdivision abuts an existing
unimproved street, the owner may be required to provide assurance that
such street will be graded and paved as required by the City’s Major Street
Plan and the Design Standards Manual. Such assurance shall be in the form
as provided in subsection 3 of this section (Guarantees of Performance),
except that the cash, cash escrow account or irrevocable letter of credit
requirement of paragraph (A)(4) of said subsection will not be applicable.
When the subdivision is to be bounded by a one-half width street right-ofway,
the subdivider shall be required to grade and pave one-half of the
street width required by the City’s Major Street Plan and the Design
Standards Manual. If the Design Standards Manual require construction of
a full width street to assure two-way traffic capacity, the subdivider shall be
required to secure agreements as necessary with the owner of the adjacent
property to provide for construction of a full width street.
F. Extension of Improvements. The subdivider shall extend public
improvements to include street paving, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water
main and sidewalk throughout the subdivision to assure availability to
contiguous property, unless expressly waived by Council.
G. Sanitary Sewer. The subdivider shall install sanitary facilities as
specified in the approved plan of improvements and in conformance with
the Design Standards Manual. Sanitary facilities shall include sanitary
sewer connection to the public sanitary sewer system unless an alternative
sanitary system is approved by the Linn County Health Department and by
the Council as part of the plan of improvements for the subdivision.
H. Water Supply. The subdivider shall install water supply facilities as
specified in the approved plan of improvements and in conformance with
the standards and specifications established by the Board of Trustees of the
Marion Water Department. Installation shall be subject to the approval of
the Water Department Administrator. If the approved water supply is from
private wells, the plan of improvements and the lot layout must be
approved by the Linn County Health Department and the Board of Trustees
of the Marion Water Department. Fire hydrants shall be installed in
conformance with the Standards and Specifications established by the
Marion Water Department Board of Trustees subject to approval of the
location thereof by the Fire Chief.
I. Off-Site Improvements. In the event that a subdivision is
determined to require new or enhanced public improvements outside of the
property being subdivided, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to
provide such public improvements in a form as may be acceptable to the
Council.
J. Public Utilities.
(1) Installation Required. In addition to sanitary sewer and
water, other public utilities such as electricity, natural gas, telephone
and cable television shall be installed to provide service to each
building lot within the subdivision.
(2) Underground Public Utilities. Except in industrially zoned
areas, and as provided in the following subsection, all utility
transmission lines, including, but not limited to, electric, telephone,
street lighting, cable television, and fiber optic systems shall be
installed underground. Appurtenances and associated equipment,
such as but not limited to surface mounted transformers, pedestal
mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in
an underground system may be placed above ground. Underground
utilities need not be installed in the following instances:
a. Any relocation of a service on a lot when it does not
necessitate any increase in the number of existing overhead
lines and/or utility poles.
b. Any increase of service size including single phase to
three phase conversion, if no additional overhead lines and/or
utility poles are required.
c. For any new service when utility poles exist along
abutting property lines which are not separated by any alley
or public right-of-way and no additional utility poles are
required.
d. Installation of new or replacement feeder lines and/or
transmission lines provided that the location, physical
appearance, and construction permits are specifically
approved by the Council.
(3) The Council may grant waivers for underground utility
installation in the following instances:
a. Remodeling or altering of a building or structure.
b. Enlarging an existing use.
c. Temporary uses, including directional signs, temporary
stands, construction poles, water pumps, and similar uses.
The City Engineer may approve underground utility waivers
for temporary uses of less than six (6) months duration.
(4) The following criteria shall be considered by the Council
prior to approving, conditionally approving, or denying requests for
underground utility waivers:
a. The age and anticipated life of the existing structure.
b. The ratios of the cost of underground utilities to the cost
of any remodeling or addition.
c. The existing utility service in the area.
d. Existing overhead utilities shall not be perpetuated or
expanded to the detriment of the aesthetics of the City.
e. Such other factors as the Council deems necessary to
maintain the intent of this section.
K. Street Lighting. Street lighting shall be installed by the electric utility
company at the expense of the subdivider in compliance with the City’s
standards for street light location. The City Engineer shall approve of the type
and location of street lighting fixtures as part of the plan of improvements.
L. Street Signs. Permanent street identification and traffic control signs
and devices shall be installed at the subdivider’s expense at the direction of the
City Engineer.
M. Buffers and Screening. When the Council determines a need, the
subdivider shall install landscaping features and plantings to provide a buffer
or screening from high traffic capacity streets and intensive land uses.
N. Front Yard Trees. At a minimum, there shall be planted one tree at
each single-family residential lot. For residential uses other than single-family
residential in the R-3 and R-6A zone districts, street trees shall be planted at a
ratio of one tree for every 60 feet of frontage. Front yard trees for all
development in the R-4, R-5 and R-6 districts shall be in accordance with the
applicable landscape standards adopted by resolution of the Council. Such
trees may be located in either the required front yard or in the right-of-way
adjacent to such lot, subject to the approval of the City Forester. Trees shall
be nursery grown, straight stemmed, free from disease, balled burlapped and
planted, staked and/or guyed in accordance with arborists’ practices for the
area. The height shall be at least six (6) feet after pruning. Varieties and
locations of trees planted in accordance with this paragraph shall be subject to
all other applicable City ordinances and regulations.
3. Guarantees of Performance.
A. Agreement. In lieu of the requirement that public improvements be
completed prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider may enter into an
agreement to complete said public improvements. Such agreement shall
provide for completion and acceptance of said improvements within a oneyear
period of time unless specifically extended by the Council. The
performance of such construction shall be secured in one of the following
manners as may be approved by the Council:
(1) The filing of cash with the Finance Director or in an escrow
account at an acceptable financial institution in an amount equal to
120% of the cost of the improvements to be completed as estimated by
the City Engineer. The subdivider may withdraw or reduce the amount
of the security in amounts approved by the City Engineer as
improvements are installed and inspected. Not more than ninety
percent (90%) of said cash may be withdrawn prior to filing of the
required maintenance bonds and acceptance of the improvements by
the City. An escrow account at an approved financial institution
wherein the City can withdraw funds by its Finance Director’s
signature alone, and the City Finance Director’s signature along with
the subdivider’s signature is required for withdrawal by the subdivider,
will satisfy this security requirement.
(2) The filing of a surety bond issued by an insurance company or
bonding company acceptable to the Council upon which the subdivider
is a principal and the City is the sole obligee. The bond shall be in an
amount equal to the cost of the improvements as estimated by the City
Engineer. The assignment of subcontractor bonds by the subdivider
will not satisfy the provisions of this paragraph.
(3) The filing of an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other
financial institution acceptable to the Council in an amount equal to
120% of the cost of the improvements as estimated by the City
Engineer. The letter of credit shall provide that if all required public
improvements are not completed and accepted by the City prior to the
expiration commitment, the City may draw sufficient funds from the
letter of credit to finance the construction of the uncompleted public
improvements.
(4) The filing of a petition, waiver of notice and consent to special
assessment for installation by the City of the required improvements
and an irrevocable guarantee by a bank or other acceptable financial
institution that a bid will be submitted on special assessment bonds
issued by the City to pay for the installation of said improvements. The
filing of said petition shall be accompanied by the filing of cash, cash
escrow account or irrevocable letter of credit in
an amount of 10% of the cost of the improvements as estimated by the
City Engineer.
B. Releases. The City Engineer may release specific lots within the
subdivision from effect of any of the special conditions under this subsection,
if, and only if, all public improvements needed to provide services to the lot
have been accepted by the Council, with the exception of minor cleanup items.
C. (Repealed by Ord. 14-11 – Aug. 14 Supp.)
D. Form of Documents. All documents guaranteeing performance of
the contract shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney. If
improvements are not completed within the time specified, the Council may
use the security or any necessary portion thereof to complete said
improvements. The Council may allow an extension of time for completion
of improvements consistent with the security provided. The subdivider
may enter into a memorandum of agreement with the City with respect to
any unusual circumstances relative to construction of, or cost sharing for
any required public improvements.
4. Inspection and Testing of Improvements. The subdivider or his or her
designee shall notify the City Engineer before construction of each public
improvement in order to facilitate the inspection to assure that said improvements
are constructed in accordance with the approved plans, profiles and specifications.
It is the ultimate responsibility of the subdivider and his or her professional
engineer to provide assurance that the required improvements are constructed in
accordance with the approved plan of improvements for the subdivision, the
Design Standards Manual and with any specific standards contained in this Code
of Ordinances. The City Engineer may require testing by qualified professional
testing services of the capacity, durability and other factors regarding the
installation of public improvements as he or she may deem necessary to assure
that the public improvements meet the Design Standards Manual and any specific
standards contained in this Code of Ordinances or the laws of the State of Iowa or
the United States. The Council may establish a schedule of fees for City
inspection of public improvements and/or to cover City expenses related to such
testing. The developer shall pay all costs associated with geotechnical testing that
is required by this section. (Ord. 05-26 – Nov. 05 Supp.)
5. Acceptance. Acceptance of completed public improvements by resolution
of the Council shall be based upon favorable recommendation by the City
Engineer following receipt of maintenance bonds as prescribed in the Design
Standards Manual. The public improvements become the property of the City
upon acceptance.
175.05 PARK AND OPEN SPACE DEDICATION. (Reserved for future use.)
175.06 STANDARDS FOR DESIGN OF SUBDIVISIONS.
1. Standards Prescribed. The standards set forth in this chapter shall be
considered the minimum standards necessary to protect the public health, safety,
and general welfare. General standards for layout of the subdivision are set out in
this section. Specific standards for design and construction of public
improvements are set out in the Design Standards Manual as most currently
approved by the Council and are incorporated herein by reference.
2. Land Suitability. The Council shall not approve the subdivision of land
which they find during the subdivision review and approval process to be
unsuitable for development by reason of flooding, ponding, poor drainage, adverse
soil conditions, adverse geological formations, unsatisfactory topography or other
conditions likely to be harmful to the public health, safety or general welfare. The
Council may require engineering analysis of conditions to determine whether land
proposed for subdivision is suitable for development. The cost of said engineering
studies shall be borne by the developer. If a subdivision is proposed for land
which contains land unsuitable for development, the subdivider may proceed if it
is determined during the review and approval process that the proposed
subdivision provides adequate developable land within each lot and that all
services can be provided to each lot and that the public interest is served. If the
Council finds that the land within a proposed subdivision is unsuitable for
development, the reasons for the determination shall be stated in writing and the
subdivider shall be afforded an opportunity to present data regarding such
unsuitability. Thereafter, the Council may reaffirm, modify or withdraw its
determination regarding such unsuitability. The City Engineer may require at the
subdivider’s cost any tests and information necessary to determine the suitability
of the land for development including recommendations for corrective measures
for any unsuitable conditions identified.
3. Land Subject to Flooding. The subdivision of any land subject to
significant flood hazard shall conform to the provisions of Section 176.39 of this
Code of Ordinances.
4. Conformity with the Plans and Ordinances of the City. The arrangement,
character, extent, width, and location of all streets and other public improvements,
and the general nature and extent of all lots and uses proposed shall conform with
the Comprehensive Development Plan, any other plan officially adopted by the
City and with this Code of Ordinances.
5. Street Standards. The following standards shall apply to all public streets
to be located within a subdivision:
A. Where the subdivision encompasses the alignment for a major street
as identified in either the Linn County Regional Planning Commission
Major Street Plan, the Marion Comprehensive Development Plan, or the
Marion Major Street Ordinance, the plat shall provide for such major street
on an alignment and with a right-of-way width in conformance with said
adopted plans.
B. Minor Streets. Minor streets (local service) should be planned so as
to discourage through traffic and to conveniently channel traffic to the
collector and arterial streets.
C. Street Connectivity. A connected street network is required within
neighborhoods. Street classes below collectors shall not directly connect
two or more arterial streets, or an arterial and collector street to avoid cutthrough
traffic.
D. Street Continuity. Streets shall provide for the continuation of street
alignments and grades from adjoining platted areas, and for the extension of
streets into adjacent unplatted areas. Street alignments and grades shall
take into consideration access needed to develop adjoining properties.
E. Dead-end Streets. Dead-end streets are prohibited. However, if a
street is planned to continue beyond the subdivision, a temporary dead end
may be allowed. A temporary turn-around meeting the Design Standards
Manual shall be provided and maintained until such time as the street is
extended.
F. Cul-de-sacs. Streets which connect to other streets are preferred for
maintenance, fire protection, and circulation, but cul-de-sacs may be
permitted where topography, low traffic volumes, or other conditions
justify their use. Cul-de-sac streets should not exceed six hundred (600)
feet in length and must terminate in a circular right-of-way of not less than
one hundred twenty (120) feet in diameter.
G. Street Right-of-Way. Street right-of-way shall be required within all
subdivision plats consistent with the Street Classification identified in the
Marion Transportation Plan. Standard right-of-way requirements
corresponding to Street Classification are set out below:
CLASSIFICATION STANDARD RIGHT-OF-WAY
Expressway IDOT Design Criteria
Major Arterial 100 feet
Minor Arterial 80 feet
Collector 80 feet
Local Street 60 feet
(1) Standard street right-of-way widths have been established
within much of the built environment. Street right-of-way width of
existing streets have been established and are included in the Major
Streets Right-of-Way Guide. The Major Streets Right-of-Way
Guide is adopted by resolution and maintained by the Engineering
Department.
(2) The minimum width for street rights-of-way shall conform to
this section provided that the applicable conditions are met.
a. Rights-of-way for residential streets shall be
determined by the need for such rights-of-way to protect the
City and to enable future revisions to the street system, which
can reasonably be foreseen.
b. Rights-of-way requirements for all collector and
arterial streets shall consider the need for future widening and
may be greater if required by the City Engineer.
c. Additional rights-of-way for pedestrian access or
landscaping adjacent to paved streets shall be granted where
sidewalks or other aesthetic enhancements are deemed
necessary in addition to the street.
d. If future widening is indicated, the rights-of-way width
shall be minimum, consistent with accommodating the
increased pavement.
e. Slopes adjacent to roadways, natural or manmade, may
be placed within easements on individual properties rather
than acquired as rights-of-way.
f. The minimum width provided in this section may be
reduced by Council action if such reduction in width is offset
by the reduction of on-street parking.
H. Partial Width Streets. Partial width streets shall not be allowed
except as part of development of a major street with a planned alignment
straddling a property line. In such cases, the portion of the street to be
developed must be wide enough to accommodate two-way vehicular traffic.
In most cases, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to coordinate
development of any street along the boundary of his or her property with
the development of adjacent property in order to accomplish development
of a full width street. Where an existing platted partial width street abuts a
subdivision, a complementary partial width street to complete the street
shall be required.
I. Intersection Angles. Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible to
right angles. No streets shall intersect at an angle of less than sixty (60)
degrees.
J. Offset Intersections. Street intersections with centerline offsets of
less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be prohibited except
where topography or other physical limitations make such jogs
unavoidable.
K. Street Grades. Street grades shall conform with the overall drainage
pattern of the locality of the subdivision and shall be in compliance with the
Design Standards Manual. Street grades and alignments shall be set to
achieve safe vertical and horizontal sight distances as specified in the
Design Standards Manual.
L. Street Naming. New street names shall not be the same or sound
similar to existing street names. Streets which are or will become
extensions of existing streets shall be given the same names as the existing
streets. In general, new street name suffixes should suggest the type and
orientation of the street. For example, “circle” and “court” should identify
cul-de-sacs, and “lane,” “way,” “road” and “drive” should be applied to
curving or diagonal streets. “Avenue” should never be applied to a street
with a north-south general direction, and “street” should not be used for an
east-west oriented street. Streets with a numerical name lying south of First
Avenue must include a “South” prefix in the name, and Avenues with a
numerical name lying west of First Street must include a “West” prefix in
the name.
M. Provision for Additional Streets. When a tract of land is subdivided
into large lots, such lots shall be so arranged as to permit the logical
location and development of future streets and appropriate resubdivision
with provision for adequate utility connections for such resubdivision.
Easements or dedications for the future openings and extensions of such
streets or utilities may, at the discretion of the Council, be required for
approval of the subdivision.
N. Private Streets and Access Easements.
(1) All platted streets within the City are for public use, the
dedication to be by deed or other appropriate conveyance. Where,
unusual conditions make a private street desirable, provided
adequate covenants and agreements ensure that the City will not
have or need to assume any maintenance or other responsibility for
such street. The City may consider approval of private streets and
access easements under the following circumstances:
a. When the street is a cul-de-sac or loop street;
b. When the street will serve a very limited group of
people and is designed and situated so as to discourage use by
the general public;
c. When the street is proposed in a location for which
adequate right-of-way does not exist to meet public street
standards because of natural topographical conditions; or
d. When the street will serve as access and/or required
frontage for only one single family dwelling unit.
(2) Design Specification. Private streets and access easements
shall meet all requirements of this section and the Design Standards
Manual of public improvements with the exception that private
streets and access easements which serve as public access to or
provide required frontage for only one single-family residence need
not be terminated with a circular turnaround. All private streets and
access easement streets shall be installed and constructed in
accordance with plans, profiles, and cross sections submitted to and
approved by the City Engineer.
(3) Maintenance and Liability. The owners and/or assigns of
private streets and access easements shall be responsible for
maintenance of said streets, and the City shall have no liability for
injuries or damages sustained on the premises.
6. Block and Lot Standards. The following standards shall apply to the design
of blocks and lots in all subdivisions and, to the extent possible, in all
resubdivisions, and shall be observed except in special conditions where variations
are warranted:
A. The width of a block shall normally be sufficient to allow for two
tiers of lots with utility easements as needed. Blocks intended for business
or industrial use shall be of such width as may be best suited for the
contemplated use of the property.
B. No residential block shall be longer than thirteen hundred (1300)
feet measured from street line to street line.
C. Lot arrangement and design shall provide satisfactory building sites
properly related to topography and surrounding land uses.
D. The size and shape of all lots shall comply with all requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance for the zoning district in which the lot is located, and
shall be adequate to meet the setback, parking, loading, and other
requirements for such uses contained in the Zoning Ordinance.
E. In no case shall a lot have a width of less than sixty (60) feet
measured at the front yard setback line and less than thirty-five (35) feet
measured at the front lot line.
F. Corner lots shall have sufficient extra width to permit the required
corner side yard setbacks as specified in the Zoning Ordinance.
G. Double frontage lots and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided
except where necessary to provide separation of development access from
high traffic arterial streets or to overcome specific topographic and/or
orientation problems.
H. Dwelling units shall not be given direct driveway access to arterial
or collector streets except:
(1) Where existing lots of record abut on arterial or collector
streets.
(2) In special instances where the configuration of the tract
prevents the construction of an access road or an interior roadway,
after review and approval by the City Council.
I. All buildable lots shall have frontage on a public or private street or
be served by an approved access easement.
J. All side lot lines should be as near as possible to right angles to
straight street lines or radial to curved street lines, unless a variation will
provide a better street or lot layout.
K. Any lot not to be served by a sanitary sewage system shall have
sufficient area as determined by the Linn County Health Department to
allow for satisfactory operation of an alternative septic system.
7. Easement Standards. The following standards shall apply to the provision
of easements in all subdivisions:
A. Easements shall conform to the provisions of the Design Standards
Manual.
B. An easement for public utilities and facilities shall be provided,
where necessary, as prescribed for location and width by the benefiting
utility operator to form a continuous easement through the service area.
C. In general, a minimum easement width along a side or rear lot line
shall be eight (8) feet resulting in a combined easement sixteen (16) feet in
width. Easements of greater width or across lots may be required and
easements of lesser width may be approved if accepted by the utility
operator(s) and the City.
D. Written approval of the easements by each utility operator shall be
submitted to the City prior to approval of the final plat.
E. Sanitary sewer easements shall be required in those cases where the
sanitary sewer must be located outside public rights-of-way or general
utility and/or drainage easements.
F. Drainage easements for storm sewers and/or open channels shall be
required where storm drainage cannot be practically carried by street or
other rights-of-way as determined by the Storm Water Design Manual. The
location of drainage easements shall be based upon evidence of natural
drainage patterns and/or grading and drainage plans submitted with the
subdivision documentation in accordance with the Design Standards
Manual and the Storm Water Management Design Manual. The width of
drainage easements shall be determined based upon a combination of the
design width of any open channel drainageway as determined by the Storm
Water Design Manual and the Design Standards Manual and of the need to
use large motorized equipment to maintain the storm sewer or open
channel.
G. The easement rights provided pursuant to this section shall be
granted by the developer to the City for the benefit of the appropriate utility
operator.
H. No structures shall be placed or erected on or over any easement
without a specific release from the benefiting utility operator and approved
by the City.
I. Utility and drainage easements, as recorded on a subdivision plat,
shall not thereafter be changed or vacated without the approval of the
Council by resolution based upon releases from the benefiting utility
operators and recommendations from the City Engineer.
8. New residential subdivisions submitted for final plat approval after July 1,
2007, that provide for on street parking of vehicles shall limit the parking of
vehicles to only one side of each street. The City Engineer shall review the sides
designated for vehicle parking and may direct revision if the engineer determines
that the other side of any street is the side that should be designated for parking.
(Ord. 14-05 – May 14 Supp.)
175.07 MAINTENANCE BONDS. Maintenance bonds shall be provided as required
by Chapter 1, Section 3.4(2) of the Design Standards Manual. In lieu thereof, at the
option of the City Engineer, the owner, developer, or contractor, shall make a cash
payment to the City’s Construction Maintenance Self-Insurance Fund in the amount
determined in Section 175.08 or by subsequent resolution of the City Council. The City
Engineer will approve said cash payment in lieu of maintenance bond if the City
Engineer is satisfied from past performance or other evidence that the construction work
of the owner, developer, or contractor on a project will be such that acceptance of a cash
payment into the fund in lieu of a maintenance bond will not expose the fund to a
significantly higher than normal risk of loss. The payment must be made prior to City
Council acceptance of any public improvement.
(Ord. 02-16 – Aug. 02 Supp.)
175.08 CONSTRUCTION MAINTENANCE SELF-INSURANCE FUND.
1. Establishment.
A. There is hereby established in the office of the City Finance Director
a Construction Maintenance Self-Insurance Fund.
B. Cash payments may be made to said fund in lieu of posting a
maintenance bond under Chapter 1, Section 3.4(2) of the Design Standards
Manual as provided in Section 175.07 of this Chapter.
C. The initial amount of the payment into this fund to relieve an owner,
developer, and/or contractor of the responsibility of posting a maintenance
bond shall be calculated by the City Engineer:
As $12.00 per $1,000.00 of the contract price of a street, storm or
sanitary sewer improvement or improvements, or $12.00 per
$1,000.00 of the City Engineer’s estimate of the contract price of the
storm or sanitary sewer improvement or improvements whichever is
greater. Where a performance bond has been posted a credit of one
year shall be allowed.
D. The amount of this payment may, from time to time, be revised by
the City Council by adoption of a resolution revising the same.
E. Payment into this fund will relieve the owner, developer, and/or
contractor of any further responsibility or liability to remedy any and all
defects that may develop in said work by reason of bad workmanship or
poor material used in the construction of said work or to keep the same in
good repair after acceptance of the improvement except that payment into
this fund shall not relieve any surety or principal of these obligations
covered under the terms of a performance bond filed with the City for the
same improvement.
F. This fund will be liable to the City General Fund for costs incurred
to remedy any and all defects that may develop in said work by reason of
bad workmanship or poor material used in the construction of said work or
to keep the same in good repair after acceptance of the improvement for a
period of two years from the date of acceptance of a storm or sanitary sewer
project and for a period of four years from the date of acceptance of a street
construction project and for administrative and inspection costs relating to
the fund and said projects and these costs shall be paid by the Finance
Director by transfer when so directed by the City Manager.
2. Funding.
A. The City Finance Director is hereby authorized to consult with the
City’s auditors, actuaries and such other persons as the Finance Officer
deems necessary to determine:
(1) An adequate starting balance for the Construction
Maintenance Self-Insurance Fund; and
(2) The matters set forth in paragraph C below.
The City Finance Director is hereby authorized to recommend to the City
Council a proposed amount to transfer from the City’s unencumbered
general fund cash balance, or other available funds, such funds as are
necessary to fund an adequate starting balance. Said transfer shall be
deemed a non-interest bearing loan which shall be repaid when and as the
condition of the Construction Maintenance Self-Insurance Fund allows.
B. The City Finance Director shall provide the City Council with an
annual report on the condition of the Construction Maintenance Self-
Insurance Fund.
C. Not less than every five years from inception of the fund, the City
Finance Director shall include in his annual report a recommendation as to
whether or not:
(1) The loan can be repaid in whole or part; and
(2) The amount required to be paid into the Construction
Maintenance Self-Insurance Fund in lieu of posting a maintenance
bond can be reduced or eliminated without a significant detrimental
impact on the fiscal soundness of the fund.
(Ord. 02-16 – Aug. 02 Supp.)
176.01 ADOPTION. This chapter contains the Marion Zoning Ordinance,
which is adopted to establish comprehensive zoning regulations for the City and
to provide for the administration, enforcement and amendment of the Zoning
Ordinance and to repeal any ordinances or resolutions in conflict herewith
except as otherwise provided herein. The Zoning Ordinance is adopted by
authority of and for the purposes set forth in the Code of Iowa and shall be
known, cited and referred to as the Marion Zoning Ordinance.
176.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE. The Zoning Ordinance, as set forth in
the text and map which constitute the Zoning Ordinance, is adopted for the
purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, and the general welfare
of the people, and is intended to accomplish the following objectives:
1. The lessening of congestion on the public streets.
2. The securing of safety from fire, flood, panic, and other dangers.
3. The avoiding of undue concentration of population.
4. The prevention of overcrowding of land, thereby ensuring proper
living and working conditions and preventing the development of slums
and blight.
5. The establishment of adequate standards for the provision of light,
air, and open spaces.
6. The provision of adequate transportation and other public
requirements and services such as water, sewerage, schools and parks.
7. The encouragement of the coordinated optimum physical
development of the community.
8. The preservation and protection of existing property uses and
values against adverse or unharmonious adjacent uses.
9. The establishment of reasonable standards to which buildings and
structures shall conform.
10. The establishment of a rational pattern of relationships between
residential, commercial, and industrial uses for the mutual benefit of all.
11. The prescription of penalties for any violation of the provisions of
this Ordinance, or of any amendment thereto.
176.03 COMPATIBILITY WITH COMMUNITY PLAN. The standards
and requirements contained in this Ordinance and the district mapping reflected
on the Zoning District Map have all been made in accordance with the officially
adopted Comprehensive Community Plan of the City of Marion, Iowa.
176.04 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND MAP. The City is hereby classified and
divided into the following zoning districts:
1. Rural and Residential Districts:
A-1 Rural Restricted
R-1 Low Density Single-Family Residential
R-2 Medium Density Single-Family Residential
R-3 Two-Family Residential
R-4 Four-Family Residential
R-5 Moderate Density Multiple-Family Residential
R-6 High Density Multiple-Family Residential
R-6A Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential
2. Transitional and Commercial Districts:
RT-1 Residential/Transitional
O-1 Office/Transitional
O-2 Office Park
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
C-2 Central Business District Commercial
C-3 General Commercial
C-3P Commercial Park
C-4 Warehouse/Commercial
3. Industrial Districts
I-1 Restricted Industrial
I-1P Industrial Park
I-2 General Industrial
4. Special Districts:
Planned Development Districts:
PD-R Planned Development – Residential
PD-C Planned Development – Commercial
PD-I Planned Development – Industrial
PD-S Planned Development – Special
PD-MH Planned Development – Manufactured/Mobile Home
5. Agricultural and Rural Residential Districts:
AG Agricultural Holding
RR-1 Rural Residential
6. Suburban Residential Districts:
SR-E Suburban Residential Estate
SR-1 Suburban Low-Density Single-Family Residential
SR-2 Suburban Medium Density Single-Family Residential
SR-3 Suburban Medium Density Single-Family Residential
SR-4 Suburban Two-Family Residential
SR-5 Suburban Three and Four-Family Residential
7. Traditional Residential Districts:
TR-1 Traditional Low-Density Single-Family Residential
TR-2 Traditional Medium Density Single-Family Residential
TR-3 Traditional Two-Family Residential
TR-4 Traditional Four-Family Residential
8. Multiple-Family Residential Districts:
MR-1 Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential
MR-2 High Density Multiple-Family Residential
9. Business and Mixed-Use Districts:
BL Local Business
BC Community Business
BR Regional Business
10. Office/Service and Manufacturing Districts:
OS Office/Service
M-1 Light Manufacturing
M-2 General Manufacturing
11. Public Institutional and Recreation and Open Space District (new):
PI Public Institutional
ROS Recreation and Open Space
(Ord. 18-22 – Nov. 18 Supp.)
176.05 ZONING DISTRICT MAP. The boundaries of the zoning districts are shown
on the Zoning District Map dated May 3, 1979, which accompanies the Zoning
Ordinance and is hereby declared to be a part of this chapter. The Zoning District Map
and all notations, references, indications, and other information shown thereon are as
much a part of this chapter as if they were fully described herein. The Zoning District
Map is not set out in this Code of Ordinances but shall remain on file in the office of the
Clerk and shall constitute a part of the Zoning Ordinance and this chapter the same as if
set out therein and herein.†
† See the EDITOR’S NOTE at the end of this chapter for ordinances amending the Zoning Map.
† See the EDITOR’S NOTE at the end of this chapter for ordinances amending the Zoning Map.
176.06 RULES AND DEFINITIONS. In the interpretation of this chapter, the rules
and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied. In the
construction of this chapter, the rules as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa,
Construction of Statues, shall be observed. In addition, the word “Commission” means
the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City, the word “lot” includes the words
“plot,” “parcel” and “tract,” and the words “used or occupied” include the words
“intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied.”
Certain terms in this chapter define a category of uses, to allow some flexibility and in
order to eliminate overly detailed lists of uses. These terms are referred to in this
ordinance as general uses, and are indicated by including (G) in the definition.
Requirements for parking and loading or other provisions of this ordinance may apply
differently to individual uses within a general use category. A change from one use
within a general use category to another use shall be considered a change in use, even
if the latter use is within the same general use category as the initial use.
The following words are defined for use in this chapter:
General Land Use Definitions
1. Academy. (music, art, or dance) A building consisting of classrooms,
instruction areas, performance or recital areas, and accessory areas in which
music, art or dance instruction is the primary and principal activity.
2. Accessory Use (G). A use that is subordinate in area, extent and purpose
to the principal use on the lot, and that is customarily maintained for the benefit
of a permitted principal use. Examples of accessory uses include off-street
parking facilities and outdoor storage.
3. Agriculture. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including
farming, limited to cultivation of grain crops, horticulture, floriculture and
viticulture. This use does not include retail sales, such as nurseries.
4. Agriculture, Urban. The use of a lot for the cultivation of food and/or
horticultural crops and accessory composting. Such use may include the farm
stands, accessory keeping of hens, ducks, or honey bees where allowed by
underlying zoning and shall abide by the standards and procedures of Section
176.49.
5. Airport. A facility where winged aircraft may land and take off, which
may include runways, hangars, facilities for refueling and repair,
accommodations for passengers, air traffic control towers, communications
towers and antennas, lighting for runways and other facilities, and administrative
offices.
6. Art Gallery/Studio. Premises used principally for the sale, display and
exhibition of art. This use may include accessory production of art products and
instruction in the production of art using paint, clay, fabric or other media. This
use does not include the mass production or manufacture of objects.
7. Artist Live/Work Space. Floor area used, or designed to be used, as
both a dwelling unit and a place of work by an artist, artisan or craftsperson,
including persons engaged in the application, teaching or performance of fine
arts including, but not limited to, drawing, vocal or instrumental music, painting,
sculpture and writing.
8. Assisted Living. A facility providing residential accommodations and
daily assistance for elderly or disabled residents with services which may
include but are not limited to health-related care, personal care, and assistance
with instrumental activities of daily living to three or more tenants in a physical
structure which provides a homelike environment. “Assisted Living” includes
twenty-four hours per day response staff to meet scheduled and unscheduled or
unpredictable needs in a manner that promotes a maximum dignity and
independence and provides supervision, safety, and security. [Iowa Code Sec.
231.C.2].
9. Automobile Repair Shop. An establishment performing only vehicle
repair and which does not involve the retail sale of fuel, lubricants, tires, and
other similar products and supplies for vehicles.
10. Automobile Service Station. An establishment for the retail sale of fuel
lubricants, tires, and other similar products and supplies for vehicles, including
minor accessory parts. It may also include vehicle repair, parts installation,
towing services, vehicle washing facilities, and other similar services and
activities.
11. Bank. An establishment such as a bank, savings bank, or credit union
that offers financial services including maintaining checking and savings
accounts, and issuing loans and other credit. Investment and other financial
services may be provided as part of a bank’s range of services. This use is
distinct from Financial Services Institution, which does not offer checking and
savings accounts.
12. Bed and Breakfast. Single-family residences, occupied by owners or
resident managers, which offer lodging on a temporary basis to paying guests in
a room(s) without cooking facilities, and may offer breakfast or other meals to
these guests. Bed and Breakfast Establishment is differentiated from a
Hotel/Motel in that they typically were designed originally as a single-family
residence and have a smaller number of rooms.
13. Boarding House. A building other than a hotel or motel, where for
compensation and arrangement, lodging and/or meals are provided for three (3)
or more persons.
14. Buildable Area (G). The area of lot remaining after the minimum yard
and/or open space requirements of this Ordinance have been complied with.
15. Building, Attached (G). A building which is joined to another at one or
more sides by a common wall, except that any accessory building, including a
garage, shall also be considered as attached to the principal building if connected
by a roof.
16. Car Wash. A building or portion thereof containing facilities for
washing vehicles, using either automatic or manual equipment, where the
vehicle washing service is available to the general public.
17. Carnival. A traveling or transportable group or aggregation of rides,
shows, games, or concessions or any combination thereof occur outdoors. Where
it may be conducted as one enterprise or several concessionaires and where one
admission fee is charged for all shows or entertainments, or a separate fee is
charged for admission to each amusement.
18. Carpet/Flooring Store. A carpet store is a full-service retail facility that
specializes in the sale of floor coverings such as carpeting, tile, wood, etc.
19. Cemetery. This use includes cemeteries for the burial of people or
animals, mausoleums, columbaria, and memorial parks, excluding
crematoriums.
20. Coffee or Tea Room. A limited menu restaurant which is located in
conjunction with and on the same premises as a retail use. As a permitted use, a
Coffee or Tea Room need not meet the definition of an accessory use in relation
to the retail use. As an accessory use, the Coffee or Tea Room must meet the
definition of an accessory use in relation to the retail use.
21. College/University. Public or private colleges, universities, community
colleges or other institutions of higher learning that primarily teach classes that
would count toward an associates, bachelor’s, masters or doctoral degree, and
that may include associated dormitories. College/University shall not include
Schools, Specialized Instructional, as defined herein.
22. Communication Antenna. Any exterior apparatus designed for
telephone, personal wireless services, broadband, radio or television
communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
23. Communication Tower. A structure designed and constructed primarily
for the purpose of supporting one or more Communication Antennas, including
self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopole towers. This use
includes radio and television transmission towers, personal communications
service (PCS), microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone
towers, and the like. This use does not include any structure erected solely for a
residential, non-commercial individual use, such as television reception
antennas, satellite dishes or non-commercial wireless antennas (amateur radio).
24. Convent/Monastery. A building where persons (such as nuns or monks)
reside under religious vows.
25. Correctional Facility. A facility for the detention, confinement,
treatment or rehabilitation of persons arrested or convicted for the violation of a
civil or criminal law. Such facilities include an adult detention center, juvenile
delinquency center, jail, and prison. Temporary holding cells in police stations
are not considered correctional facilities, provided they are accessory in area,
extent and purpose to the police station.
26. Crematory Retort. An apparatus intended for use in the act of
cremation.
27. Cultural Facility (G). Facilities open to the public including, but not
limited to, museums, cultural centers, and aquariums. Cultural Facility does not
include Library, Place of Worship or Lodge or Private Club, as defined herein.
28. Day Care, Adult. A facility providing care for elderly and/or
functionally impaired adults in a protective setting that for a portion of a 24-hour
day. Services often offered in conjunction include, but are not limited to social
and recreational activities, training, counseling, meals, and/or medication
assistance.
29. Day Care Center. A facility in which are received six (6) or more
children for part of all of a day and includes but is not limited to the following:
nursery, school, kindergarten, child care center, day nursery, preschool, and
playground. It does not include bona fide kindergartens or nursery schools
operated by public or private elementary or secondary systems.
30. Day Care, Home. A person or program providing child care to five (5)
children or fewer children at any one time that is not registered to provide child
care, as authorized under Iowa Code Sec. 237A.3.
31. Delayed Deposit Service Uses. An individual, group of individuals,
partnership and association, corporation or any other business unity or legal
entity, who for a fee accepts a check dated subsequent to the date it was written
or to a check dated on the date it was written and holds said check for a period
of time prior to deposit or presentment pursuant to an agreement with, or any
representation mead to the maker of the check, whether express or implied. For
the purposes of the Ordinance “check” means a check, draft, share draft, or other
instrument for the payment of money.
32. Drive-Thru Facility. See Restaurant, Drive-Thru.
33. Dwelling Unit, Auxiliary. An attached or detached dwelling unit
conforming to the following provisions:
A. Auxiliary Dwelling Unit, Attached. A dwelling unit attached to a
single-unit dwelling. The attached auxiliary dwelling unit may have
permanent, independent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking
and sanitation. A separate exterior entrance to the auxiliary dwelling unit
may be provided. An interior connection between the auxiliary dwelling
unit and the single-unit detached dwelling is not necessary, unless
required to meet building or fire prevention code requirements.
B. Auxiliary Dwelling Unit, Detached. A dwelling unit, but not a
manufactured home, surrounded by open space, which is constructed on
the same lot as a single-unit detached dwelling. The detached auxiliary
dwelling unit may have permanent, independent facilities for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
34. Dwelling, Efficiency/Micro Unit. A dwelling unit, included as part of a
multi-unit development and located in a mixed-use zoning district, with a total
gross floor area of no more than 500 square feet.
35. Dwelling, One-Unit. A detached dwelling containing a single dwelling
unit. Travel trailers, housing mounted on self-propelled or drawn vehicles, tents,
or other forms of temporary or portable housing are not included in this
definition.
36. Dwelling, Two-Unit. A building containing two (2) dwelling units
attached either vertically or horizontally. This use does not include Auxiliary
Dwelling Units as defined herein.
37. Dwelling, Three-Unit. A building containing three (3) dwelling units
attached either vertically or horizontally.
38. Dwelling, Four-Unit. A building containing four (4) dwelling units
attached either vertically or horizontally.
39. Dwelling, Multi-Unit. A building with five (5) or more dwelling units
not designed as townhouses (see Dwelling, Townhouse), where each dwelling
unit is provided an individual entrance to the outdoors or to a common hallway.
40. Dwelling, Townhouse. A building with two (2) or more attached
dwelling units arranged side-by-side, sharing common fire-resistive walls
without openings, where each dwelling unit occupies an exclusive vertical space
with no other dwelling unit above or below, and where each dwelling unit has at
least one individual exit directly to the outdoors.
41. Dwelling, Upper Level. A dwelling unit located on a floor above a on
residential use.
42. Electronics Superstore. An establishment with more than 30,000
square feet of floor area that specializes in the sale of electronic merchandise.
Examples of items sold in these stores include: televisions, audio and video
players and recorders; software; telephones; computers; and general electronics
accessories. Major home appliances may also be sold at these facilities.
43. Emergency Medical Center. A facility, other than a hospital, that
provides emergency medical care and that is licensed by the State of Iowa as an
emergency center under the Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Systems Act.
44. Family Home. A residential home which is licensed as a residential care
facility under Chapter 135C of the Code of Iowa, or as a child foster care facility
under Chapter 237 of the Code of Iowa, to provide room and board, personal
care, rehabilitation services, and supervision in a family environment
exclusively for not more than eight (8) developmentally disabled persons, brain
injury, and any necessary support personnel. However, “family home” does not
mean an individual foster care family licensed under Chapter 237 of the Code
of Iowa. Includes an elder group home.
45. Financial Institution (G). An establishment, the principal use or
purpose of which is the provision of financial services including, but not limited
to, mortgage companies and investment services. Financial Institution shall not
include currency exchanges, banks, credit unions, and savings banks.
46. Firework Sales. The sale of any substance or combination of substance
or articles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation and includes fireworks
containing any explosive or flammable compound, or other device containing
any explosive substance and that meets the definition of consumer fireworks,
display fireworks, or novelty fireworks as defined by the American Pyrotechnics
Association and include, but are not limited to firecrackers, torpedoes, sky
rockets, Roman candles, sparklers, poppers, snappers, or the like.
47. Funeral Home / Mortuary. An establishment providing services for
preparing deceased humans for burial and may include a chapel or gathering
space for the display of the deceased and rituals connected therewith before
burial or cremation. This excludes cemeteries, columbaria, and mausoleums.
48. Furniture Store. A furniture store is a full-service retail facility that
specializes in the sale of furniture. Furniture stores are generally large and may
include storage areas. Although some home accessories may be sold, furniture
stores primarily focus on the sale of pre-assembled furniture.
49. Gas Station. An establishment offering for sale at retail to the public,
fuels, oils and accessories for motor vehicles, which may also offer convenience
goods such as food, beverages, and other items typically found in a convenience
market. Gas Station does not include Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor,
as defined herein. For Gas Station facilities with drive-through fast food
windows, see Drive-Through Facility.
50. Golf Course. Land used for playing the game of golf by the public or by
members and guests of a private club, and which may include any of the
following: clubhouse, meeting rooms, food and beverage services, tennis
facilities, landscaping, irrigation systems, driving ranges, paths and golf greens
and tees.
51. Grocery, Neighborhood. Retail establishments occupying facilities of
less than 10,000 square feet, and characterized by sales of specialty foods or a
limited variety of general items. The accessory sale of fuel for motor vehicles is
not allowed. Typical uses include delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries,
candy shops, and small grocery stores.
52. Grocery. Retail establishments primarily selling a wide variety of food
commodities, but also may sell other convenience and household goods, using
facilities larger than 10,000 square feet.
53. Group Home. A facility for the residence of individuals including
resident persons providing care and supervision in a family setting. A group
home shall be duly approved and licensed as required by applicable State and
local regulations. A group home does not include a facility such as a family
home, rehabilitation house, lodging house, fraternity, sorority, health care
facility or similar institution. (Group Home, Small = less than 6 individuals;
Group Home, Large = 6 or more individuals)
54. Health/Fitness Club. An establishment that provides exercise facilities
such as running, jogging, aerobics, weight lifting, court sports and swimming,
as well as locker rooms, showers, massage rooms, saunas and related accessory
uses.
55. Heavy Retail and Service (G). A retail and/or service establishment
where a) outdoor service or storage areas or partially enclosed structures are
used in conjunction with the business, or b) the sale of goods or services to the
general public at retail is secondary to the sale of goods or services to
contractors, service professionals, and the like at wholesale. This use includes,
but is not limited to, equipment rental and leasing, lumberyards and other
building material and building supply establishments; auto parts establishments,
commercial greenhouses and garden centers; landscape, construction and lawn
maintenance contractor yards; contractor’s offices and storage; bulk materials
sales and storage; swimming pool sales; deck and patio sales, playground
equipment sales, and recreational vehicle and mobile home dealers. Outdoor
Sales Areas and outdoor storage are permitted as accessory uses. Heavy Retail
and Service does not include: Home Improvement Center, Retail Sales, Personal
Services, Pawn Shops, Motor Vehicle Sales and Leasing, or Adult Uses, as
defined herein.
56. Heliport. An area used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff
of helicopters that is certified by the State of Iowa as such.
57. Home Improvement Center. An establishment with more than 50,000
square feet of floor area that sells building supplies, construction equipment,
home decorating fixtures and accessories, and related goods and services to the
general public. Outdoor Sales, Permanent and Temporary, are permitted as
accessory uses. Home Improvement Center is distinct from Heavy Retail and
Service, as defined herein.
58. Home Occupation (G). The conduct of a business or profession within
a dwelling unit by one or more members of the family residing therein, which is
incidental and secondary to the residential use. Home Occupation includes, but
is not limited to, the following: the practice of law, engineering, architecture,
and accounting; brokerage; business offices; instruction in or the practice of art,
photography, music, language, or dance; computer services; hair cutting and
styling; and day care homes. The following occupations, as well as others which
do not have a character similar to those listed above, are specifically excluded
from the definition of home occupation: restaurants, bed and breakfast
establishments, nursing homes, mortuary establishments, and retail sales
establishments with stock displayed and/or sold on the premises.
59. Homeless Shelter. A facility that provides temporary sleeping and/or
living accommodations and meals to homeless persons and which may include
counseling, accessory offices, or recreational facilities for occupants.
60. Horse Stable, Private. A detached accessory building for the keeping
of horses owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for remuneration,
hire or sale.
61. Hospice. A facility or program licensed by the State of Iowa that meets
the requirements as authorized under the Iowa Licensed Hospice Program [Iowa
Code Sec. 135.J].
62. Hospital. An institution that provides emergency room and other
services including but not limited to physical or mental health services, inpatient
or overnight accommodations, and medical or surgical care services, that
is licensed by the State of Iowa under the Licensure and Regulation of Hospitals
[Iowa Code Sec. 135.B].
63. Hotel/Motel. A building where guest rooms or suites are offered for a
fee to temporary or transient guests to provide temporary sleeping and/or living
accommodations. This use is distinct from Bed and Breakfast Establishment and
Homeless Shelter as defined herein.
64. Independent Living Facility. A multiple-family dwelling that is limited
to occupancy by persons who are fifty-five (55) years of age or older or, if two
(2) persons occupy a unit, at least one (1) shall be fifty-five (55) years or older.
Such facilities may include offering congregate meals in a common dining area.
This use may include incidental medical services for the convenience of
residents, but is distinct from an Assisted Living or Nursing Home, as defined
herein.
65. Indoor Recreation and Amusement (G). Indoor facilities including
Health/Fitness Clubs, sports arenas, swimming pools, ice or roller skating rinks,
bowling alleys, tennis, handball and other court games, sports clubs, indoor golf,
paintball marking, pool, billiards, foosball, table tennis, shuffleboard, pinball
machines, video games and similar recreation or amusement facilities. This use
may include accessory uses such as snack bars, pro shops and locker rooms,
which are designed and intended primarily for the use of patrons of the principal
recreational use.
66. Junk/Salvage Yard. An open area where waste, and/or used or
secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed,
disassembled or handled including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other
metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. This use includes auto salvage
yards, but does not include a Recycling Facility as defined herein.
67. Kennel. Any lot or premises, or portion thereof, where more than four
(4) dogs, cats and other household domestic animals, over four (4) months of
age, are kept, or where more than two (2) such animals are boarded for
compensation. This use includes animal day care establishments, but does not
include the retail sale of household domestic animals unless animals are kept or
exercised out of doors.
68. Library. A public or private facility where books, periodicals,
recordings, and other documents are principally maintained for borrowing and
use by patrons, rather than being offered for sale. This use may include the
incidental sale of surplus materials and other goods.
69. Live Entertainment (G). The performance of singing, playing musical
instruments, spoken word, or dancing by live performers within an
establishment such as a Restaurant or Tavern/Bar, or portion thereof. Live
Entertainment does not include Theaters that may have live musical
performances as part of a theatrical production, or Restaurants that play low
volume background music.
70. Lodge or Private Club. A non-profit association of persons who are
bona fide members paying dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building, or
portion thereof, where the use of the premises are restricted to members and their
guests.
71. Manufacturing, Heavy (G). Activities or processes that may involve
the storage of large volumes of highly flammable, toxic matter or explosive
materials needed for the manufacturing process, and may involve outdoor
operations. Typical heavy manufacturing uses include, but are not limited to:
concrete batch plants, concrete, tile or brick manufacturing, automobile, truck
and tire assembly, ammonia or chlorine manufacturing, metal casting or
foundries, grain milling or processing, metal or metal ore production, refining,
smelting or alloying, petroleum or petroleum product refining, boat, pool and
spa manufacturing, slaughtering of animals, glass manufacturing, paper
manufacturing, and wood or lumber processing. The assembly, fabrication or
processing of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily have greater
than average impacts on the environment, or that ordinarily have significant
impacts on the use and enjoyment of adjacent property in terms of noise, smoke,
fumes, odors, glare or health and safety hazards, are considered Heavy
Manufacturing.
72. Manufacturing, Light (G). The assembly, fabrication, or processing of
goods and materials using processes that ordinarily do not create noise, smoke,
fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety hazards outside of the building or lot
where such assembly, fabrication or processing takes place.
73. Medical Cannabidiol. Any pharmaceutical grade cannabinoid that has
a tetrahydrocannabinol level consistent with Iowa Code Sec. 124.E.
74. Medical Cannabidiol Dispensary. Any dispensary selected and
licensed by the State of Iowa to dispense medical cannabidiol within the state of
Iowa shall abide by Iowa Code Sec. 124.E.
75. Medical Cannabidiol Manufacturer. Any manufacturer selected and
licensed by the State of Iowa to manufacture and to possess, cultivate, harvest,
transport, package, process, or supply medical cannabidiol within the state of
Iowa and shall abide by Iowa Code Sec. 124.E.
76. Medical / Dental Clinic. A medical or dental office or clinic offering
professional medical or dental services primarily on an out-patient basis. Such
services may include examination and consultation, treatment, surgery,
radiology, MRI, on-site testing laboratories, physical / occupational therapy,
diagnostic services, training, administration, and other services to patients
provided by licensed medical or dental professionals. This use includes facilities
licensed by the State of Iowa as ambulatory surgical treatment centers. This use
does not include a Hospital as defined herein or a facility certified by the State
of Iowa as an emergency center under the Emergency Medical Services (EMS)
Systems Act.
77. Microbrewery. An establishment licensed by the State of Iowa for the
manufacturing, blending, fermentation, processing, and packaging of alcoholic
beverages for distribution, retail sale, or wholesale, for consumption on- or offpremises
which produces less than 15,000 barrels per year. Taprooms or tasting
rooms for on-site consumption of the manufacture’s products is permitted. This
includes micro-distilleries and micro-wineries.
78. Mini-Warehouse. A structure or group of structures used for the
purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to different tenants who
are to have access to such spaces for the purpose of storage and removing
property. This includes shipping containers and other temporary individual
structures.
79. Model Airplane Facility. An outdoor facility for displaying and flying
model aircraft, including paved or unpaved runways and taxiways, shelter
structures, seating such as benches or bleachers, parking facilities for
participants and spectators, and unpaved areas for temporary event parking. The
nature and extent of these facilities may be specified in an ordinance granting or
amending a special use. The area encompassed by the use shall include all flight
paths and flyover areas.
80. Motor Vehicle Display, Outdoor. The outdoor display of new or used
motor vehicles offered for sale or lease, which do not carry permanent motor
vehicle registration tags, but may be temporarily registered with “dealer” plates
for purposes of test drives, transfer of vehicles between sales locations, use by
sales personnel, and similar limited uses. Outdoor Motor Vehicle Display is
permitted only in conjunction with an allowable Motor Vehicle Sales and
Leasing use.
81. Motor Vehicle Rental. An establishment that offers motor vehicles,
trucks, vans, recreational vehicles, trailers, or other similar motorized
transportation vehicles for rent to the general public.
82. Motor Vehicle Sales and Leasing. An establishment licensed by the
State of Iowa where the principal use is the sale or lease of new or used
automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers, boats or motorcycles, or other similar
motorized transportation vehicles. A Motor Vehicle Sales and Leasing
establishment may maintain an inventory of the vehicles for sale or lease onsite.
Secondary support uses may also exist upon the same site, such as
maintenance, repair, and service areas, indoor parts storage areas, and financial
services areas. Motor Vehicle Display, Outdoor, is permitted as an accessory
use; Vehicle Service and Repair, Major and Minor, as defined herein, are
permitted as accessory uses or as additional principal uses.
83. Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Major. Motor Vehicle Service and
Repair, Major includes, but shall not be limited to, establishments involved in
major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers, engine
rebuilding, towing and collision service, including body, frame or fender
straightening or repair, and overall painting of motor vehicles. Such
establishments often require the storage of vehicles to be repaired. Vehicle
towing establishments, with or without repair facilities, are included in this
category.
84. Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor. An establishment which
performs minor repairs and service to any motor vehicle, including repairs and
replacement of cooling, electrical, fuel and exhaust systems, brake adjustments,
brake relining and repairs, wheel alignment and balancing, repair and
replacement of shock absorbers, touch up work for paint chips and windshields,
engine repair and service, and transmission repair and service which is,
conducted entirely within an enclosed building. Such use may include the
incidental sales of motor oil, lubricants or motor vehicle accessories. This use
does not permit the storage of repair vehicles on the site for more than five (5)
days and does not include the services and activities of Motor Vehicle Service
and Repair, Major, as defined herein.
85. Motor Vehicle Storage, Permanent. The outdoor storage of motor
vehicles, trucks, vans, recreational vehicles, trailers, or other similar motorized
transportation vehicles, when not accessory to any principal use on the same lot.
86. Motor Vehicle Storage, Temporary. The temporary outdoor storage of
motor vehicles, trucks, vans, recreational vehicles, trailers, or other similar
motorized transportation, when not accessory to any principal use on the same
lot, conforming to the limits provided herein for Temporary Motor Vehicle
Storage.
87. Nursing Home. An institutional facility that meets the definition of a
nursing facility as established in the Iowa Code of Health Care Facilities [Iowa
Code Sec. 135.C].
88. Office, Government (G). An office of a local, State or Federal
government organization. This use is distinct from a Public Service Facility, as
defined herein.
89. Office, Business or Professional (G). An office used for business,
professional or administrative uses, which may or may not offer services to the
public, and is engaged in the processing, manipulation or application of business
information or professional expertise. This use may include as accessory uses,
facilities not available for use by the general public such as meeting facilities,
employee amenities such as exercise rooms, and food service. This use does not
involve the fabricating, assembling, warehousing, or repair of physical products,
and does not include Medical/Dental Clinics, Financial Institutions or
Professional Training Centers.
90. Outdoor Amusement. Outdoor facilities including stadiums, outdoor
theaters, go-cart courses, raceways, rodeos, outdoor music arenas, theme parks,
amusement parks, and privately-owned water parks. Outdoor Amusement may
include accessory uses, such as snack bars, which are designed and intended
primarily for the use of patrons of the principal use.
91. Outdoor Dining. The serving of food and/or beverages in an outdoor
space with seats and/or tables accessory to a restaurant or other food service
establishment.
92. Outdoor Entertainment. An outdoor show, performance or the playing
of recorded or amplified sound.
93. Outdoor Entertainment, Temporary. The performance of live music
outside of an enclosed building in an outdoor space as part of a community
festival or an event hosted by the City, Park District, School District, or other
governmental body, or as a temporary accessory use to a business.
94. Outdoor Recreation (G). Active outdoor recreational facilities
available to the general public, including lighted ball fields, lighted ball courts,
driving ranges, miniature golf courses, batting cages, skateboarding courses,
archery ranges, outdoor aquatic facilities owned and operated by a park district
such as swimming pools, splash parks and water slides, and other similar uses.
This use may include accessory uses such as snack bars that are designed and
intended primarily for the use of patrons of the principal recreational use.
Outdoor Recreation does not include Model Airplane Facilities, Golf Courses,
or Outdoor Amusement.
95. Outdoor Sales, Permanent. The sale or display for sale at retail of
goods, or the provision of services, out of doors in conjunction with or accessory
to a principal use, where the sale, display or provision of services exceeds the
time limits provided herein for Temporary Outdoor Sales.
96. Outdoor Sales, Temporary. The sale or display for sale at retail of
goods, or the provision of services, out of doors in conjunction with or accessory
to a principal use, where the sale, display or provision of services conforms to
the limits provided herein for Temporary Outdoor Sales.
97. Outdoor Storage. The storage of any goods, material, merchandise or
equipment outside of an enclosed building. Outdoor Storage does not include
the display of goods for sale at retail or temporary storage of refuse, nor does it
include outdoor refuse dumpsters, recycling containers, compacting equipment,
pallet storage, baled cardboard, and other refuse and recycling materials.
98. Park, Neighborhood. Public or private open space maintained in a
natural state or improved with amenities for passive or active recreation,
including but not limited to ball fields and ball courts without lighting for night
play. This use does not include facilities categorized as Outdoor Recreation or
Outdoor Amusement.
99. Parking Garage/Structure. Public or private structures, or portions
thereof, composed of one (1) or more levels or floors used exclusively for the
parking of motor vehicles, whether public or private, but not including a private
garage as defined herein. A parking structure may be totally below grade (as in
an underground parking garage), or either partially or totally above grade, with
those levels being either open or enclosed.
100. Parking Lot, Private. A parking lot used for parking of motor vehicles
that is not within a parking garage/structure and is not within or under a building.
This use is distinct from “Motor Vehicle Display, Outdoor”, “Motor Vehicle
Storage”, and “Parking Lot, Public.”
101. Parking Lot, Public. A parking lot used for parking of motor vehicles that is not
within a parking garage/structure, is not within or under a building, and is available for
public use for at least a portion of the day. The lot may provide off-street parking for
multiple uses and lots in the vicinity. The lot may be accessory to a building and may be
publicly or privately owned. This use is distinct from “Motor Vehicle Display, Outdoor”,
“Motor Vehicle Storage”, and “Parking Lot, Private.”
102. Pawn Shop. An establishment where loans are offered on the security of personal
property and where unclaimed property is sold.
103. Personal Services (G). An establishment where personal services are provided
directly to the customer. This use includes, but is not limited to, barber shops, beauty
parlors, day spas, laundry and dry-cleaning establishments, tanning salons, tailors,
domestic pet grooming, shoe repair shops, and the like. This use may include incidental
retail sales of goods. Tattoo Parlors, Currency Exchanges, Motor Vehicle Rental and
Sexually Oriented Business are not permitted as Personal Services establishments.
104. Personal Services, Limited. A subset of the Personal Services use category limited
to barber shops and beauty salons (including: hair treatments, facial treatments, pedicures,
and finger nail treatments, tanning salons). All limitations on the Personal Services use
category shall also apply to Personal Services, Limited.
105. Pet Care Facilities. A building, structure or portion thereof designed or used for
the retail sale of pet products and food, grooming, boarding, training, daycare or overnight
boarding of dogs, cats or other household domestic animals. The overnight boarding area
of the establishment shall not exceed 50% of the total Gross Floor Area of the business.
Establishments that only provide daycare and overnight boarding services, or
establishments where these services exceed 50% of the Gross Floor Area, shall be
considered a Kennel, not a Pet Care Facility.
106. Place of Worship. A church, temple, synagogue, mosque or other religious place
of assembly, which may or may not include schools and/or meeting facilities and accessory
uses such as a parish house, recreational facilities and other non-profit operations that serve
members of the religious organization.
107. Planned Unit Development. A special use that is reviewed and approved
according to the standards and procedures of Section 176.34, Planned Development
Districts and other relevant provisions of this Ordinance.
108. Police Firearms Training Range. A firearms range used exclusively for training
and practice by law enforcement personnel.
109. Private Garage. An accessory building, or an accessory portion of the principal
building, which is intended and used for storing the private passenger vehicles of the family
or families residing upon the premises.
110. Professional Training Center. A training center with classrooms, administrative
offices, food preparation and service, residential accommodations for trainees, and
recreational facilities.
111. Post Office. A facility with service windows for mailing packages and letters, post
office boxes, postal service offices, postal vehicle storage areas and sorting and distribution
facilities for mail.
112. Public Plaza. Pedestrian oriented open space owned and maintained by a public
agency for the use and enjoyment of the general public, commonly hardscaped.
113. Public Service Facility. A facility owned and operated by a governmental entity
used to provide a public safety or public service, including but not limited to police and
fire stations, public works facilities for road or utility maintenance, vehicle maintenance
garages, workshops, storage, offices, communications and dispatch, school bus
maintenance and storage, and park maintenance facilities.
114. Recycling Facility. A facility where newspapers, magazines, books and other
paper products, glass, metal cans and other products are received, sorted, reprocessed
and/or treated as part of a process to return such products to a condition in which they may
be used again as a raw material in finished products. This use does not include a junkyard
as defined herein.
115. Research and Development Use (G). Facilities for laboratory research in
scientific, medical or technology intensive fields such as biotechnology, pharmaceuticals,
genetics, plastics, polymers, resins, coatings, fibers, fabrics, films, heat transfer and
radiation research, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as
incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory or research facility.
116. Restaurant (G). An establishment in which the primary activity is prepared food
service, provided for consumption on the premises or for carry-out. Live entertainment is
permitted as an accessory use within completely enclosed areas; and outdoor dining,
including service to patrons seated outdoors, is permitted as an accessory use on the
premises. This use is distinct from a Tavern/Bar where the primary purpose is the sale of
alcoholic beverages, or snack bars or refreshment stands that are accessory to recreational
or amusement facilities. For restaurants with drive-through windows, see Drive-Through
Facility; for restaurants with outdoor live entertainment, see Outdoor Entertainment. A
small-scale brewery serving food can be included in the definition of a restaurant.
117. Restaurant, Carry-Out Only. A restaurant establishment in which the primary
activity is prepared food service provided for carry-out or delivery only, and no food is
consumed on the premises.
118. Restaurant, Drive-In. A restaurant in which food is served directly to customers
in motor vehicles for consumption of the premises.
119. Restaurant, Drive-Thru. A facility or part thereof that provides goods or services
to patrons while they remain in a motor vehicle for consumption off the premises.
120. Retail Sales, Large (G). An establishment over 30,000 square feet where the
primary purpose is the sale of physical goods, products or merchandise directly to the
consumer. This use includes, but is not limited to, stores that sell groceries, hardware,
clothing, auto parts, electronics, appliances, jewelry, antiques and shoes. This use also
includes, Electronics Superstores, and Furniture Stores and Grocery Stores. This use does
not include Heavy Retail and Service, Home Improvement Center, Pawn Shops, or
Sexually Oriented Business as defined by Chapter 127, herein.
121. Retail Sales, Medium (G). An establishment between 10,000 and 30,000 square
feet where the primary purpose is the sale of physical goods, products or merchandise
directly to the consumer. This use includes, but is not limited to, stores that sell groceries,
hardware, clothing, auto parts, electronics, appliances, jewelry, antiques and shoes. This
use does not include Heavy Retail and Service, Home Improvement Center, Pawn Shops,
or Sexually Oriented Business as defined by Chapter 127, herein.
122. Retail Sales, Small (G). An establishment between 5,000 and 10,000 square feet
where the primary purpose is the sale of physical goods, products or merchandise directly
to the consumer. This use includes, but is not limited to, stores that sell groceries, hardware,
clothing, auto parts, electronics, appliances, jewelry, antiques and shoes. This use also
includes, Neighborhood Grocery Stores, Specialty Retail Stores. This use does not include
Heavy Retail and Service, Home Improvement Center, Pawn Shops, or Sexually Oriented
Business as defined by Chapter 127.
123. Retail Sales, Specialty (G). Retail operations that specialize in one type or line of
merchandise. Specialty Retail Sales establishments include stores that sell food items
prepared on site, including but not limited to chocolate, ice cream, candy, bakery items and
popcorn.
124. Sexually Oriented Business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store,
adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio
or sexual encounter services, or experiences appropriate only for adults by reason of an
emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” as defined in
Chapter 127 of this Code of Ordinances.
125. Schools, Primary or Secondary. Public, private or parochial institutions primarily
engaged in academic instruction for all, or part of, grades Kindergarten through 12th, and
recognized or approved by the State of Iowa. This use may include accessory day care
centers for children over the age of three (3).
126. School, Private Boarding. An elementary, junior high or high school that provides
lodging for students on the same property.
127. School, Specialized Instructional (G). A private for-profit or non-profit
establishment where the primary business is providing specialized instruction not
necessarily limited by age, such as, but not limited to, driving, trade, specialized academic,
vocational, art, music and dance schools.
128. Tattoo Parlor/Body Piercing Studio. An establishment whose principal business
activity, either in terms of operation or as held out to the public, is the practice of (1) placing
of designs, letters, figures, symbols or other marks upon or under the skin of any person,
using ink or other substances, which result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means
of the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin (2)
creation of an opening in the body of a person for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other
decoration.
129. Tavern/Bar. An establishment primarily engaged in serving alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises. This use may also include accessory sale of prepared food.
Live entertainment is permitted as an accessory use in completely enclosed areas. This use
does not include Outdoor Dining, unless permitted as a Special Use.
130. Theater. An indoor establishment where live performances, motion pictures, or
other recorded media are offered for public viewing, where admission is charged. This use
does not include any Sexually Oriented Business, as defined herein.
131. Transportation Operations Facility. A facility which may include outdoor
facilities and buildings, where buses, trains, taxicabs or other delivery vehicles are stored
and/or dispatched, where loading and unloading of passengers and freight may be carried
on regularly. This use is distinct from a Public Service Facility, as defined herein.
132. Utility, Community/Regional. Infrastructure services that serve a larger area than
those defined herein as Utility, Local and which may have employees normally present at
the site. This includes electrical substations, telephone equipment buildings, cable
television head-end facilities, above- ground natural gas transmission facilities, municipal
wastewater treatment facilities, water supply treatment facilities, and similar large-scale
utility equipment and buildings.
133. Utility, Local. Infrastructure services that need to be located in the area where the
service is provided, and which generally do not have employees at the site. This includes
overhead electric and communications lines and poles; electric utility towers; electric
transformers and switchgear; traffic signals and controllers; street lighting; wastewater lift
stations; fire hydrants and standpipes; water supply wells, reservoirs and towers; storm
water drainage and underground gas, electrical, telephone, communications, water
distribution, wastewater collection, and drainage facilities. This use does not include the
facilities included under Utility, Community/Regional as defined herein.
134. Veterinary Office/Animal Hospital. Any building, or portion thereof, designed or
used for veterinary examination, observation and treatment of domestic animals, and may
include euthanasia of domestic animals. This use does not include Kennels or any keeping
of animals out of doors, except that one animal at a time may be taken out of doors by one
or more employees of the Veterinary Office/Animal Hospital; see also Kennels and Horse
Stables, Private.
135. Warehouse/Distribution. This use includes structures or areas, or a portion
thereof, used principally for the storage or distribution of goods and merchandise to
retailers, non-residential users, or to other wholesalers. This use shall not include
Manufacturing, Light/Assembly, as defined herein.
General Zoning Definitions
136. Abut or Abutting. Having a common lot line, zoning district boundary line, or
other boundary, not separated by a street or alley.
137. Accessory Building. A building that is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to
the principal use and building on the lot and that is customarily used or occupied for a
permitted accessory use. Examples of accessory buildings include private garages and
storage buildings.
138. Accessory Structure. A structure that is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to
the principal use and building on the lot and that is customarily used for a permitted
accessory use. Examples of accessory structures include signs, fences, and decks.
139. Addition or Expansion. Any of the following:
A. An increase in floor area of a building
B. A modification to the roof line of a building, such as the construction of a
dormer that increases the amount of floor space devoted to human use or occupancy
C. The reconstruction of a building or structure which is not accompanied by
a change in the use of a lot
140. Advertising Bench. Any bench or bench-like structure that is used, in whole or in
part, for advertising purposes by means of a message or design painted on, printed on,
affixed to, or otherwise designed as, an integral part of the bench.
141. Alley. A public right-of-way, normally 20 feet or less in width, that affords a
secondary means of access to abutting properties.
142. Alteration. Any physical change to the exterior surface of a building or part
thereof, including but not limited to renovation, rehabilitation, reconstruction, restoration,
or replacement, or any change that affects the interior configuration of walls, spaces, or
bulk of a building or structure.
143. Architectural Feature. A visually apparent feature of a building or structure that
contributes to its aesthetics, including but not limited to cornices, eaves, gutters, belt
courses, lintels, sills, archways, windows, doors, chimneys, columns, pilasters, and
decorative ornaments.
144. Arterial or Collector Street. A street that is designated in the Marion
Comprehensive Plan and Marion Major Streets Right-of-Way Guide as an existing or
future strategic major arterial, minor arterial or collector street.
145. Attention-getting Device. Any flag, streamer, pennant, light, balloon, fringe, or
similar device or ornamentation used primarily for the purpose of attracting attention for
promotion or advertising a business or other use, which is visible by the general public
from any public right of way.
146. Automobile Franchise. The right to sell a particular make of motor vehicle held
by any person, firm or corporation owning or demising any portion of the land within an
Auto Mall, as defined herein, irrespective of whether a particular manufacturer has multiple
makes or brands. By way of example only, a corporation authorized to sell Pat McGrath
manufactured Jeep vehicles and Pat McGrath-Buick manufactured Dodge vehicles shall be
considered to have two (2) Franchises.
147. Awning. A structure made of cloth, metal or other materials affixed to a building
and generally located so as to provide shade for windows and doors.
148. Basement. A portion of the building partly underground but having less than onehalf
its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
149. Bay Window. A window which projects outward from the building wall, and does
not rest on the building foundation or on the ground.
150. Beacon. A light with one (1) or more beams directed into the atmosphere or
directed at one (1) or more points not on the same lot as the light source. However, this
term shall not include any kind of lighting device that is required or necessary under the
safety regulations described by the Federal Aviation Administration or other similar
agencies. Beacon shall not include Searchlight, as defined herein.
151. Berm. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen
undesirable views, reduce noise, or fulfill other such purposes.
152. Block. A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of one (1) or more
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines, shorelines of
waterways or corporate boundary lines.
153. Block Face. The properties abutting on one (1) side of the street and lying between
the two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest intersecting or intercepting
street and railroad right- of-way, public parks, cemeteries, corporate boundary line or
watercourse.
154. Block Frontage. The total horizontal length of the lot frontages on one side of a
street between the two nearest intersecting streets, or, if the street terminates in a dead-end,
between the nearest intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
155. Bollard. A functional pole or sphere attached to the ground intended to control
automobile access into pedestrian areas or protect structures in pedestrian areas from
automobile damage.
156. Breezeway. A roofed, open-sided structure that connects a principal building with
an accessory building.
157. Buffer Yard. An area of a lot with landscape plantings and other components used
to visibly separate one use from another or to shield noise, lights or other nuisances.
158. Buildable Area. The area of lot remaining after the minimum yard and/or open
space requirements of this Ordinance have been complied with.
159. Building. A structure attached to the ground built for the support, shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind.
160. Building, Attached. A building which is joined to another at one or more sides by
a common wall, except that any accessory building, including a garage, shall also be
considered as attached to the principal building if connected by a roof.
161. Building, Completely Enclosed. A building enclosed by a permanent roof and
continuous exterior walls having openings only for windows, screens, and entrance or exit
doors.
162. Building Coverage. A measure of intensity of land use that represents the portion
of a site that is covered by a principal building or buildings including attached garages and
enclosed porches, and accessory buildings including detached garages and any other
enclosed accessory building in excess of 120 square feet of Lot Coverage. Building
Coverage shall be measured at the outer edge of the foundation line, or at the outer wall
surface or support column in the case of a post or other non- continuous foundation,
excluding projections for bay windows. Building Coverage shall not include unenclosed
porches, decks, or unenclosed accessory structures such as gazebos, swimming pools, or
tennis and sports courts.
163. Building, Detached. A building surrounded by open space on the same lot. A
building connected to another building only by an unenclosed structure shall be deemed to
be a detached building.
164. Building Frontage. The horizontal length of any side of a building or portion
thereof that faces a public or private street or parking area.
165. Building Height. The vertical distance from grade at the midpoint of the required
front building line to a specified point on the building:
A. In the case of a flat roof, to the highest point of the wall or parapet; if the
building design provides for enclosed mechanical equipment on the roof, the
building height shall be measured to the highest point of the enclosing structure, if
the enclosing structure comprises more than 20% of the lot coverage of the
building.
B. In the case of a gable, hip, gambrel or mansard roof, to the top of the ridge
of the highest area of the roof.
C. Building elements extending above the main portion of the building such as
chimneys, spires, steeples, towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar
projections shall not be included in calculating building height, unless the area of a
horizontal plane through the widest part of the building element comprises more
than 20% of the lot coverage of the building.
166. Building Line. A line within the lot parallel to a front lot line or exterior side lot
line, which is separated from such lot line by the depth of the required front yard or exterior
side yard, respectively.
167. Bulk. The term used to indicate the size of buildings or structures, and the location
of the same with respect to lot lines and to one another, which includes the following:
A. Lot Area
B. Lot Width
C. Building Coverage
D. Floor Area and Floor Area Ratio
E. Building Height
F. Yards, setbacks, Landscape Buffers, and other open space.
168. Bulletin Board. Any sign with a changeable message board erected in a permanent
fashion by a charitable, educational or religious institution or public body, which is erected
upon the same property as said institution.
169. Business. The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter, or exchange of goods, wares,
merchandise, or services, the maintenance or operations of offices or recreational and
amusement enterprises for profit.
170. Canopy. A permanent roof like structure that projects from the wall of a building
and overhangs the right of way or open space outside the building, normally used to shelter
pedestrians from rain or snow, or as a decorative architectural feature.
171. Carport. An open-sided roofed structure designed to shelter one or more vehicles,
usually formed by an extension of the roof from the side of a building.
172. Cellar. The portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and having
half of more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
173. Circular Driveway. A driveway on a single or two-family residential lot
configured generally in a “U” shape, having two points of access to a public street or streets.
174. Clear Zone. An area of a lot that is required to be kept clear of obstructions as
specified by this Ordinance, to provide access to fire hydrants and electrical equipment.
175. Commercial Vehicle. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or
property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-hire or not-forhire,
but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement when
being used for that purpose, or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially.
176. Conditional Use. The use allowed in a zoning district after approval is granted by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment according to the provisions set forth in Section 176.36 of
this Ordinance.
177. Conforming Building or Structure. Any building or structure that complies with
the regulations of this Ordinance, as amended.
178. Contiguous. Adjoining or abutting.
179. Curb Level. The elevation of the established curb in front of a building or structure,
measured at the midpoint of the building or structure’s frontage. Where there is pavement,
but no curb, curb level shall be deemed to be the elevation of the centerline of the street
surface in front of the building or structure, measured at the midpoint of the building or
structure’s frontage.
180. Deck. An accessory structure that may be attached or unattached to the principal
building, which is open to the sky and provides a platform that is raised above the ground.
181. Degree of Nonconformity. The degree of deviation of a particular nonconformity
from uses or structures permitted within a zoning district. The principal uses listed under a
specific zoning district shall be interpreted to have the same degree of nonconformity for
the purposes of this Ordinance.
182. District. A geographic area of the City within which certain uniform regulations
and requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of this
Ordinance.
183. Donation Boxes. Any enclosed container located on private or public property
specifically for the purpose of collecting donated clothing, books, electronics, or other
similar items. Cargo Containers, trash dumpsters, or trash receptacles shall not be
considered Donations Boxes.
184. Driveway. A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space,
garage, dwelling, or other structure.
185. Dwelling. A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for
residential occupancy, but not including Hotel/Motel or Bed and Breakfast Establishment,
nor an automobile house trailer, recreational vehicle as defined herein.
186. Dwelling, Attached. A dwelling that is joined to another dwelling at one (1) or
more sides by a party wall or walls.
187. Dwelling, Detached. A dwelling that is entirely surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
188. Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit consists of a group of rooms which are arranged,
designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one (1) family, as
defined by this Ordinance and which include permanently installed bathroom and kitchen
facilities.
189. Dwelling Unit, Accessory. See Dwelling Unit, Auxiliary.
190. Easement. A legal interest in land, granted by the owner to another person, which
allows that person’s use of all or a portion of the owner’s land, generally for a stated
purpose including but not limited to access or placement of utilities, or access.
191. Efficiency Unit. A dwelling unit consisting of one (1) principal room, together with
bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets and/or dining alcove directly off the principal room,
provided such dining alcove does not exceed one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet in
area.
192. Erect. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix; also including the
painting of wall signs.
193. Façade. Any wall of a building which faces, or is visible from, a public street or
residential district.
194. Family. A group of individuals, not necessarily related by blood, marriage, or legal
adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit.
195. Fence. A constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal, or other
manufactured material or combination of materials erected to enclose, screen, or separate
areas.
196. Fence, Open. A fence designed and constructed so that the surface area of any
segment of the fence, inclusive of any gates, is at least eighty percent open, as compared
to solid materials, when viewed perpendicular to the plane of the fence.
197. Fence, Solid. A fence designed and constructed so that the surface area of any
segment of the fence, inclusive of any gates, is at least eighty percent opaque, when viewed
at any angle.
198. Fence Height. The vertical distance from grade directly under the fence to the top
of the fence. Support posts or decorative elements may be excluded in measuring the height
of a fence if they do not exceed one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the height of
the other elements of the fence, do not exceed six (6) inches in diameter or width, and are
spaced at not less than three (3) feet on center.
199. Floor Area, Gross. The sum of the gross horizontal floor areas of the several
stories of a building, plus any basement or cellar floor area, measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls, or in the case of a common wall separating two buildings, from
the centerline of the common wall. Gross floor area shall not include interior parking or
loading spaces, or any space where the floor to ceiling height is less than six feet.
200. Foot Candle. A measuring unit of illuminance on a surface that is uniformly one
foot from a uniform point source of light of one candela.
201. Frequency. The term Frequency signifies the number of oscillations per second in
a sound wave and is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound.
202. Frontage. See Lot Frontage.
203. Grade. The elevation of the ground at a reference point or line, as may be specified
for the applicable regulation.
204. Greenhouse. A building or structure used for growing plants and/or displaying and
selling of horticultural and related products, not including the conduct of a landscape
contracting business on the premises.
205. Height. The vertical distance from grade to a specified point or plane. See also
Building Height, Fence Height, Sign Height.
206. Historic building. A building that has been designated by the City, the State of
Iowa, or the National Trust for Historic Preservation as an architectural or historic
landmark, or that is a significant or contributing building within a designated historic
district.
207. Historic lighting fixture. A lighting fixture mounted on a historic building, that
was either part of the original design and construction of the historic building or has been
approved by the City as being consistent with the original design and construction of the
historic building.
208. Hotel. A building in which lodging and/or boarding are provided and offered to the
public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made
through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it
is open to transient guest as compared to a boarding or lodging house.
209. Impervious Surface. A hard, man-made surface that does not readily absorb or
retain water, including but not limited to roofs, paved areas for parking and driveways, and
graveled areas.
210. Inflatable Advertising Devices. A portable advertising device that is supported
primarily by compressed air or other gases. Such devices may be sealed from escaping or
may be maintained in an inflated condition by means of a fan or blower, which is designed
to maintain air pressure inside the device greater than the atmospheric air pressure outside
the device.
211. Intensity of Use. An increase to an existing use of a building, structure, or land
area through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, additional
employment, or similar unity of measure.
212. Intermodal Container. A shipping container that is portable and enclosed, used
for the storage or shipping of inventory, materials or supplies.
213. Land Banked Parking. Parking spaces required for compliance with the off-street
parking requirements of this Ordinance that are not initially constructed, pursuant to the
provisions for land banked parking contained in Chapter 17.24. Land banked parking stalls
shall be clearly indicated on all approved site, engineering, landscape, and building plans.
214. Landscaping, Building Foundation. A planted area located adjoining exterior
building walls and containing a common side with the structure. Turf is not a component
of this planted area.
215. Loading Space, Off-Street. An unobstructed area located totally outside of any
street or alley right-if-way and the principal use of which is for standing, loading, or
unloading of trucks or trailers.
216. Logo. A business trademark or symbol.
217. Lot. A tract of land which is designated by its owner at the time of application for
a building permit as a unified parcel, all of which is to be developed and used under single
ownership. A lot may consist of a) a single lot of record or b) a combination of contiguous
complete lots of record. See 176.06-Figure1 for lot types.
176.06-Figure1
218. Lot Area. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through
front, side and rear lot lines.
219. Lot, Buildable. A lot that meets all the minimum requirements of this Ordinance
applicable to the construction of a principal building of a given type.
220. Lot, Corner. A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on, two (2) or more
intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a single street, the
interior angle of which does not exceed one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).
221. Lot Coverage. A measure of intensity of land use that represents that portion of
the horizontal area of a lot that is covered by the principal building or buildings and
accessory buildings and structures, including but not limited to:
A. Attached and detached garages (measured at the foundation)
B. Accessory sheds (measured at the outer wall surface)
C. Gazebos and cabanas (measured at the outer wall surface)
D. Enclosed and Unenclosed Porches (measured at the outer edge of the
foundation line, or at the outer wall surface or support column in the case of a post
or other non-continuous foundation)
E. Decks and accessibility ramps (measured at the outer limits of the deck or
ramp surface)
F. Swimming pools (measured at the outer edge of the pool deck)
G. Tennis courts and sports courts (measured at the outer edge of the court
surface)
222. Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot
line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
223. Lot, Flag. A Flag Lot is an irregularly shaped lot which consists of two (2) sections:
the primary mass of the lot (the buildable portion), which is set back from the street access
and located behind one (1) or more other lots, and a narrow access corridor (the flagpole),
which extends from the primary mass of the lot toward the street. The front lot line for a
flag lot may be established on a lot line which is not a street frontage, and which is generally
either parallel with or perpendicular to the street right-of- way.
224. Lot Frontage. The horizontal length of a front lot line or an exterior side lot line
abutting a street. The term “Street Frontage” is equivalent.
225. Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot.
226. Lot Line. A property boundary line of any lot, except that where any portion of the
lot extends into an abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the established
or existing street or alley right-of-way line.
227. Lot Line, Exterior Side. A lot line which abuts a street and which is not a front lot
line or a rear lot line.
228. Lot Line, Front.
A. In the case of an interior lot, the lot line that abuts an improved or dedicated
street.
B. In the case of a corner lot or flag lot, the front lot line shall be as established
on the plat of subdivision. For corner lots, if a front lot line was not established on
the plat of subdivision, the front lot line shall be the shortest lot line adjoining a
street; if both lot lines adjoining the street are the same length, the front lot line
shall be as established by the owner at the time of application for a building permit.
For flag lots, if the front lot line was not established on the plat of subdivision, the
front lot line shall be as established by the owner at the time of application for a
building permit.
C. In the case of a through lot, the front lot line shall be the lot line that does
not abut a collector or arterial street; if neither street abutting the lot is a collector
or arterial street, the front lot line shall be the established common front lot line on
the block. If no common front lot line has been established, the front lot line shall
be established along the street where access is provided to the lot. If none of the
preceding conditions apply, then the front lot line shall be established by the owner
at the time the building permit is issued.
D. In the case of a lot with no frontage on a street, the front lot line shall be as
established in a PUD, or if not so established, shall be designated by the Director
of Community Development based upon the orientation of the building and its
entrances in relation to the location of parking lots, access drives, and visibility of
the building from public streets. In general, the front lot line should be designated
so that the front of the building faces the front lot line.
229. Lot Line, Interior Side. Any lot line that is not a front lot line, a rear lot line, or an
exterior side lot line.
230. Lot Line, Exterior Side. A lot line that abuts a street and that is not a front lot line
or a rear lot line.
231. Lot Line, Rear. That boundary of a lot that is most distant from and is, or is
approximately, parallel to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten (10) feet in
length, or if the line forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line
ten (10) feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front
lot line. In the case of a through lot, the rear lot line shall be the lot line abutting a street
that is, or is most nearly, opposite from and parallel to the designated front lot line.
232. Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a recorded subdivision, or a lot or parcel
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded.
233. Lot, Reversed Corner. A corner lot where the exterior side lot line is substantially
a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
234. Lot, Through. A lot bounded by streets at opposite ends of the lot, which is not a
corner lot.
235. Lot, Through Corner. A lot abutting two parallel or approximately parallel streets,
as well as a third street which is perpendicular or approximately perpendicular to the other
two streets.
236. Lot Width. The distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured by a straight
line drawn between the intersections of the side lot lines with the front building line.
237. Luminaire. A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary
optical, mechanical, electrical and decorative parts, but not including the pole or other
support.
238. Lux (lx). A unit for measuring the illumination (luminance) of a surface. One lux
is defined as an illumination of one lumen per square meter or 0.0001 phot. [By way of
explanation, in considering the various light units, it's useful to think about light originating
at a point and shining upon a surface. The intensity of the light source is measured in
candelas; the total light flux in transit is measured in lumens (1 lumen = 1
candela·steradian); and the amount of light received per unit of surface area is measured in
lux (1 lux = 1 lumen/square meter). One lux is equal to approximately 0.09290 foot candle.]
239. Mansard Roof. A double-sloped pitched roof rising steeply from the eaves and
having a summit of flatter slope on both sides of the ridge.
240. Memorial Plaque. A sign designating names of buildings and/or date of erection,
and other items such as architect, contractor or others involved in the building’s creation
cut into or attached to a building surface.
241. Mezzanine. An intermediate or fractional story between the floor and ceiling of a
main story. A mezzanine is usually just above the ground or main floor and extends over
part of the main floor.
242. Motor Vehicle. Any self-propelled wheeled vehicle designed primarily for
transportation of persons or goods along public streets.
243. Nameplate. A sign indicating the name, address or profession of the person or
persons occupying the lot or a part of the building.
244. Nonconforming, Legal. (lawful) A building, structure, or use lawfully erected
and/or used prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, and which does
not conform to the provision of this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, for the zoning
district within which such building, structure or use is located.
245. Nonconforming Lot. A lot of record that does not meet the lot area or lot width
requirements of this Ordinance for the zoning district in which it is located.
246. Nonconforming Use, Building or Structure. An existing use, building or
structure, or part or appurtenance thereof, that does not meet the applicable requirements
of this Ordinance.
247. Nonconformity, Degree of. See definition of Degree of Nonconformity.
248. Non-residential Building or Use. A principal building or principal use thereof
which is not arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for residential occupancy.
Nursing homes, homeless shelters, hospice facilities, hotel/motels, and bed and breakfast
establishments are considered to be non- residential buildings or uses for purposes of this
Ordinance. (See definition of Residential Building or Use.)
249. Obstruction. Any building or structure, or part thereof, which is so located as to
come in the way of any open area required by this Ordinance. Trees or shrubs shall not be
considered as obstructions.
250. Owner. A titleholder of record, or if Ordinance is held in trust, the beneficiary of
the trust.
251. Parcel. One or more lots or parts of lots, which may or may not be in common
ownership, designated by its owner(s) to be considered as one parcel for the purpose of
applying a particular regulation of this Ordinance. (An example for illustrative purposes
only: The owners of separate lots constituting a shopping center where parking and access
are shared, may designate the lots constituting the shopping center as a parcel so as to apply
the regulations pertaining to parking, signs, etc.)
252. Parking Space, Off-Street. A space other than a street or alley designed for use or
used for the temporary parking of a motor vehicle.
253. Patio. An open, hard surfaced area designed and intended for outdoor sitting,
dining, socializing, or recreational use by people and not as a parking space.
254. Pedestrian Wall. An upright structure of building material, such as brick or
masonry, serving to enclose, divide, or protect an area as part of an aesthetic or landscape
design.
255. Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or
other legal entity.
256. Person with a Disability. Any individual whose disability:
A. Is attributable to mental, intellectual or physical impairments or a
combination of mental, intellectual or physical impairments.
B. Is likely to continue or a significant amount or time or indefinitely.
C. Results in functional limitations in three (3) or more of the following areas
of major life activity: Self-care, receptive or expressive language, learning,
mobility, self-direction, capacity for independent living, and economic selfsufficiency.
D. Reflects the person’s need for a combination and sequence of special,
interdisciplinary, or generic care, treatment or other services which are of a lifelong
or extended duration.
257. Porch, Enclosed. A structure immediately adjoining and projecting from an
exterior wall of a building, which has direct access into the building, is covered by a roof
or eaves, and is enclosed by a combination of walls and permanent or temporary windows
or screens. Screened-in rooms shall be considered enclosed porches.
258. Porch, Unenclosed. A structure immediately adjoining and projecting from an
exterior wall of a building, which has direct access into the building, is covered by a roof
or eaves, and is completely open on all sides not adjoining an exterior wall of a building,
except for railings and columns. Principal Building. A non-accessory building in which the
principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted.
259. Principal Use. A non-accessory use of a building or lot.
260. Private. In reference to a building, structure, utility, facility or use, owned by
someone other than a unit of government, or an agency of government, unless the context
clearly indicates that “private” is being used in a broader sense of something not open or
available to the general populace.
261. Property Line. A lot line.
262. Public. In reference to a building structure, utility, facility or use, owned and/or
operated by a unit of government or an agency thereof, unless the context clearly indicated
that “public” is being used in the broader sense of something available to the general
populace.
263. Public Property. Any property owned, leased or held by any unit of government
such as the United States, the State of Iowa, the City, park district, school district, library
district, township, County, or any subdivisions thereof. This shall include all streets,
parkways, sidewalks, alleys, buildings, parking lots, landscaped areas, parks, and schools,
as well as any municipal signs, traffic-control devices, trees, utility poles, shelters or street
lights located thereon.
264. Public Building. Any building owned, leased or held by any unit of government
such as the United States, the State of Iowa, the City, park district, school district, library
district, township, County, or any subdivisions thereof, provided that said building is used
for governmental purposes.
265. Public Way. Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other public thoroughfare,
located within a dedicated right of way or within an easement where the public has a right
of access.
266. Railroad Right-of-Way. A private right of way with tracks and auxiliary facilities
for track operation, not including freight depots or stations, loading platforms, train sheds,
warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards.
267. Recreational Vehicle. Any camping trailer, motor home, mini-motor home, travel
trailer, truck camper or van camper and any towed recreational equipment, including the
trailers for same such as boats, snowmobiles and motorcycles used privately for
recreational purposes and not used commercially. Recreational vehicles, more specifically,
include, but are not limited to:
A. Camper Trailer (Pop-Up). A recreational trailer not used commercially,
constructed with partial side walls which fold for towing and unfold to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use and are of a size or
weight not requiring an over-dimension permit when towed on a highway.
B. House Trailer (Mobile Home). A recreational trailer equipped and used for
living quarters for human habitation, temporarily or permanently, rather than for
the transportation of freight, goods, wares and merchandise.
C. Motor Home (Mini-Motor Home or Van Camper). Any self-contained
motor vehicle, not used commercially, designed or permanently converted to
provide living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, with the direct walkthrough
access to the living quarters from the driver’s seat.
D. Travel Trailer. A recreational trailer not used commercially, designed to
provide living quarters for recreational camping or travel use, and of a size or
weight not requiring an over-dimension permit when towed on a highway.
E. Truck Camper. A recreational truck, not used commercially, when equipped
with a portable unit designed to be loaded on to the bed which is construed to
provide temporary living quarters for recreational, travel or camping use.
268. Refuse. Any waste products, including recyclable materials, resulting from human
habitation or the conduct of business or industry, except sewage.
269. Residential Building, Use. A principal building or principal use thereof which is
arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for residential occupancy and permitted
accessory uses, including but not limited to single-family dwellings, auxiliary dwellings,
two-family dwellings, townhouse dwellings, multi-family dwellings, group homes,
independent living facilities, and assisted living facilities. Nursing homes, homeless
shelters, hospice facilities, hotel/motels, and bed and breakfast establishments are not
considered to be residential buildings or uses for purposes of this Ordinance.
270. Residential Development Sign. An identification sign used to indicate the
entrance to a subdivision, neighborhood, or unified residential area.
271. Satellite Dish Antenna, Large. A parabolic Communication Antenna, usually
distinguished by a spherical or cone shape, including the dish structure and structural
supports, used for the sending and/or receiving of transmissions from satellites, with a dish
diameter larger than a “Satellite Dish Antenna, Small” as defined herein.
272. Satellite Dish Antenna, Small. A parabolic Communication Antenna, usually
distinguished by a spherical or cone shape, including the dish structure and structural
supports, used for the sending and/or receiving of transmissions from satellites, with a dish
diameter of one (1) meter (40 inches) or less located in a residential zoning district or two
(2) meters (80 inches) or less located in all other zoning districts.
273. Searchlight. An apparatus containing a source of light and a reflector that projects
the light produced in a concentrated, far-reaching beam. A searchlight is typically mounted
on a swivel so that the beam can be directed.
274. Setback. The required minimum distance from a lot line to a building or structure,
or other improvement on a lot; usually synonymous with yard.
275. Shade Tree. A deciduous tree planted primarily for its high crown of foliage or
overhead canopy. A large shade tree is over forty (40) feet in height. Medium shade trees
are between twenty-five (25) and forty (40) feet in height. Small shade trees reach up to
twenty-five (25) feet in height.
276. Shopping Center. Two (2) or more retail stores and/or service establishments
located on a parcel of four acres or more sharing customer parking areas, regardless of
whether said stores and/or establishments occupy separate structures or are under separate
ownership.
277. Sign. A name, identification, description, display, illustration or attention-getting
device which is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building
or other outdoor surface or lot, and which directs attention to a person, business, product,
service, place, organization or entertainment. Sign shall not include the flag of any nation,
state or governmental entity. Specific classification and structural types of signs are found
in Section 176.31 of the Zoning Code.
278. Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of a floor and the
surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, the space between the floor
and the ceiling or roof above it. A cellar shall not be counted as a story, but shall be included
in any calculation of gross floor area if it otherwise meets the applicable criteria.
279. Story, Half. A partial story located above a full story and underneath one or more
sloping roofs, meeting the following criteria:
A. Total wall height above the first-floor level shall not exceed an average of
13 ft., measured along walls that intersect the roof plane, as shown in Figure 17.30-
4. A garage floor level shall be calculated at the height of the first floor immediately
adjacent to the garage. For a half story located above a second floor, the wall height
shall be measured from the second-floor level.
B. The total horizontal width of all projections out of the half-story roof plane
shall not exceed 60% of the total horizontal length of the half story roof. Roof length
shall be measured horizontally along all walls that intersect the roof, as shown in
Figure 17.30-4. Projections include window dormers, shed dormers, wall
projections up through the roof eave line, and other projections that do not extend
out beyond the roof eave line.
280. Street. A permanent public or private right of way that affords a primary means of
access to abutting property.
281. Street Level. The story of a building that has its floor at the level closest to the
elevation of the public sidewalk or street, with direct pedestrian access to that story from
the outside. A story shall not be considered street level if it is more than three (3) feet above
or three (3) feet below sidewalk grade at the primary customer entrance to the building.
282. Street Line. The dividing line between a street and a lot.
283. Street Wall. The wall of a building nearest to and facing on a street.
284. Structural Alteration. Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the supporting
members of a building or structure such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or
girders, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.
285. Structure. Anything constructed, erected, or placed with a more or less fixed
location on the ground, or attached or resting on something having a fixed location on the
ground. Among other things, “structure” includes buildings, walls, fences, signs, and
billboards.
286. Temporary Structure. A structure that is not designed or intended to be
permanently located, placed or affixed in a location, such as a trailer, tent, or portable sign.
287. Temporary Contractor’s or Real Estate Sales Office. This use includes
watchman’s trailers, construction equipment sheds, contractor or real estate sales trailers,
and similar uses incidental to a construction project and sales of homes within a newly
constructed development.
288. Terrace. An open area with a paved platform and a flat roof or roof-like structure
and adjacent on at least one (1) side to a building, but not adjacent to any entrance to a
building.
289. Use. The specific purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
290. Variance. A modification of the strict terms of the relevant regulations of this
chapter where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where,
owning to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue
hardship.
291. Yard. A required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from
its lowest level upward, except for obstructions specifically permitted in this Ordinance. A
yard extends along a lot line for a depth or width specified for the district in which the lot
is located, measured perpendicular to the lot line.
292. Yard, Corner Side. A required yard that extends along a corner or exterior side lot
line abutting public right-of-way, excluding the area within the required front yard.
293. Yard, Front. A required yard that extends along a front lot line for the full width
of the lot.
294. Yard, Interior Side. A required yard that extends along an interior side lot line,
excluding the area within the required front and rear yards.
295. Yard, Rear. A required yard that extends along a rear lot line for the full width of
the lot between side lot lines, excluding the area within a required exterior side yard.
296. Zoning Official. The individual appointed by the City Manager to administer and
enforce the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 18-20 – Nov. 18 Supp.)
176.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
1. Applicability of Regulations.
A. Territorial Application. This Ordinance shall apply to all
structures, land, and uses within the corporate limits of the City.
B. General Application. All buildings and structures erected
hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established hereafter, all
structural alterations or relocations of existing structures
occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of, additions to, changes
in, and relocation of existing uses occurring hereafter shall be
subject to all the regulations of this Ordinance which are
applicable to the districts in which such buildings, structures,
uses, or land are located. Existing buildings, structures, and uses
which do not comply with the regulations of this Ordinance shall
be allowed to continue subject to the provisions of Section 176.33
of this Ordinance relating to nonconformities.
C. Conversion or Use of Building. The conversion of any use
or building either to another use or to increase the size or area of
the existing use, including the conversion of any building into a
dwelling or the conversion of any dwellings to accommodate an
increased number of dwelling units, families, or residents, shall be
permitted only within a zoning district in which a new building
for similar occupancy would be permitted under this Ordinance,
and only when the resulting occupancy will comply with the
requirements governing new construction in such district, with
respect to minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling unit, dimension
of yards sand other open spaces, height, off-street parking, and
other applicable requirements.
2. General Prohibitions. No building or structure; no use of any
building, structure or land; and no lot of record or zoning lot, now or
hereafter existing, shall hereafter be established, altered, moved, divided,
maintained, or otherwise used in any manner except in accordance with
the provisions of this Ordinance.
3. Building Permits Issued Prior to Effective Date of Ordinance.
Where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in
accordance with law prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and
provided that construction is begun within six (6) months of such
effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or
structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on
the basis of which the building permit has been issued, and further, may
upon completion be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use
for which originally designated even if said building or structure is
nonconforming under the terms of this Ordinance.
4. Interpretations of Regulations.
A. Minimum Requirements. In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety,
health, morals, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general
welfare.
B. Greater Restrictions. Where conditions imposed by any
provisions of this Ordinance upon use of land or buildings or
upon the bulk of buildings are either more restrictive or less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other
provision of this Ordinance or any other law, ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulations of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or
requirements shall govern.
C. Private Agreements. This Ordinance is not intended to
abrogate, annul, or otherwise interfere with any easements,
covenant, or other private agreement or legal relationship;
provided, however, that where the regulations of this Ordinance
are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements
than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements or
legal relationships, the regulations of this Ordinance shall prevail.
D. Unlawful Existing Uses. Any building, structure, or use
which was not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this
Ordinance shall not become or be made lawful solely by reason of
the adoption of this Ordinance; and to the extent or manner that
said unlawful building, structure, or use is in conflict with the
requirements of this Ordinance, said building, structure, or use
remains unlawful hereunder.
5. Prior Ordinances In Effect. The provisions of this Ordinance are
deemed to be of a general statute nature and in the event of conflicts with
a prior specific ordinance providing for rezoning of specific property
which was passed after the effective date of the ordinance repealed by
this Ordinance, the ordinances shall be construed, if possible, so that the
effect is given to both. If conflict between the two is irreconcilable, the
prior special ordinance shall prevail as an exception to this Ordinance.
This Ordinance shall not be construed as to repeal or otherwise affect
prior resolutions, memorandums of agreement or other official actions
taken by the City with respect to regulation of subdivisions as provided
in Chapter 175 of this Code of Ordinances. This ordinance does not
repeal prior ordinances providing for rezoning of specific property which
were passed after the effective date of the zoning ordinance repealed by
this Ordinance, except to the extent that the classification of said
premises shall be as set forth on the Zoning District Map adopted by the
Ordinance, any other conflict shall be determined in a manner set forth
herein.
6. Determination and Interpretation of District Boundaries. Where
uncertainty exists as to the exact boundaries of any district as shown on
the official Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to
follow such centerlines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted
lot lines shall be construed to follow such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following corporate
limits shall be construed to follow such corporate limits.
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be
construed to be midway between the main tracks.
E. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines and in the
event of change in the shore line, such boundaries shall be
construed to move with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated
as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers,
canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow
such centerlines.
F. Boundaries are indicated as parallel to or extensions of
features indicated in subsections A through E above shall be
construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official
Zoning District Map shall be determined by dimensions shown on
the map, or in the absence of dimensions, by the scale of the map.
G. All streets, alleys, public ways, and railroad rights-of-way,
if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in
the same zoning district as the property immediately abutting
upon such alleys, streets, public ways, and railroad rights-of-way.
The centerline of a street, alley, public way, or railroad right-ofway,
unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to
be the zoning district boundary.
H. In the case of further uncertainty, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall interpret the intent of the Zoning District Map as
to the location of the boundary in question, and the scale of the
Zoning District Map shall be referred to in this question.
7. Annexed or Vacated Areas.
A. Annexed Areas. Any territory hereafter annexed shall,
upon annexation, automatically retain the zoning classification
and regulations pertaining to such territory prior to the
annexation. If within sixty (60) days after annexation, no
application for rezoning or reclassification of the property has
been received by the City, the Commission shall schedule a public
hearing on the advisability of the zoning classification of the
property and thereafter make recommendation to the Council as to
the zoning classification of such property. The Council shall then
consider such matter in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance respecting amendment of the Zoning District Map.
B. Vacated Areas. Whenever any street, alley, public way,
railroad right-of-way, waterway, or other similar area is vacated
by property authority, the zoning districts adjoining each side of
such street, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way, or similar
area shall be extended automatically to the center of such vacation
and all areas included in the vacation shall then and thenceforth
be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended district.
In the event of a partial vacation, the adjoining district, or district
nearest the portion vacated, shall be extended automatically to
include all the vacated area.
8. Underwater Areas. All areas which are underwater and not
shown as included within a zoning district shall be subject to all of the
regulations of the zoning district which immediately adjoins the area.
176.08 A-1 RURAL RESTRICTED.
1. Intent. The A-1, Rural Restricted District is intended to provide
space on the fringes of the developed areas of the City for agricultural,
low density residential, and similar non-intensive uses without
permitting an intensity of development which would require the
provision of urban-type facilities and services. This district is also
designed to preserve land suitable for eventual development for other
uses until such time as the necessary facilities and services can be
economically and reasonably provided to such areas.
2. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the A-1 District:
A. Agricultural Uses. General farming, including general
agricultural activities, truck farms, nurseries, greenhouses,
orchards, boarding and riding stables, and kennels, provided:
(1) Any sales of products not raised or produced on the
premises shall be clearly subordinate to sales of products
raised or produced on the premises.
(2) No poultry or livestock shall be housed, kept, or
confined within 100 feet of any residence or residential
zoning district.
(3) Only animals raised on the premises may be
rendered, slaughtered, or dressed.
B. Residential Uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of
Section 176.30.
C. Public, Quasi-public, or Governmental Buildings and
Facilities:
(1) Golf courses and country clubs when located on at
least ten (10) acres, but not including commercial driving
ranges, pitch and putt, or miniature golf courses.
(2) Public parks and playgrounds, public and private
game and forest preserves, and similar conservation
facilities.
(3) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places
of religious worship and instruction, when located in a
permanent structure or site of at least one acre.
(4) Public elementary, junior high or high schools, and
non-boarding schools having curriculum similar to that in
the permitted public schools.
3. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted
in the A-1 District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as provided in Section 176.36.
A. Airports and heliports.
B. Cemeteries.
C. Railroad tracks, yards, and similar railroad facilities.
D. Gas regulator stations, electric distribution substations,
pipeline pumping stations, water storage facilities, and similar
essential services.
E. Outdoor recreation facilities.
F. (Repealed by Ord. 05-01 – Feb. 05 Supp.)
G. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal
permitted uses in this district.
3A. School Facilities and School Support Facilities as Conditional
Uses.
A. Intent. The intent of this subsection is to insure that
schools and school related support facilities are sited in
conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and adequate
infrastructure is available to support both the new facility and
future growth in the area; further, this subsection was developed
to identify and address potential impacts to existing neighborhood
residents, land owners and public service providers, when
locating, constructing, or expanding schools or school related
support facilities in primarily residential zoning districts.
B. Applicability. The standards shall apply to all schools,
educational and support facilities including public elementary,
junior high and high schools, and private non-boarding schools
having a curriculum similar to that in the public schools.
Regulations shall also apply to all non-educational school support
facilities including, but not limited to, bus barns, administrative
offices and maintenance buildings.
(1) Applications to site schools, educational and
support facilities shall be permitted as a conditional use
request in the A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-6A and
RT-1 zoning districts.
(2) Applications to site schools, educational and
support facilities in zoning districts other than those listed
in subsection B(1) shall be regulated by the district in
which the use is being proposed.
(3) The granting of a conditional use shall also meet the
standards of review per section 176.36 (6)(E) of this Code
of Ordinances as stated below:
a. That the conditional use applied for is provided
in the zoning district within which the property is
located.
b. That the proposed use and development will be
in accord with the intent and purpose of the Zoning
Ordinance and the Comprehensive Community
Plan.
c. That the proposed use and development will not
have a substantial adverse effect upon adjacent
property; the character of the neighborhood; traffic
conditions; parking; utility and service facilities;
and other factors affecting the public health, safety,
and welfare.
d. That the proposed development or use will be
located, designed, constructed, and operated in such
a manner that it will be compatible with the
immediate neighborhood and will not interfere with
the orderly use, development and improvement of
surrounding property.
e. That adequate measures have been or will be
taken to assure adequate access designed to
minimize traffic congestion and to assure adequate
service by essential public services and facilities
including utilities, storm water drainage and similar
facilities.
C. Revisions of Approved Site Development Plans. Minor
changes from the approved plan in the location and siting of
building and structures may be authorized by the Zoning Official.
No change authorized by this subsection may cause the following:
(1) A change in use of the development.
(2) A 10% increase in the overall coverage of structures.
(3) A change in the location of any building or structure by more
than 10 feet.
(4) An increase in the intensity of use.
(5) A reduction of approved open space.
(6) A reduction in approved off-street parking space.
D. Pre-Existing Uses. Any school or school support facility that was in
existence prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this subsection shall
be considered lawful and may continue without approval of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment. However, any expansion or extension of such preexisting
use shall be considered as a conditional use and shall comply with
the provisions of this subsection with the following exception:
(1) Proposed future additions previously approved by the Zoning
Official and/or the Zoning Board of Adjustment as a part of the
conditional use approval process.
E. Applicable Standard. When determining the issue of whether to
approve a conditional use permit for the location of a school educational
facility or a school support facility and in determining conditions attached
to any such approval, the Zoning Official, Planning Commission and the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall apply the balancing of interests test set
out in City of Ames v. Story County, Iowa, 392 N.W.2d 145 (Iowa 1986) to
wit: The legitimate public interests of both the City and school district
must be recognized and weighed in the balance. The City can have no
absolute veto over the construction and placement of a school or school
support facilities. On the other hand the school district cannot proceed
oblivious of the City’s authority to zone all land inside corporate
boundaries. To the extent they can be, all conflicting governmental interests
must be accommodated. Where they cannot be accommodated the Zoning
Official, Planning Commission and the Board are to resolve the dispute,
after weighing the interests, on the basis of the greater public good.
F. Pre-acquisition Site Approval Option. In order that a school district
not be put in the position of having purchased or acquired a site by
condemnation only to have the site subsequently disapproved for a
conditional use permit, a school may apply for prior site or vicinity
approval conditioned on submission of a full conditional use permit
application thereafter if the district acquires the property and upon
possession of the information necessary for the final application submittal
and approval. In this pre-acquisition submission the school district shall
submit so much of an application as will allow the Zoning Official,
Planning Commission and the Board of Adjustment to determine that the
site or vicinity has or will have sufficient infrastructure sufficient to allow
generally for the location of the proposed school or facility.
When requested by the school district and accompanied by a written
opinion of the school district attorney to the affect that section 21.5(j) of the
Code of Iowa is applicable, the Zoning Official, Planning Commission and
the Zoning Board of Adjustment, subject to the provisions of Chapter 21 of
the Code of Iowa, may meet with representatives of the school district in a
closed session or may redact such portion of the written record as would
otherwise disclose the identity of the particular property under
consideration and shall treat the property identity as confidential
information until the same becomes public under section 21.5(j) of the
Code of Iowa.
(Ord. 09-07 – May 09 Supp.)
4. Site and Structure Measurements.
A. Minimum lot area - 1 acre.
B. Minimum lot width - 150 feet. A lot of record on the effective date
of this Ordinance that has less width than herein required may be used for
any purpose permitted in this district, provided all other provisions of this
Ordinance are met.
C. Front yard setback - 50 feet.
D. Side yard setback - 10 feet; corner side yard setback - 50 feet.
E. Rear yard setback - 50 feet.
F. Maximum height - 2½ stories or 35 feet.
5. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a principal
permitted use or a conditional use are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.32 of this chapter.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to the
provisions of Section 176.35(13) of this chapter.
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of Section
176.31 of this chapter.
D. Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading
facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Section 176.29 of
this chapter.
E. Commercial Feedlots. Commercial feedlots are specifically
prohibited in the A-1 District.
F. Cluster Development Option. The Cluster Development Option is
permitted subject to the provisions of Section 176.28 of this chapter.
176.09 R-1 LOW DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL. The R-
1 Low Density Single-Family Residential District is intended to establish and
preserve lower density single-family areas free from other uses except those
which are both compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a
district.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the R-1 District:
A. Residential Uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of
Section 176.30.
B. Public, Quasi-public, or Governmental Buildings and
Facilities:
(1) Fire and police stations.
(2) Public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings
and facilities, and community centers operated by public
agencies.
(3) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places
of religious worship and instruction.
(4) Public elementary, junior high, and high schools,
and non-boarding private schools having a curriculum
similar to that in the permitted public schools.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted
in the R-1 District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as provided in Section 176.36:
A. Public or quasi-public buildings and facilities essential to
the physical welfare of an area such as electrical distribution
substations, pipeline pumping stations, gas regulator stations,
water storage facilities, and similar uses.
B. Cemeteries.
C. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal
permitted uses in this district.
3. Site and Structure Measurements.
A. Minimum lot area - 10,000 square feet. A lot of record as
of the effective date of this Ordinance that has less area or less
width than herein required may be used for any purpose permitted
in this district provided all other provisions of this Ordinance are
met.
B. Minimum lot width - 65 feet.
C. Front yard setback - 30 feet, unless 30 percent or more of
the lots within the frontage and within 200 feet are improved with
buildings that have observed an average front yard line with a
variation in depth of not more than 10 feet, then no portion of a
new building shall project beyond the average front yard line so
established; but in no event shall a front yard of more than 50 feet
be required.
D. Side yard setback - 10 feet; corner side yard setback - 15
feet.
E. Rear yard setback - 35 feet, unless the lot has a depth of
less than 115 feet in which instance the depth of the rear yard
shall be no less than 30 percent of the depth of the lot but in no
event shall the rear yard setback be less than 25 feet.
F. Maximum height - 2½ stories or 35 feet.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to
the provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.31.
D. Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of
Section 176.29.
E. Cluster Development Option. The Cluster Development
Option is permitted subject to the provisions of Section 176.28.
176.10 R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
The R-2, Medium Density Single-Family Residential District has the same
intent as the R-1 Low Density Single-Family Residential District, except that
the R-2 District contains lots of lesser size than the R-1 District.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the R-2 District:
A. Residential Uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of
Section 176.30.
B. Public, Quasi-public, or Governmental Buildings and
Facilities:
(1) Fire and police stations.
(2) Public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings
and facilities, and community centers operated by public
agencies.
(3) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places
of religious worship and instruction.
(4) Public elementary, junior high, and high schools,
and non-boarding private schools having a curriculum
similar to that in the permitted public schools.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted
in the R-2 District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as provided in Section 176.36.
A. Public or quasi-public buildings and facilities essential to
the physical welfare of an area such as electrical distribution
substations, pipeline pumping stations, gas regulator stations,
water storage facilities, and similar uses.
B. Cemeteries.
C. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal
permitted uses in this district.
3. Site and Structure Measurements.
A. Minimum lot area - 6,000 square feet. A lot of record as of
the effective date of this Ordinance that has less area or less width
than herein required may be used for any purpose permitted in
this district, provided all other provisions of this Ordinance are
met.
B. Minimum lot width - 60 feet.
C. Front yard setback - 25 feet.
D. Side yard setback - 7 feet; corner side yard setback - 12
feet.
E. Rear yard setback - 25 feet or 20 percent of the depth of
the lot, whichever amount is smaller, but in no event less than 15
feet.
F. Maximum height - 2½ stories or 35 feet.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to
the provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.31.
D. Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of
Section 176.29.
E. Cluster Development Option. The Cluster Development
Option is permitted subject to the provisions of Section 176.28.
176.11 R-3 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL. The R-3, Two-Family
Residential District is intended to establish and preserve areas for single-family
and two-family homes, free from other uses except those which are both
compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the R-3 District:
A. Residential Uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of
Section 176.30.
B. Public, Quasi-public, or Governmental Buildings and
Facilities:
(1) Fire and police stations.
(2) Public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings
and facilities, and community centers operated by public
agencies.
(3) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places
of religious worship and instruction.
(4) Public elementary, junior high, and high schools,
and non-boarding private schools having a curriculum
similar to that in the permitted public schools.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted
in the R-3 District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as provided in Section 176.36.
A. Public or quasi-public buildings and facilities essential to
the physical welfare of an area such as electrical distribution
substations, pipeline pumping stations, gas regulator stations,
water storage facilities, and similar uses.
B. Cemeteries.
C. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal
permitted uses in this district.
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum lot area: Single-family – 6,000 square feet
Two-family – 8,000 square feet
A lot of record as of the effective date of this Ordinance that has
less lot area or width than herein required may be used for any
purpose permitted in this district provided all other provisions of
this Ordinance are met. However, a two-family dwelling may not
be permitted on an existing lot of record with a minimum area of
less than 7,200 feet.
B. Minimum lot width - 60 feet.
C. Front yard setback - 25 feet.
D. Side yard setback - 7 feet; corner side yard setback - 12
feet.
E. Rear yard setback - 25 feet or 20 percent of the depth of
the lot, whichever amount is smaller, but in no event less than 15
feet.
F. Maximum height - 2½ stories or 35 feet.
G. Open space required - 30 percent of the lot area.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to
the provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.31.
D. Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of
Section 176.29.
E. Cluster Development Option. The Cluster Development
Option is permitted subject to the provisions of Section 176.28.
176.12 R-4 FOUR-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL. The R-4, Four-Family
Residential District is intended to establish and preserve areas for medium
density residential development consisting of single to four-family dwellings,
free from other uses, except those which are both compatible with and
convenient to the residents of such a district. This district is designed to serve
as a buffer between lower density residential districts and more intensive
zoning districts such as a higher density multiple-family residential or
commercial district.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the R-4 District:
A. Residential Uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Three-family dwellings.
(4) Four-family dwellings.
(5) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of
Section 176.30.
B. Public, Quasi-public, and Governmental Buildings and
Facilities:
(1) Fire and police stations.
(2) Public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings
and facilities, and community centers operated by public
agencies.
(3) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places
of religious worship and instruction.
(4) Public elementary, junior high and high schools,
and private non-boarding schools having a curriculum
similar to that in the public schools.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted
in the R-4 District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as provided in Section 176.36:
A. Public or quasi-public buildings and facilities essential to
the physical welfare of an area such as electrical distribution
substations, pipeline pumping stations, gas regulator stations,
water storage facilities, and similar uses.
B. Group homes sponsored by a religious, governmental,
educational, or charitable institution.
C. Day care centers.
D. Off-street parking lots and garages, but only for the
provision of accessory parking for uses located within 300 feet
from such parking lots and garages.
E. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal
permitted uses in this district.
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum Lot Area:
Single-family dwelling – 6,000 square feet
Two-family dwelling – 7,200 square feet
Three-family dwelling – 7,800 square feet
Four-family dwelling – 8,000 square feet
A lot of record as of the effective date of this Ordinance that has
less area or width than herein required may be used for any
purpose permitted in this district, provided that a two-family
dwelling shall have a minimum area of 6,000 square feet, a threefamily
dwelling shall have a minimum of 7,200 square feet, and a
four-family dwelling shall have a minimum area of 7,200 square
feet and further provided that all other provisions of this
Ordinance are met.
B. Minimum lot width - 60 feet.
C. Front yard setback - 25 feet.
D Side yard setback - 7 feet.
E. Corner side yard setback - 12 feet.
F. Rear yard setback - 25 feet, except for single or two-family
dwellings which shall be 25 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the
lot, whichever amount is smaller, but in no event less than 15 feet.
G. Maximum height - 2½ stories or 35 feet.
H. Open space required - 40 percent of the lot area.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to
the provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.31.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of
Section 176.29.
E. Cluster Development Option. The Cluster Development
Option is permitted subject to the provisions of Section 176.28.
F. Landscaping/Open Space Requirements. The required
open space shall be landscaped. The landscaping and open space
requirements for this zoning district shall be established by
resolution of the Council from time to time. Said requirements
shall by reference be effective as part of this Ordinance.
G. Any portions of an R-4 zoned parcel containing exterior
storage, parking or loading service areas shall be screened as
provided in paragraph 176.29(2)(H)(7) of this chapter in order to
protect non-commercial property from the activity located on R-4
zoned property. The screening shall be composed of a
combination of solid fencing, opaque plant materials, earthen
structures and/or retaining walls of sufficient height to effectively
screen the property from view of the non-commercial property.
176.13 R-5 MODERATE DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL. The R-5, Moderate Density Multiple-Family Residential
District is intended to establish and preserve areas containing single-family,
two-family, and multiple-family dwellings. It is intended to provide a wide
range of housing types while maintaining a moderate density residential
character. It is primarily intended for those older, established areas of the City
which have been designated for such uses in the Comprehensive Community
Plan.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the R-5 District:
A. Residential Uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Multiple-family dwellings.
(4) Boarding and rooming houses.
(5) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of
Section 176.30.
B. Public, Quasi-public, and Governmental Buildings and
Facilities:
(1) Fire and police stations.
(2) Public and private parks, playgrounds, recreational
buildings and facilities, and community centers operated
by public agencies.
(3) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places
of religious worship and instruction.
(4) Public elementary, junior high and high schools,
and private non-boarding schools having a curriculum
similar to that in the permitted public schools.
(5) Off-street parking lots and garages, but only for the
provision of accessory parking for uses within 300 feet
from such parking lots or garages.
(6) Nursing, rest, or convalescent homes.
(7) Group homes sponsored by a religious,
governmental, educational, or charitable institution.
(8) Day care centers.
(9) Music, art, or dance academies.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted
in the R-5 District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as provided in Section 176.36:
A. Public or quasi-public buildings and facilities essential to
the physical welfare of an area such as electrical distribution
substations, pipeline pumping stations, gas regulator stations,
water storage facilities, and similar uses.
B. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal
permitted uses in this district.
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum Lot Area:
Single-family dwelling – 6,000 square feet
Two-family dwelling – 7,200 square feet
Three-family dwelling – 7,200 square feet
Four-family dwelling – 8,000 square feet
Five-family dwelling – 8,000 square feet
Six-family dwelling – 8,400 square feet
Seven or more family dwelling – 1,200 square feet per unit
A lot of record as of the effective date of this Ordinance that has
less area or width than herein required may be used for any
purpose permitted in this district, provided that a two-family
dwelling shall have a minimum area of 6,000 square feet, and a
four-family dwelling shall have a minimum of 7,200 square feet,
and a four-family dwelling shall have a minimum area of 7,200
square feet and further provided that all other provisions of this
Ordinance are met.
B. Minimum lot width - 60 feet.
C. Front yard setback - 25 feet.
D. Side yard setback - 7 feet; corner side yard setback - 12
feet.
E. Rear yard setback:
For single and two-family dwellings: 25 feet or 20 percent
of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller, but in
no event less than 15 feet.
For three or more family structures:
For structures 2 stories or less in height - 25 feet.
For structures 2½ stories in height - 30 feet.
For structures 3 stories in height - 35 feet.
F. Maximum height - 3 stories or 45 feet.
G. Open space required - 40 percent of the lot area.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a
principal use or a conditional use are permitted subject to the
provisions of Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to
the provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.31.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of
Section 176.29.
E. Cluster Development Option. The Cluster Development
Option is permitted subject to the provisions of Section 176.28.
F. Landscaping/Open Space Requirements: The required
open space shall be landscaped. The landscaping and open space
requirements for this zoning district shall be established by
resolution of the Council from time to time. Said requirements
shall by reference be effective as part of this Ordinance.
G. Screening. Any portions of an R-5 zoned parcel
containing exterior storage, parking or loading service areas shall
be screened as provided in paragraph 176.29(2)(H)(7) of this
chapter in order to protect non-commercial property from the
activity located on R-5 zoned property. The screening shall be
composed of a combination of solid fencing, opaque plant
materials, earthen structures and/or retaining walls of sufficient
height to effectively screen the property from view of the noncommercial
property.
176.14 R-6 HIGH DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
The R-6, High Density Multiple-Family Residential District is intended to
establish and preserve areas for high density residential areas, as well as certain
institutional and compatible non-residential uses. Single and two-family
dwellings are not intended to be included in this district in order to prevent
possible conflicts between such uses and the high density residential uses. The
R-6 District is primarily intended to accommodate new development in the
outlying areas of the community.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the R-6 District:
A. Residential Uses:
(1) Multiple-family dwellings containing four (4) or
more units.
(2) Boarding and lodging houses.
(3) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of
Section 176.30.
B. Public, Quasi-public, and Governmental Buildings and
Facilities:
(1) Fire and police stations.
(2) Public and private parks, playgrounds, recreational
buildings and facilities, and community centers operated
by public agencies.
(3) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places
of religious worship and instruction.
(4) Public elementary, junior high, and high schools
and private non-boarding schools having a curriculum
similar to that in the permitted public schools.
(5) Off-street parking lots and garages, but only for the
provision of accessory parking for uses within 300 feet
from such parking lots or garages.
(6) Nursing, rest, or convalescent homes.
(7) Day care centers.
(8) Group homes sponsored by a religious, educational,
governmental, or charitable institution.
C. Personal service establishments which perform services on
the premises:
(1) Professional offices or studios of a physician,
dentist, chiropodist, chiropractor, optician, osteopath,
attorney, architect, accountant, engineer, or similar
profession.
(2) Mortuaries, but not including ambulance service.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted
in the R-6 District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as provided in Section 176.36:
A. Public or quasi-public buildings and facilities essential to
the physical welfare of an area such as electrical distribution
substations, pipeline pumping stations, gas regulator stations,
water storage facilities, and similar uses.
B. Clubs or lodges, provided that the chief activity of which is
not a service customarily carried on as a business.
C. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal
permitted uses in this district.
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum lot area - 7,200 square feet; minimum lot area
per dwelling unit -1,200 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width - 60 feet.
C. Front yard setback - 25 feet.
D. Side yard setback - 7 feet; corner side yard setback -12
feet.
E. Rear yard setbacks:
For structures 2 stories or less in height - 25 feet.
For structures 2½ stories in height - 30 feet.
For structures 3 stories in height - 35 feet.
F. Maximum height - 3 stories or 45 feet, whichever is less,
except that the maximum height may increase by one (1) foot for
each one-half (½) foot that the front, rear and side yard setbacks
are increased over the required minimums, up to a maximum of
150 feet in height with no limit on the number of stories.
G. Open space required - 40 percent of the lot area.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a
principal use or a conditional use are permitted subject to the
provisions of Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to
the provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.31.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of
Section 176.29.
E. Cluster Development Option. The Cluster Development
Option is permitted subject to the provisions of Section 176.28.
F. Landscaping/Open Space Requirements. The required
open space shall be landscaped. The landscaping and open space
requirements for this zoning district shall be established by
resolution of the Council from time to time. Said requirements
shall by reference be effective as part of this Ordinance.
G. Screening. Any portions of an R-6 zoned parcel
containing exterior storage, parking or loading service areas shall
be screened as provided in paragraph 176.29(2)(H)(7) of this
chapter in order to protect non-commercial property from the
activity located on R-6 zoned property. The screening shall be
composed of a combination of solid fencing, opaque plant
materials, earthen structures and/or retaining walls of sufficient
height to effectively screen the property from view of the noncommercial
property.
176.15 R-6A MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
The R-6A, Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential District is intended to
establish and preserve areas for medium density multiple-family residential
uses. This district is intended to apply to the development of new residential
districts or reclassifications of existing districts.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the R-6A District:
A. Residential Uses:
(1) Two-family dwellings.
(2) Multiple-family dwellings.
(3) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of
Section 176.30.
B. Public, Quasi-public, and Governmental Buildings and
Facilities:
(1) Fire and police stations.
(2) Public and private parks, playgrounds, recreational
buildings and facilities, and community centers operated
by public agencies.
(3) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places
of religious worship and instruction.
(4) Public elementary, junior high, and high schools
and private non-boarding schools having a curriculum
similar to that in the permitted public schools.
(5) Nursing, rest, or convalescent homes.
(6) Group homes sponsored by a religious,
governmental, educational or charitable institution.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted
in the R-6A District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as provided in Section 176.36:
A. Public or quasi-public buildings and facilities essential to
the physical welfare of an area such as electrical distribution
substations, pipeline pumping stations, gas regulator stations,
water storage facilities, and similar uses.
B. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal
permitted uses in this district.
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum lot area - 2 acres, except tracts which are
contiguous to an area currently zoned R-6A, in which case the
minimum lot area is 10,000 square feet; minimum lot area per
dwelling unit:
Two-family dwelling - 4,000 square feet.
Three or more family dwelling - 2,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width - 60 feet.
C. Front yard setback - 25 feet.
D. Side yard setback - 7 feet; corner side yard setback -12
feet.
E. Rear yard setbacks:
For structures 2 stories or less in height - 25 feet.
For structures 2½ stories in height - 30 feet.
F. Maximum height - 2 ½ stories or 35 feet.
G. Open space required - 40 percent of the lot area.
H. Cluster Development Option. The Cluster Development
Option is permitted subject to the provisions of Section 176.28.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a
principal use or a conditional use are permitted subject to the
provisions of Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to
the provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.31.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of
Section 176.29.
E. Additional Area Regulations. When two (2) or more
structures are placed upon the same plot of ground, front yard,
side yard, rear yard, and open space requirements shall be
maintained for each dwelling in accordance with the provisions of
this section unless the development is undertaken in accordance
with the provisions of the Cluster Development Option.
F. Cluster Development Option. The Cluster Development
Option is permitted subject to the provisions of Section 176.28.
176.16 MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME COMMUNITIES. All new
manufactured/mobile home communities and expansions of manufactured/
mobile home communities are to be developed as Planned Development –
Mobile Home Communities (PD-MH) as provided in Section 176.34 of this
chapter and further subject to the development standards described in Chapter
151, Manufactured/Mobile Home Communities.
176.17 RT-1 RESIDENTIAL/TRANSITIONAL USE. This zoning district
is primarily intended to provide an acceptable range of land uses and controls
for the reuse of vacant school and institutional properties in residential
neighborhoods. The permitted uses are limited to low intensity office and
service uses characterized by low traffic generation with little or no customer
contact on the premises. In order to maintain the residential qualities of the
surrounding areas, stringent development and activity standards are imposed.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the RT-1 District:
A. The following residential uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings and multiple-family
dwellings as a reuse of buildings existing at the time of the
establishment of RT-1 District zoning in an area.
(3) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of
Section 176.30.
B. The following personal service establishments as a reuse of
any buildings existing at the time of the establishment of the RT-1
District zoning in an area:
(1) Photographic, art, and musical studios.
(2) Offices for personal service businesses which
perform their services off the premises.
C. Business service establishments as a reuse of any building
existing at the time of the establishment of the RT-1 District
zoning in an area:
(1) Business and management consulting services and
similar consulting services.
(2) Telemarketing and telephone message services.
(3) Computer and data processing services.
(4) Market research, advertising, and public relations.
(5) Medical, dental and optical laboratories without
individual patient visitors.
(6) Electronic audiovisual production.
(7) Real estate appraisal, abstract title research,
mortgage brokerages and other real estate related
businesses except sales offices.
(8) Stenographic services and temporary office worker
placement services.
(9) Miscellaneous business services which require only
incidental client contract on the premises.
D. The following professional office establishments as a reuse
of any building existing at the time of the establishment of the
RT-1 District zoning in an area:
(1) Accounting and bookkeeping offices.
(2) Engineering and architectural firms.
(3) Attorney’s offices.
(4) Miscellaneous professional offices which require
only incidental client contact on the premises.
E. The following public, quasi-public and governmental uses
as a reuse of any building existing at the time of the establishment
of the RT-1 District zoning in an area:
(1) Churches, synagogues, chapels and similar places of
religious worship and instruction.
(2) Educational, charitable, religious and similar public
and quasi-public offices.
(3) Parks, playgrounds and community recreation
centers.
(4) Governmental offices.
(5) Public schools.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted
in the RT-1 District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as provided in Section 176.36.
A. Any use permitted as a principal use as a reuse of a
building existing at the time of the establishment of the RT-1
District when such use involves the construction of an additional
building.
B. The following residential uses: two-family and multiplefamily
dwellings other than within buildings existing at the time
of the establishment of the RT-1 District zoning an area.
C. The following retail businesses:
(1) Pharmacies and medical supplies stores.
(2) Antique shops.
(3) Art galleries.
(4) Art, craft and hobby shops.
(5) Book, stationery and news dealers, but not adult
book stores.
(6) Other similar, specifically identified retail
businesses.
D. The following personal service establishments:
(1) Music, art and dance academies.
(2) Mortuaries.
(3) Other similar, specifically identified personal
service businesses.
E. The following business service establishments:
(1) Insurance and real estate offices.
(2) Employment services.
(3) Other similar, specifically identified business
service establishments.
F. The following professional office establishments:
(1) Physician offices and clinics.
(2) Dentist offices and clinics.
(3) Chiropodists, chiropractor, osteopath and podiatrist
offices and clinics.
(4) Optician offices.
(5) Prosthetic appliance services.
(6) Other similar, specifically identified professional
office establishments.
G. The following industrial-type uses:
(1) Preparation of food for consumption off the
premises including catering services.
(2) Assembly of small appliances, electronics, and
scientific precision instruments.
H. The following public, quasi-public and governmental uses:
(1) Preschools and day care centers.
(2) Private clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
(3) Vocational or trade schools.
(4) Other similar, specifically identified public and
quasi-public and governmental uses.
I. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal
permitted uses in this district.
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum lot area:
Residential Uses:
Single-family dwelling - 6,000 square feet
Two-family dwelling - 7,200 square feet
Three-family dwelling - 7,200 square feet
Four-family dwelling - 8,000 square feet
Five-family dwelling - 8,000 square feet
Six-family dwelling - 8,400 square feet
Seven or more family dwelling - 1,200 square feet per unit
All other uses - 6,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width - 60 feet.
C. Front yard setback - 25 feet.
D. Side yard setback - 7 feet; corner side yard setback - 12
feet.
E. Rear yard setback:
For structures 2 stories or less in height - 25 feet.
For structures 2½ stories in height - 30 feet.
F. Maximum height - 2½ stories or 35 feet.
G. Open space requirement - 30 percent of the lot area.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 176.32, provided that new structures
which are accessory to any use except single-family detached
dwellings be accessory to and approved as part of a conditional
use.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to
the provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions for
signs in the O-1 District found in Section 176.31.
D. Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided subject to the provisions of the
O-1 District found in Section 176.29.
E. Outdoor Activity. All nonresidential business, servicing or
processing, except for off-street parking and loading facilities,
shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
F. Open Storage. All nonresidential operations, including the
storage of materials and merchandise, shall be conducted in a
fully enclosed building or entirely within a solid, opaque wall or
fence which conceals the operations from visibility from the
adjoining properties.
G. Performance Standards.
(1) No use shall create odors, noise, dust, gases,
electrical interference, or vibrations discernible beyond the
boundaries of the property.
(2) No flammable, reactive, explosive, toxic or
radioactive materials may be processed, stored, handled or
utilized unless the Building Official and the Fire Chief
determine that such use does not constitute a hazard to
adjacent properties based upon local standards and criteria
set forth in local, State and Federal codes, rules and/or
regulations.
(3) All areas of the property exclusive of building sites,
parking areas, driveways, walks, etc. shall be landscaped
with grasses, shrubs, trees, flowers, fences, walls, or other
suitable materials. All buildings, driveways, parking areas,
plants and grounds shall be properly maintained with all
necessary clean-up, repairs, and replacements performed
promptly.
176.18 O-1 OFFICE/TRANSITIONAL. The O-1, Office/Transitional District is
intended to accommodate offices, certain low intensity commercial uses, and residential
uses in a mutually compatible environment. The uses permitted are generally
characterized by a low volume of traffic and limited outdoor advertising to protect the
abutting and surrounding residential areas. This district is basically designed to serve as
a buffer between residential and commercial areas.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are permitted in the
O-1 District:
A. The following retail businesses which supply commodities on the
premises:
(1) Antique Shops.
(2) Art galleries.
(3) Art, crafts, and hobby shops.
(4) Book and stationery shops, but not adult book stores.
(5) Gift shops.
(6) News dealers.
(7) Radio and television sales and service shops.
B. The following personal service establishments which perform
services on the premises:
(1) Barber and beauty shops.
(2) Business offices in which goods, wares, or merchandise are
not displayed or sold on the premises.
(3) Mortuaries.
(4) Music, art, or dance academies.
(5) Photographer, art, sculptor, and composer studios.
(6) Tailors and dressmakers.
(7) Massage therapy offices and clinics.
C. Business service establishments which perform services on the
premises.
(1) Business and management consulting services and similar
consultant services.
(2) Business offices in which goods, wares, or merchandise are
not displayed or sold on the premises.
(3) Credit reporting services and collection services.
(4) Employment services.
(5) Insurance and real estate offices.
(6) Newspaper offices but not including printing shops.
(7) Research and testing services but not industrial laboratories.
D. Professional office establishments:
(1) Accounting and bookkeeping offices.
(2) Charitable organizations offices.
(3) Chiropodists, chiropractors, and osteopaths offices and
clinics.
(4) Dentists offices and clinics.
(5) Engineers and architects offices.
(6) Law offices
(7) Medical, dental, and similar testing laboratories, but not
industrial laboratories.
(8) Opticians offices.
(9) Physicians offices and clinics.
E. Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and facilities.
(1) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of
religious worship and instruction.
(2) Day care centers.
(3) Educational, charitable, religious, and similar public and
quasi-public office buildings.
(4) Fire and police stations.
(5) Governmental office buildings.
(6) Off-street parking lots.
(7) Public and private parks, playgrounds, and community
centers.
F. Residential uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Multiple-family dwellings.
(4) Dwelling units and rooming units in nonresidential uses.
(5) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Section
176.30.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted in the O-1
District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of Adjustment as provided in
Section 176.36.
A. Banks, savings and loans, and financial institutions.
B. Public, quasi-public buildings and facilities essential to the physical
welfare of an area such as electrical distribution substations, gas regulator
stations, pipeline pumping stations, water storage facilities, and similar
uses.
C. Group homes sponsored by a religious, governmental, educational,
or charitable institution.
D. Nursing, rest, or convalescent homes.
E. Golf Courses and Country Clubs when located on at least ten (10)
acres, but not including commercial driving ranges, pitch and putt, or
miniature golf courses.
F. Tea rooms, provided that no alcoholic beverages or beer are served.
G. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal permitted
uses in this district. (Ord. 02-22A – Nov. 02 Supp.)
H. Self service laundry and dry cleaning establishments.
(Ord. 12-10 – May 12 Supp.)
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum lot area - 6,000 square feet; minimum lot area per
dwelling unit - 1,200 square feet.
A lot of record as of the effective date of this Ordinance that has less area
or width than herein required may be occupied by a use permitted in this
district, except for four-family dwellings which shall have a minimum lot
area of 7,200 square feet and multiple-family dwellings containing more
than four dwellings which shall have a minimum lot area of 8,000 square feet
and a minimum lot area per dwelling unit of 1,200 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width - 60 feet.
C. Front yard setback - 25 feet.
D. Side yard setback - 7 feet; corner side yard setback - 12 feet.
E. Rear yard setback:
(1) For single and two-family dwellings - 25 feet or 20 percent of
the lot depth, whichever amount is smaller, but in no event less than 15
feet.
(2) For multiple-family dwellings - 25 feet.
(3) For nonresidential structures - none, except when abutting a lot
in an R district in which case there shall be a setback of 25 feet or 20
percent of the lot depth; whichever amount is smaller, but in no event
less than 15 feet.
F. Maximum height - 3 stories or 45 feet.
G. Open space required - none.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a principal permitted
use or a conditional use are permitted subject to the provisions of Section
176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to the
provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of Section 176.31.
D. Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading
facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Section 176.29.
E. Outdoor Sales. All businesses, servicing, or processing, except for offstreet
parking and loading facilities, shall be conducted within completely
enclosed buildings.
F. Open Storage. All operations, including the storage of merchandise
displayed for sale or lease, but not including equipment and vehicles, shall be
conducted in a fully enclosed building or entirely behind solid walls or fences
which conceal them from visibility from off the lot.
176.19 O-2 OFFICE PARK. The O-2, Office Park District, is intended to provide for
office and related accessory commercial uses in an environment free from intrusion by
heavy commercial and lower density residential uses. This district is intended to
accommodate new development in the outlying areas of the community.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are permitted in the
O-2 District:
A. Professional office establishments permitted in the O-1 District.
B. Business service establishments which provide services on the
premises:
(1) Business service establishments permitted in the O-1 District .
(2) Banks and similar financial institutions.
a. Banks and similar financial institutions shall not
include delayed deposit service uses.
C. Personal service establishments which perform services on the
premises:
(1) Barber and beauty shops.
(2) Physical culture and health clubs including licensed
therapeutic massage establishments.
(3) Day care centers.
D. Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and facilities:
(1) Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and
facilities permitted in the O-1 District.
(2) Post Office substations.
E. Retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises:
(1) Book, stationery and office supply stores,
(2) News dealers.
(3) Bakeries.
(4) Restaurants, including the sale of alcoholic beverages,
provided that no drive-in or drive-through service is provided.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted in the O-2
District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of Adjustment as provided in
Section 176.36:
A. Public or quasi-public buildings and facilities essential to the
physical welfare of an area such as electrical distribution substations, gas
regulator stations, water storage facilities, and similar uses.
B. Radio or television broadcasting stations, studios or facilities.
C. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal permitted
uses in this district.
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum lot area - None.
B. Minimum lot width - None.
C. Front yard setback - 25 feet.
D. Side yard setback - 7 feet.
E. Corner side yard setback - 12 feet.
F. Rear yard setbacks - None, except when abutting a lot in an R
district, in which case there shall be a setback of 25 feet or 20 percent of the
lot depth; whichever amount is smaller, but in no event less than 15 feet.
G. Maximum height - 3 stories or 45 feet, whichever is less, except that
the maximum height may increase by one (1) foot for each one-half (½)
foot that the front, rear and side yard setbacks are increased over the
required minimums, up to a maximum of 150 feet in height with no limit on
the number of stories.
H. Open space required - 25% of the first three (3) acres and 10% of the
area over three acres of the total area of the lot.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a principal
permitted use or a conditional use are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to the
provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of Section
176.31.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading
facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Section 176.29.
E. Open Storage. All operations, including the storage of anything
except merchandise displayed for sale or lease, or equipment and vehicles,
shall be conducted in a fully enclosed building or entirely behind solid
walls or fences which conceal them from visibility from off the lot.
F. Performance Standards. No flammable, reactive, explosive, toxic, or
radioactive materials may be stored, handled or utilized unless the Building
Official and the Fire Chief determine that such use does not constitute a
hazard to adjacent properties based upon standards and criteria set forth in
local, State and Federal codes, rules and/or regulations.
G. Landscaping/Open Space Requirements. The required open space
shall be landscaped. The landscaping and open space requirements for this
zoning district shall be established by resolution of the Council from time
to time. Said requirements shall by reference be effective as part of this
chapter.
H. Screening. Any portions of an O-2 zoned parcel containing exterior
storage, parking or loading service areas shall be screened as provided in
Subsection 176.29(2)(H)(7) in order to protect non-commercial property
from the activity located on O-2 zoned property. The screening shall be
composed of a combination of solid fencing, opaque plant materials,
earthen structures and/or retaining walls of sufficient height to effectively
screen the property from view of the non-commercial property.
(Ord. 13-27 – Feb. 14 Supp.)
176.20 C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL. The C-1 Neighborhood
Commercial District is intended to provide restricted commercial development in areas
adjacent to or surrounded by residential neighborhoods. This district is designed to allow
commercial development which can be carried out in a harmonious manner with a
minimum of disruption and undesirable impact upon the adjacent residential uses.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are permitted in the
C-1 District:
A. Retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises:
(1) Retail businesses permitted in the O-l District.
(2) Apparel, millinery, and shoe stores.
(3) Bakeries
(4) Camera and photographic supply stores.
(5) Candy, ice cream, and dairy products stores.
(6) Drug stores and pharmacies.
(7) Fabric, yard, and needlecraft shops.
(8) Floral shops, but not including commercial greenhouses or
nurseries.
(9) General merchandise stores, except that the sale of gasoline
on the premises shall be a conditional use.
(10) Grocery and food stores.
(11) Hardware stores.
(12) Jewelry stores.
(13) Meat markets, provided that no slaughtering or processing of
animals takes place on the premises.
(14) Radio, television, record and stereo stores and musical
instrument stores.
(15) Sporting goods and toy stores.
(16) Restaurants and delicatessens, provided that no alcoholic
beverages or beer are served and further provided that drive-in and
drive-through service is prohibited.
B. Personal service establishments which perform services on the
premises:
(1) Personal service establishments permitted in the O-1 District.
(2) Dry cleaner and laundry receiving stations, provided that
processing is done elsewhere.
(3) Self-service laundry and dry cleaning establishments.
(4) Shops for repair of shoes, watches, jewelry, and small
appliances.
C. Business service establishments which perform services on the
premises and which are permitted in the O-1 District.
D. Professional office establishments permitted in the O-1 District.
E. Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and facilities:
(1) Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and
facilities permitted in the O-1 District.
(2) Post office substations.
F. Residential uses: dwelling units and rooming units in nonresidential
uses.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted in the C-1
District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of Adjustment as provided in
Section 176.36.
A. Gas stations selling fuel, lubricants, coolants, tires, and other
commodities, but not including the performance of vehicle repair and
maintenance of any kind.
B. Banks, savings and loans, and financial institutions.
C. Public or quasi-public buildings and facilities essential to the
physical welfare of an area such as electrical distribution substations,
pipeline pumping stations, gas regulator stations, water storage facilities,
and similar uses.
D. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal permitted
uses in this district.
E. Drive-in or drive-through services.
(Ord. 12-06 – May 12 Supp.)
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum lot area - 6,000 square feet.
(1) Minimum lot area per dwelling unit - 1,200 square feet.
(2) A lot of record as of the effective date of this Ordinance that
has less area or width than herein required may be occupied by a use
permitted in this district.
B. Minimum lot width - 60 feet.
C. Front yard setback - 25 feet.
D. Side yard setback: None, except when a lot abuts an R or O-1
District, in which case there shall be a side yard setback of 7 feet; corner
side yard - 12 feet.
E. Rear yard setback: None, except when a lot abuts an R District, in
which case there shall be a rear yard setback of 25 feet, or 20 percent of the
lot depth, whichever amount is smaller, but in no event less than 15 feet.
F. Maximum height – 2½ stores or 35 feet.
G. Open space required - none.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a principal
permitted use or a conditional use are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to the
provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of Section
176.31.
D. Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading
facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Section 176.29.
E. Outdoor Sales. All business, servicing, or processing, except for offstreet
parking and loading facilities, shall be conducted within completely
enclosed buildings.
F. Open Storage. All operations, including the storage of merchandise
displayed for sale or lease, but not including equipment and vehicles, shall
be conducted in a fully enclosed building or entirely behind solid walls or
fences which conceal them from visibility from off the lot.
G. Performance Standards. No flammable, reactive, explosive, toxic, or
radioactive materials may be manufactured, stored, handled or utilized
unless the Building Official and the Fire Chief determine that such use does
not constitute a hazard to adjacent properties based upon standards and
criteria set forth in local, State and Federal codes, rules and/or regulations.
H. Exterior Lighting. Other than security lighting, no exterior
illumination of parking lots, building facades or advertising devices shall be
allowed except when the business is open to the public.
I. Hours of Operation. No business shall be open to the public
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
176.21 C-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT COMMERCIAL. The C-2 Central
Business District Commercial District is intended to establish and preserve a convenient
and attractive central business district offering a wide range of concentrated retail, office,
and service uses.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are permitted in the
C-2 District:
A. Retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises:
(1) Retail businesses permitted in the C-1 District.
(2) Auto accessory stores.
(3) Furniture, home furnishings, paint, wall covering, floor
covering and similar stores.
(4) Household appliance.
(5) Leather goods and luggage stores.
(6) Liquor stores.
(7) Office supply stores.
(8) Pet shops.
(9) Restaurants, cocktail lounges, taverns, and dancing
establishments, including the serving of alcoholic beverages and
beer, but not including drive-in or drive-through service except as
conditional uses.
B. Personal service establishments which perform services on the
premises:
(1) Personal service establishments permitted in the C-1 District.
(2) Physical culture and health clubs including licensed
therapeutic massage establishments.
(3) Indoor theaters, but not including drive-in theaters or adult
theaters.
C. Business service establishments which perform services on the
premises:
(1) Business service establishments permitted in the C-1 District.
(2) Banks, savings and loans, and financial institutions. Shall not
include Delayed Deposit Service Uses.
D. Professional office establishments:
(1) Professional office establishments permitted in the C-1
District.
(2) Business offices including the sale and display of goods,
wares, or merchandise on the premises.
E. Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and facilities:
(1) Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and
facilities permitted in the C-1 District.
(2) Off-street parking lots and garages.
(3) Post offices.
(4) Private clubs and lodges.
F. Residential uses: Dwelling units and rooming units in nonresidential
uses.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted in the C-2
District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of Adjustment as provided in
Section 176.36:
A. Gas stations selling fuel, lubricants, coolants, and other commodities
but not including the performance of vehicle repair and maintenance of any
kind.
B. Drive-in or drive-through restaurants.
C. Auction houses.
D. Public or quasi-public buildings and facilities essential to the
physical welfare of an area such as electrical distribution substations, gas
regulator stations, pipeline pumping stations, water storage facilities, and
similar uses.
E. Delayed deposit services uses shall be subject to the following
standards:
(1) A distance separation of 1,000 feet from any child care
center, educational facility, park or recreational facility, religious
institution or other delayed deposit services use.
F. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal permitted
uses in this district.
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum lot area - none.
B. Minimum lot width - none.
C. Front yard setback - none.
D. Side yard setback - none; corner side yard setback - none.
E. Rear yard setback - none.
F. Maximum height - 5 stories or 75 feet.
G. Open space required - none.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a principal
permitted use or a conditional use are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to the
provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of Section
176.31.
D. Off-Street Parking and Loading. No off-street parking and loading
facilities are required in the C-2 District.
E. Open Storage. All operations, including the storage of anything
except merchandise displayed for sale or lease or equipment and vehicles,
shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building or entirely behind solid
walls or fences which conceal them from visibility from off the premises.
F. Performance Standards. No flammable, reactive, explosive, toxic or
radioactive materials may be manufactured, stored, handled or utilized
unless the Building Official and the Fire Chief determine that such use does
not constitute a hazard to adjacent properties based upon standards and
criteria set forth in local, State and Federal codes, rules and/or regulations.
(Ord. 15-08 – May 15 Supp.)
176.22 C-3 GENERAL COMMERCIAL. The C-3, General Commercial District is
intended to provide areas for all types of retailing and service uses, certain wholesale and
warehouse uses, and some limited industrial activities normally associated with commercial
uses. This district is designed to accommodate commercial areas where customers reach
individual business establishments primarily by automobile.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are permitted in the C-
3 District:
A. Retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises:
(1) Retail businesses permitted in the C-2 District.
(2) Automobile, boat, camper, farm implement, heavy equipment,
mobile home, motorcycle, bicycle, and recreational vehicle sales,
service, and rental.
(3) Automobile service stations, gas stations, automobile and
vehicle repair shops, towing service, automobile laundries/car washes,
tire, battery and automobile accessory sales and service. Automobile
storage is permitted provided there is a six-foot high solid screening
from adjoining properties.
(4) Building service and supply stores and lumber yards.
(5) Tombstone and monument sales.
(6) Water softener sales and service.
(7) Restaurants, cocktail lounges, taverns, and dancing
establishments, including the serving of beer and alcoholic beverages,
and also including drive-in and drive-through service.
B. Personal service businesses which perform services on the premises:
(1) Personal service establishments permitted in the C-2 District.
(2) Veterinary clinics providing onsite service to domestic animals
only and do not include: outdoor kennels, commercial boarding
services accept as an accessory use, crematory services or 24 hour
emergency service. Veterinary clinics providing any service restricted
above shall be located at least 100 feet from any lot in an "R" District;
all outdoor kenneling shall be limited to clinics located in an "I"
District.
(3) Automobile driving schools.
(4) Athletic and amusement establishments such as miniature
golf courses, "pitch and putt" and "par three" golf courses, bowling
alleys, pool halls, dancing establishments, gymnasiums, swimming
pools, skating rinks, indoor archery ranges and shooting galleries,
tennis courts, handball and racquetball courts, coin-operated game
establishments, and similar uses, but not including massage
establishments.
(5) Drive-in theaters, but not including adult theaters, provided
that patron entrance and exit drives lead only to major streets as
designed on the City's Major Street Plan, at points at least 200 feet
from any intersection, and further provided that the motion picture
screen cannot be seen from any street or from any R District.
(6) Food locker rentals.
(7) Taxidermist establishments.
(8) General service and repair establishments, including air
conditioning, appliance, electrical, furniture, heating, painting,
plumbing, sheet metal, upholstery, and similar uses.
C. Business service establishments:
(1) Business service establishments permitted in the C-2 District.
(2) Cartage, express, and parcel delivery service.
(3) Auction houses, but not livestock auction houses.
(4) Contractors yards, shops, and offices.
D. Professional office establishments permitted in the C-2 District.
E. Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and facilities:
(1) Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and
facilities permitted in the C-2 District, except that day care centers
are conditional uses in this district.
(2) Bus depots.
(3) Ambulance services.
(4) Public service and municipal garages.
(5) Buildings and facilities essential to the physical welfare of an
area such as electrical distribution substations, pipeline pumping
stations, gas regulator stations, water storage facilities, and similar
uses.
F. Residential uses: Hotels and motels.
(1) Dwelling units and rooming units above a permitted
commercial use allowed in Section 176.22, so long as said unit is
located within a second story or higher.
G. Wholesale and warehouse uses:
(1) Direct selling establishments where products are stored and
distributed.
(2) Warehouse establishments.
(3) Wholesale and distributor establishments.
(4) Wholesale meat cutting and processing establishments, but not
including meat packing.
H. Industrial-type uses:
(1) Establishments for processing or manufacturing of goods for
sale only at retail and primarily on the premises, provided such
processing or manufacturing is permitted in the I-1 District.
(2) Printing, publishing, and lithography establishments.
I. Sexually oriented businesses (as defined and regulated under
Chapter 127 of this Code of Ordinances), provided that:
(1) The sexually oriented business may not be operated within
1,000 feet of (a) a church, synagogue, chapel or similar place of
religious worship or instruction; (b) a public or private elementary or
secondary school; (c) a boundary of a residential zoning district; (d)
a library, or a public park, playground or other recreational facility;
(e) a licensed day care center or nursery or preschool, or (f) another
sexually oriented business.
(2) A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same
building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another sexually
oriented business.
(3) For the purpose of this section, measurement shall be made in
a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest point of the building or structure used as a part of
the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the
nearest property line of the premises of a church, synagogue, regular
place of worship, or library, or public or private elementary or
secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public
park, residential district, or residential lot, or licensed day care
center.
(4) For purposes of paragraph (3), the distance between any two
sexually oriented business uses shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest
exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted in the C-3
District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of Adjustment as provided in
Section 176.36.
A. Day care centers.
B. Fuel oil dealers.
C. Bottled gas dealers.
D. Radio or television broadcasting stations, studios or facilities.
E. Truck terminals.
F. Hay, grain, and feed stores.
G. Adult bookstores, adult theaters, provided that any structures
associated therewith shall be at least 500 feet from any lot in an R or O
District, or any public or private school, library, park, playground or other
recreational facility, and at least 500 feet from the nearest property line of
any church, synagogue, chapel or similar place of religious worship or
instruction.
H. Amusement parks, including permanent carnivals and similar private
outdoor amusement facilities, provided that such facilities shall be located
at least 500 feet from any lot in an R or O District, or any public or private
school, library, park, playground, or other recreational facility, and at least
500 feet from the nearest property line of any church, synagogue, chapel, or
similar place of religious worship or instruction.
I. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal permitted
uses in this district.
J. Farm and garden supply establishments, commercial greenhouses
and nurseries, and disinfecting and exterminating services.
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum lot area - none.
B. Minimum lot width - none.
C. Front yard setback - 12 feet.
D. Side yard setback – none; corner side yard setback - 12 feet.
E. Rear yard setback - none, except when a lot abuts an R district in
which case the rear yard setback shall be 15 feet.
F. Maximum height - 3 stories or 45 feet, whichever is less, except that
the maximum height may increase by one (1) foot for each one-half (½)
foot that the front, rear and side yard setbacks are increased over the
required minimums, up to a maximum of 150 feet in height with no limit on
the number of stories.
G. Open space required - None.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a principal
permitted use or a conditional use are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to the
provision of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of Section
176.31.
D. Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading
facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of Section 176.29.
E. Open Storage. All operations, including the storage of anything
except merchandise' displayed for sale or lease, or equipment and vehicles,
shall be conducted in a fully enclosed building or entirely behind solid
walls or fences which conceal them from visibility from off the lot.
F. Performance Standards. No flammable, reactive, explosive, toxic, or
radioactive materials may be stored, handled or utilized unless the Building
Official and the Fire Chief determine that such use does not constitute a
hazard to adjacent properties based upon standards and criteria set forth in
local, State and Federal codes, rules and/or regulations.
(Ord. 15-09 – May 15 Supp.)
176.23 C-3P COMMERCIAL PARK. The C-3P, Commercial Park District
is intended to provide for retail and service and related office uses in an
environment free from intrusion by heavier commercial or residential uses.
This district is intended to accommodate new development in the outlying areas
of the community adjacent to Major Streets as defined in Section 176.38 of this
Zoning Ordinance.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the C-3P District:
A. Retail businesses which supply commodities on the
premises:
(1) Retail businesses permitted in the C-2 District.
(2) Automobile, boat, camper, farm implement, heavy
equipment, mobile home, motorcycle, bicycle, and
recreational vehicle sales, service, and rental.
(3) Automobile service stations, gas stations, car
washes, tire, battery and automobile accessory sales and
service.
(4) Restaurants, cocktail lounges, and taverns,
including the serving of beer and alcoholic beverages, and
also including drive-in and drive-through service.
B. Personal service businesses which perform services on the
premises:
(1) Personal service establishments permitted in the C-2
District.
(2) Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics, and kennels,
but not including unenclosed kennels, provided that any
building associated with such uses shall be at least 100 feet
from any lot in an “R” district.
(3) Athletic and amusement establishments such as
miniature golf courses, “pitch and putt” and “par three”
golf courses, bowling alleys, billiard and pool centers,
dancing establishments, gymnasiums, swimming pools,
skating rinks, indoor archery ranges and shooting galleries,
tennis courts, handball and racquetball courts, coinoperated
game establishments, and similar uses.
(4) Hotels, motels and resorts.
C. Business service establishments:
(1) Business service establishments permitted in the C-
2 District.
(2) Office services including xerographic and offset
printing, and mailing services.
D. Professional office establishments permitted in the C-2
District.
E. Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and
facilities.
(1) Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings
and facilities permitted in the C-2 District.
(2) Bus depots.
(3) Ambulance services.
(4) Day care centers.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted
in the C-3P District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as provided in Section 176.36.
A. Public, quasi-public buildings and facilities essential to the
physical welfare of an area such as electrical distribution
substations, gas regulator stations, water storage facilities, and
similar uses.
B. Radio or television broadcasting stations, studios or
facilities.
C. Amusement parks, including permanent carnivals and
outdoor amusement facilities, provided that such facilities shall be
located at least 500 feet from any lot in an “R” or “O” district, or
any public or private school, library, park, playground, or other
recreational facility, and at least 500 feet from the nearest
property line or any church, synagogue, chapel, or similar place of
religious worship or instruction.
D. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal
permitted uses in this district.
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum lot area - 25,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width - 75 feet.
C. Front yard setback - 40 feet along streets classified as
Expressways, Major Arterials and Minor Arterials in Section
176.38; 25 feet for other street frontages.
D. Side yard setback - 15 feet; corner side yard setback - 30
feet along streets classified as Expressways, Major Arterials and
Minor Arterials in Section 176.38; 15 feet for other street
frontages.
E. Rear yard setback - 25 feet.
F. Maximum height - 3 stories or 45 feet, whichever is less,
except that the maximum height may increase by one (1) foot for
each one-half (½) foot that the front, rear and side yard setbacks
are increased over the required minimums, up to a maximum of
150 feet in height with no limit on the number of stories.
G. Open space required - Minimum of 25% of the first three
(3) acres and 10% of the area over three acres of the total area of
the lot.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to
the provision of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.31, except that no portable signs pursuant to
Subsection 176.31(5)(C) shall be allowed.
D. Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of
Section 176.29.
E. Open Storage. All operations, including the storage of
anything except merchandise displayed for sale or lease, or
equipment and vehicles, shall be conducted in a fully enclosed
building or entirely behind solid walls or fences which conceal
them from visibility from off the lot.
F. Performance Standards. No flammable, reactive,
explosive, toxic, or radioactive materials may be stored, handled
or utilized unless the Building Official and the Fire Chief
determine that such use does not constitute a hazard to adjacent
properties based upon standards and criteria set forth in local,
State and Federal codes, rules and/or regulations.
G. Landscaping/Open Space Requirements. The required
open space shall be landscaped. The landscaping and open space
requirements for this zoning district shall be established by
resolution of the Council from time to time. Said requirements
shall by reference be effective as a part of this ordinance.
H. Screening. Any portions of a C-3P zoned parcel
containing exterior storage, parking or loading or service areas
shall be screened as provided in Subsection 176.29(2)(H)(7) in
order to protect non-commercial property from the activity
located on
C-3P zoned property. The screening shall be composed of a
combination of solid fencing, opaque plant materials, earthen
structures and/or retaining walls of sufficient height to effectively
screen the property from view of the non-commercial property.
176.24 C-4 WAREHOUSE/COMMERCIAL. The C-4 Warehouse/Commercial
District is intended to accommodate wholesale establishments, warehouses,
some limited industrial activities, and certain kinds of commercial uses most
appropriately located in proximity to the foregoing uses or which are necessary
to serve the needs of the area.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the C-4 District:
A. Retail businesses which supply commodities on the
premises.
(1) Automobile, bicycle, boat, camper, farm implement,
heavy equipment, mobile home, motorcycle, and
recreational vehicle sales, service, and rental.
(2) Automobile service stations, gas stations,
automobile and vehicle repair shops, towing service,
automobile laundries/car washes, tire, battery, and
automobile accessory sales and service. Automobile
storage yards are permitted provided there is a six-foot
high solid screening from adjoining properties.
(3) Building service and supply stores.
(4) Electrical, plumbing, heating and similar
showrooms and shops.
(5) Tombstone and monument sales.
(6) Water softener sales and service.
(7) Restaurants, but not including the sale of beer or
alcoholic beverages and not including drive-in or drivethrough
service.
(8) Furniture and home furnishing stores.
B. Personal service establishments.
(1) Arts and crafts workshops.
(2) Automobile driving schools.
(3) General service and repair establishments including
air conditioning, appliance, electrical, furniture, heating,
painting, plumbing, upholstery, and similar establishments.
(4) Barber and beauty shops.
(5) Photographer, art, sculptor, and composer studios.
(6) Self-service laundries and dry cleaning establishments.
(7) Indoor athletic establishments such as bowling
alleys, indoor tennis courts, pool halls, gymnasiums,
skating rinks, and similar establishments, but not including
massage establishments.
C. Business service establishments:
(1) Business service establishments permitted in the C-
3 District.
(2) Auction houses, but not livestock auction houses.
(3) Contractors yards, shops, and offices.
(4) Cartage, express, and parcel delivery service.
D. Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and
facilities:
(1) Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings
and facilities permitted in the C-3 District.
(2) Vocational or trade schools.
E. Wholesale and warehouse uses:
(1) Direct selling establishments where products are
stored and distributed.
(2) Wholesale establishments, including wholesale
bakeries.
(3) Wholesale meat cutting and processing establishments,
but not including meat packing.
(4) Warehousing, storage, and distribution facilities.
(5) Truck terminals.
(6) Cartage, express, and parcel delivery facilities.
F. Industrial-type uses:
(1) Dyeing and cleaning works.
(2) Industrial laundries.
(3) Printing, publishing, and lithography establishments.
(4) Laboratory and research firms involved in the
research, experimentation, or testing of materials, goods, or
products, provided that such materials, goods, or products
are permitted in the I-1 District.
(5) Welding and machine shops.
(6) Light machinery manufacturing such as small
appliances, and electronics and scientific precision
instruments manufacturing.
(7) Assembly of wood products and finished wood
products manufacturing.
(8) Establishments for processing or manufacturing of
goods for sale only at retail and primarily on the premises,
provided such processing or manufacturing is permitted in
the I-1 District.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted
in the C-4 District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as provided in Section 176.36:
A. Living quarters for watchmen and their families located on
the premises where they are employed.
B. Fuel oil dealers.
C. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal
permitted uses in this district.
D. Farm and garden supply establishments, commercial
greenhouses and nurseries, and disinfecting and exterminating
services.
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum lot area – none.
B. Minimum lot width – none.
C. Front yard setback – 12 feet.
D. Side yard setback – none.
E. Corner side yard setback – 12 feet.
F. Rear yard setback – none.
G. Maximum height – 3 stories or 45 feet.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to
the provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.31.
D. Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of
Section 176.29.
E. Open Storage. All operations, including the storage of
anything except merchandise displayed for sale or lease, raw
materials, equipment or vehicles, shall be conducted in a fully
enclosed building or entirely behind solid walls or fences which
conceal them from visibility from off the lot.
F. Performance Standards.
(1) No flammable, reactive, explosive, toxic, or
radioactive materials may be manufactured, stored,
handled or utilized unless the Building Official and the
Fire Chief determine that such use does not constitute a
hazard to adjacent properties based upon standards and
criteria set forth in local, State and Federal codes, rules
and/or regulations.
(2) No use shall create odors, noise, dust, smoke, or
vibrations discernible beyond the boundaries of the lot to
the point of becoming a public nuisance.
176.25 I-1 RESTRICTED INDUSTRIAL. The I-1 Restricted Industrial
District is intended to provide areas for industrial and related uses of such a
nature that they do not create appreciable nuisances, hazards, or serious
problems of compatibility with other kinds of land uses. This district also
provides for certain kinds of commercial uses which are most appropriately
located in proximity to industrial areas or which are necessary to serve the
immediate needs of these areas. The district is designed to serve as a buffer
between general industrial areas and commercial/residential areas.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the I-1 District:
A. Industrial-type uses:
(1) Industrial-type uses which comply with the
performance standards set forth in this section. However,
those uses designated as conditional uses in the I-2 District
are not permitted in the I-1 District.
(2) Bakeries
(3) Dairy products processing.
(4) Industrial laundries and dry cleaning
establishments.
(5) Laboratory and research firms involved in the
research, experimentation, or testing of materials, goods, or
products.
B. Wholesale and warehouse uses:
(1) Warehousing, storage, and distribution facilities,
including wholesaling activities.
(2) Truck terminals.
(3) Packing and crating establishments.
(4) Cartage, express, and parcel delivery service.
(5) Direct selling establishments where products are
stored and distributed.
C. Commercial uses:
(1) Retail businesses, personal services, and business
services permitted in the C-4 District.
(2) Restaurants including drive-in and drive-through
service, but not including the serving of beer and alcoholic
beverages.
(3) Office buildings and meeting halls.
(4) Nurseries.
(5) Hotels and motels.
D. Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings:
(1) Public service garages and maintenance facilities.
(2) Ambulance service.
(3) Police and fire stations.
(4) Public and private parks and playgrounds.
(5) Governmental office buildings.
(6) Public utility establishments.
(7) Essential services such as gas regulator stations,
pipeline pumping stations, electrical distribution
substations, water storage facilities and similar uses.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted
in the I-1 District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as provided in Section 176.36.
A. Kennels, provided that all animals shall be kept at least 100
feet from any residence or residential district.
B. Living quarters for watchmen and their families located on
the premises where they are employed.
C. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal
permitted uses in this district.
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum lot area - none.
B. Minimum lot width - none.
C. Front yard setback - 12 feet.
D. Side yard setback - none; corner side yard setback - 12
feet.
E. Rear yard setback - none
F. Maximum height - 3 stories or 45 feet.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to
the provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.31.
D. Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of
Section 176.29.
E. Open Storage. All operations, including the storage of
anything except merchandise displayed for sale or lease, raw
materials, equipment, or vehicles, shall be conducted in a fully
enclosed building or entirely behind solid walls or fences which
conceal them from visibility from off the lot.
F. Performance Standards.
(1) No flammable, reactive, explosive, toxic, or
radioactive materials may be manufactured, stored,
processed. handled, or utilized unless the Building Official
and the Fire Chief determine that such use does not
constitute a hazard to adjacent properties, based upon
standards and criteria set forth in local, State, and/or
Federal codes, rules and regulations.
(2) No use shall create odors, noise, dust, smoke, or
vibrations discernible beyond the boundaries of the lot to
the point of becoming a public nuisance.
176.26 I-1P INDUSTRIAL PARK. The I-1P, Industrial Park District is
intended to provide for industrial, service and related office uses in an
environment free from intrusion by lighter commercial or residential uses. This
district is intended to accommodate new development in the outlying areas of
the community adjacent to Major Streets as defined in Section 176.38 of this
Zoning Ordinance.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the I-1P District:
A. Industrial uses:
(1) Industrial uses which comply with the performance
standards set forth in this section. However, those uses
designated as conditional uses in the I-2 District are not
permitted.
(2) Bakeries.
(3) Dairy products processing.
(4) Laundries and dry cleaning establishments.
(5) Laboratory and research firms involved in the
research, experimentation, or testing of materials, goods, or
products.
B. Wholesale and warehouse uses:
(1) Warehousing, storage, and distribution facilities,
including wholesaling activities.
(2) Cartage, express, and parcel delivery services.
(3) Direct sales establishments where products are
stored and distributed.
C. Commercial uses:
(1) Retail business, personal services, and business
services permitted in the C-4 District.
(2) Restaurants, including drive-in and drive-through
service and serving of alcoholic beverages.
(3) Office buildings and meeting halls.
D. Public, quasi-public and governmental uses.
(1) Public service garages and maintenance facilities.
(2) Police and fire stations.
(3) Public and private parks and playgrounds.
(4) Governmental office buildings.
(5) Public utility establishments.
(6) Essential services such as gas regulator stations,
pipeline pumping stations, electrical distribution
substations, water storage facilities and similar uses.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted
in the I-1P District only when authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as provided in Section 176.36.
A. Kennels, provided that all animals shall be kept at least 100
feet from any residence or residential district.
B. Living quarters for watchmen and their families located on
the premises where they are employed.
C. Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal
permitted uses in this district.
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum lot area - 25,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width - 75 feet.
C. Front yard setback - 40 feet along streets classified as
Expressways, Major Arterials and Minor Arterials in Section
176.38; 25 feet for other street frontages.
D. Side yard setback - 15 feet; corner side yard setback - 40
feet along streets classified as Expressways, Major Arterials and
Minor Arterials in Section 176.38; 15 feet for other street
frontages.
E. Rear yard setback - 25 feet.
F. Maximum height - 3 stories or 45 feet, whichever is less,
except that the maximum height may increase by one (1) foot for
each one-half (½) foot that the front, rear and side yard setbacks
are increased over the required minimums, up to a maximum of
150 feet in height with no limit on the number of stories.
G. Open space required - Minimum of 25% of the first three
(3) acres and 10% of the area over three acres of the total area of
the lot.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or a conditional use are permitted subject
to the provisions of Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to
the provision of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.31, except that no portable signs pursuant to
Subsection 176.31(5)(C) shall be allowed.
D. Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of
Section 176.29.
E. Open Storage. All operations, including the storage of
anything except merchandise displayed for sale or lease, or
equipment and vehicles, shall be conducted in a fully enclosed
building or entirely behind solid walls or fences which conceal
them from visibility from off the lot.
F. Performance Standards. No flammable, reactive,
explosive, toxic, or radioactive materials may be stored, handled
or utilized unless the Building Official and the Fire Chief
determine that such use does not constitute a hazard to adjacent
properties based upon standards and criteria set forth in local,
State and Federal codes, rules and/or regulations.
G. Landscaping/Open Space Requirements. The required
open space shall be landscaped. The landscaping and open space
requirements for this zoning district shall be established by
resolution of the Council from time to time. Said requirements
shall by reference be effective as a part of this ordinance.
H. Screening. Any portions of a I-1P zoned parcel containing
exterior storage, parking or loading or service areas shall be
screened as provided in Subsection 176.29(2)(H)(7) in order to
protect non-commercial property from the activity located on I-1P
zoned property. The screening shall be composed of a
combination of solid fencing, opaque plant materials, earthen
structures and/or retaining walls of sufficient height to effectively
screen the property from view of the non-commercial property.
176.27 I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL. The I-2 General Industrial District is
intended to accommodate most types of industrial development. This district is
designed to protect residential and less intensive commercial and industrial uses
by locating general industrial uses in locations removed from such residential or
commercial development. Certain general industrial uses that may tend to be
objectionable due to their odor, vibrations, smoke, glare, heat, noise or similar
characteristics are provided as conditional uses in this district.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the I-2 District:
A. Industrial-type uses:
(1) Industrial-type uses permitted in the I-1 District.
(2) Industrial firms involved in the fabrication,
assembling, processing, production, compounding, and
manufacturing of materials, goods, and products, except
for those enumerated in subsection 2 hereof.
(3) Bottling works.
(4) Electroplating establishments.
(5) Grain storage establishments.
(6) Metal stamping establishments.
(7) Planing mills and saw mills provided that such
activities take place in a completely enclosed building.
B. Wholesale and warehouse uses permitted in the I-1
District.
C. Commercial uses:
(1) Commercial uses permitted in the I-1 District.
(2) Bottled gas and fuel dealers.
(3) Tire re-treading establishments.
(4) Septic tank and sewer cleaning and service
establishments.
D. Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings and
facilities permitted in the I-1 District.
2. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses are permitted
in the 1-2 District only as authorized by the Zoning Board of Adjustment
as provided in Section 176.36 when the following general requirements
are met.
A. General Requirements.
(1) No conditional use shall be located within five
hundred feet (500') of a church, synagogue, chapel or
similar place of religious worship or instruction; a public
or private elementary or secondary school; a library or
public park, playground or other recreational facility, a
licensed day care center or nursery or preschool, or
healthcare facility; a boundary of any R, 0, C-1, C-2, C-3
or C-3P Zoning District.
(2) All conditional uses shall be situated, equipped,
operated and maintained so as to minimize to the greatest
extent possible, using the best available technology, any
negative impacts on, or interference with other land uses
and activities in the general area, or the public health,
safety and general welfare.
(3) The following numbered conditional uses shall not
be located within five hundred feet (500') of a food
processing or eating establishment: (1), (2), (3), (6), (7),
(9), (10), (14), (16) and (17).
B. Conditional Uses.
(1) Junk Yards and Salvage Yards, including
automobile salvage yards and wrecking operations, subject
to the following requirements.
a. General Requirements.
(i) All outdoor storage shall be conducted
entirely within a solid fence at least eight
foot (8') in height with lockable gates. The
fence shall be constructed in such a manner
that no outdoor storage or salvage operations
shall be visible from an adjacent property,
street or highway. Storage, either temporary
or permanent, between such fence or wall
and any property line is expressly prohibited.
Junk or salvage materials shall not be piled
against the fence.
(2) Solid Waste Transfer Stations and Materials
Recovery Facilities, including non-hazardous industrial
waste salvage operations and recycling facilities, subject to
the following requirements.
a. General Requirements.
(i) Application for a conditional use
permit shall include all applicable
information required by the Iowa Department
of Natural Resources and any other federal,
state, regional or local authority to evaluate a
transfer station permit application, including,
but not limited to, a detailed site plan of the
proposed facility, design, operation, storage,
reporting, assurances and emergency
response and remedial action plans.
(ii) No building permit shall be issued
until the applicant provides a copy of the
approved Iowa Department of Natural
Resources Transfer Station Permit.
(iii) The owner shall provide the City, in a
timely fashion, a copy of all reports required
to be submitted to the state.
(iv) All aspects of the transfer station use
and operation including, design, location,
operation, maintenance and reporting shall be
consistent with local, state, and federal
regulations.
b. Site Design Requirements.
(i) Minimum site area for such
development shall be five (5) acres.
(ii) Building coverage shall not exceed 40
percent of the site.
(iii) No exterior loading docks may be on
any street frontage. Provision for handling of
materials brought to or removed from the site
by truck shall be on those sides of any
building which do not face on any street or
proposed street(s).
(iv) Site ingress and egress shall be at
locations approved by the City. All
driveways, circulation and stacking lanes,
storage areas and parking areas shall be hard
surfaced and curbed.
(v) A traffic study may be required at the
request of the City Engineer. All
improvements necessary to accommodate the
transfer station shall be provided by the
owner of the waste transfer station.
(vi) All stacking of trucks and equipment
shall occur on site and outside the public
right-of-way.
(vii) The Waste Transfer Building shall be
located entirely within an eight foot (8') solid
fence with lockable gates. The fence shall be
constructed in such a manner that no outdoor
storage or salvage operations shall be visible
from an adjacent property, street or highway.
Storage, either temporary or permanent,
between such fence or wall and any property
line is expressly prohibited. Outdoor storage
of equipment or materials associated with the
business shall be in designated areas and not
to be stored against the fence or exceed the
height of the fence.
c. Environmental Control Requirements.
(i) No solid waste shall be deposited
outside the transfer station building. There
shall be no on-site, exposed or contained,
overnight storage of solid waste, including
storage in trucks; except as specifically
identified in the permit application approved
by the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources and City of Marion.
(ii) The emission of noxious matter shall
be controlled so that no concentration of such
matter, at or beyond the lot line, will be
detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety, comfort or general welfare or cause
damage to property. Noxious matter means
any solid, liquid or gaseous material,
including but not limited to gases, vapors,
odor, dusts, fumes, mists, or combinations
thereof, the emission of which is detrimental
to or endangers the pubic health, safety,
comfort, or general welfare or causes damage
to the property.
(iii) The operator of the transfer station
shall cooperate with the City in order to
facilitate periodic City inspections of the
facility as the City may deem necessary. The
operator of the facility shall authorize access
to the City to conduct such inspections. The
City may require the operator to submit
periodic reports from licensed engineers
regarding air quality, noise generation or
other noxious emissions testing or analysis.
d. Operational Requirements.
(i) All trucks and equipment destined to
or away from the site, except for personal
vehicles, may be restricted to designated
routes established by the City. The operator
of any transfer station shall be responsible
for notifying truck operators of the route
designation by the City. The City will not
revoke a conditional use permit granted
under this subsection for off-site violations
beyond the control of the transfer station
operator and owner.
(ii) No loading or unloading by reason of
tipping or use of other equipment, or
cleaning of vehicles, equipment or
containers, shall occur outside of the transfer
station building.
(iii) On-site storage or handling of
hazardous waste materials is prohibited as a
planned mode of operation. Hazardous waste
materials inadvertently delivered to the
facility shall be promptly removed in
accordance with county and state
requirements. No special programs for the
collection of residential hazardous waste
shall be conducted at the facility without
prior City approval.
(iv) Operation and use of the facility shall
be in conformance with the approved site
plan and application. Substantial changes to
the site plan, facility operations or design
may require review and approval of the
conditional use permit, as determined by the
City.
(3) Acid or corrosive manufacture.
(4) Cement, lime, ready mix cement, gypsum or similar
manufacturing and processing.
(5) Commercial quarries, gravel pits, mines, and similar
extractive uses.
(6) Distillation or refining of bones or coal.
(7) Fat, grease, lard, or tallow rendering or refining.
(8) Fertilizer manufacture.
(9) Fur and hide processing.
(10) Garbage, offal, or dead animal disposal, rendering,
or processing.
(11) Glue manufacturing.
(12) Grain or alcohol processing.
(13) Industrial firms involved in the manufacturing,
fabrication, processing, production, or compounding of
reactive, explosive, hazardous, radioactive, or highly
flammable materials, goods, or products.
(14) Packing plants, slaughterhouses, stockyards,
livestock sales, and livestock auction houses.
(15) Petroleum products terminals, refineries, and bulk
storage facilities.
(16) (Repealed by Ord. 05-01 – Feb. 05 Supp.)
(17) Sewage disposal and treatment facilities.
(18) Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as
permitted uses in this district.
3. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum lot area - none.
B. Minimum lot width - none.
C. Front yard setback - 12 feet.
D. Side yard setback - none; corner side yard setback - 12
feet.
E. Rear yard setback - none.
F. Maximum height - 3 stories or 45 feet, whichever is less,
except that the maximum height may increase by one (1) foot for
each one-half (½) foot that front, rear and side yard setbacks are
increased over the required minimums, up to a maximum of 150
feet in height with no limit on the number of stories.
4. Other Provisions.
A. Accessory Uses. Uses and structures accessory to a
principal permitted use or to a conditional use are permitted
subject to the provisions of Section 176.32.
B. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are permitted subject to
the provisions of Section 176.35(13).
C. Signs. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of
Section 176.31.
D. Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and
loading facilities shall be provided according to the provisions of
176.29.
(Ord. 03-27 – Feb. 04 Supp.)
176.28 CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT OPTION. The intent of the Cluster
Development Option is to promote greater design flexibility in land development by
offering density transfers in conjunction with relaxation of conventional lot and building
bulk controls. In those zoning districts offering the Cluster Development Option, the
developer has the option of choosing either conventional or cluster development. The
Cluster Development option is intended to promote the most appropriate design and
development of land, facilitate the adequate and economic provision of public services,
and preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open areas.
1. General Requirements. Whenever there is a conflict or difference between
the provisions of this section and those of the other sections of this Zoning
Ordinance, the provisions of this section shall prevail. Subjects not covered by
this section shall be governed by the respective provisions found elsewhere in this
Ordinance. Cluster development shall conform to the following:
A. In a district in which the Cluster Development Option is available,
dwelling units may be clustered in one or more locations upon the site,
provided that the average land area for which dwelling unit contained in the
site, exclusive of the area occupied by private streets or public rights-ofway,
shall not be less than the lot area per dwelling unit required in the
zoning district within which the development is located.
B. Single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, three- and fourplexes,
multiple-family dwellings, and accessory uses may be permitted in
a cluster development, provided that the density requirement set forth in
paragraph A above is met. However, no use shall be permitted except in
conformity with an approved Cluster Development Plan pursuant to the
provisions set forth herein.
C. Other principal permitted uses in the zoning district within which the
development is located may be permitted in the cluster development.
However, no use shall be permitted except in conformity with an approved
Cluster Development Plan.
D. Conditional uses set forth in the zoning district within which the
development is located may be permitted in the cluster development, when
authorized by the Zoning Board of Adjustment as provided in Section
176.36. However, no conditional use shall be permitted except in
conformity with an approved Cluster Development Plan.
E. The cluster development may depart from strict conformance with
the required lot dimension, lot area, lot width, setback, yard, and bulk
regulations and the zoning district within which the development is located,
so long as the development will not be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare.
(1) However, the setbacks on all exterior boundaries of the
cluster development shall be at least equal in width or depth to that
required in the adjacent property.
(2) No departure from conformance with the lot dimension, lot
area, lot width, setback, yard, and bulk regulations shall be permitted
except in conformity with an approved Cluster Development Plan
pursuant to the provisions set forth herein.
F. Adequate off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided
and shall conform to the standards set forth in Section 176.29 of this
Ordinance.
G. Adequate provision shall be made to provide ingress and egress
designed to promote optimal traffic safety and flow.
H. If the sequence of construction of various portions of the cluster
development is to occur in stages, then the off-street parking, open space,
or any other shared facility as contained in the approved Cluster
Development Plan shall be developed in proportion to the number of
dwelling units developed during the given stage of construction.
I. At no time during the construction of the cluster development shall
the number of constructed dwelling units exceed the over-all density per
acre established in the approved Cluster Development Plan.
J. No land may be used or building permit issued on land within the
cluster development until all procedural and regulatory provisions of this
section have been complied with.
2. Coordination With Subdivision Ordinance.
A. No lot, tract, parcel, or other division of land may be divided into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for the purpose of
sale, transfer or of building development, whether immediate or future,
including the re-subdivision or re-platting of lands or lots, except in
conformance with Chapter 175 (Subdivision Regulations) of this Code of
Ordinances.
B. It is the intent of this section that subdivision plat review, when
applicable, be carried out simultaneously with the review of the Cluster
Development Plan.
C. The Cluster Development Plan required under this section may be
submitted in a form which satisfies the subdivision filing requirements set
forth in said Chapter 175, provided that such Cluster Development Plan
satisfies all the requirements set forth in this Ordinance.
3. Filing Procedure.
A. Application. A petition for a cluster development shall be submitted
to the Clerk accompanied by thirty (30) copies of the Cluster Development
Plan and, when appropriate, subdivision plat.
B. Filing Fee. The filing fee for a cluster development shall be $5.00
per acre or fraction thereof with a minimum fee of $40.00. If a Cluster
Development Plan is submitted in conjunction with a subdivision plat, the
applicant shall pay either the cluster development filing fee or the plat filing
fee, whichever amount is greater. The filing fee is not refundable.
C. Cluster Development Plan. The Cluster Development Plan shall
contain the following information:
(1) All information required to be submitted with preliminary
plats as provided in Chapter 175 of this Code of Ordinances.
(2) The approximate location and dimension of each building
site, common open and recreation area, and other improvements.
(3) The location of open spaces around buildings and structures.
(4) If the proposed site contains ten (10) or more acres, a
circulation diagram indicating movement of vehicles and pedestrians
to and within the development and to and from existing features.
(5) Location and dimensions of off-street parking facilities and
access and service drives.
(6) A schematic landscaping plan (preliminary) indicating
landscaping treatment around the perimeter of the property (if any)
and other critical areas.
(7) A preliminary development schedule indicating approximate
dates for start and completion of the project and phasing of the
project, if applicable, and identification of location and sequence of
stages, density, use, and public facilities.
(8) If the cluster development involves the subdivision of land as
governed by Chapter 175, the bound copies of the final plat shall
contain, in addition to that required under Chapter 175, all public
and private agreements, provisions, or covenants which will govern
the use, maintenance, protection, performance and/or design of the
development and any of its common open areas.
(9) If the cluster development does not involve the subdivision of
land as governed by the Subdivision Regulations, the following
materials shall be submitted as part of the Cluster Development
Plan:
a. Easements showing dimensions and purposes for any
right-of-way provided for public use, drainage, services, or
utilities.
b. Private easements showing dimensions and purposes
for traffic and pedestrian circulation, parking, and similar
purposes.
c. All public and private agreements, provisions, or
covenants which will govern the use, maintenance,
protection, performance, and/or design of the development
and any of its common open areas.
(10) A restrictive covenant, which shall be recorded as provided
under paragraph (5)(E) of this section, shall be submitted with the
Cluster Development Plan which shall stipulate compliance with
paragraph (2)(A) of this section pertaining to the subdivision of land.
4. Evaluation Criteria. The following criteria shall be considered by the
Commission and the Council in reviewing the Cluster Development Plan:
A. The Cluster Development Plan substantially conforms to the City’s
Comprehensive Community Plan.
B. The existing character of the neighborhood will not be adversely
affected and that adequate safeguards are provided to minimize possible
detrimental effects to adjacent properties and the neighborhood.
C. There is ample provision for sanitary sewage disposal, storm and
surface water drainage, water supply, and other utilities.
D. Topography, soil conditions, geography, and other natural
characteristics do not present a substantial hazard to development or
adjacent properties.
E. There is adequate availability to police and fire protection, schools,
parks and recreational facilities, and other community facilities and public
services.
F. The location, height, bulk, and dimensions of buildings and
structures relate well to one another and are in proportion to each other and
to other structures and visual perspectives in the area.
G. Safe patterns of pedestrian circulation and the effective use and
design of open spaces, landscaping, and amenities are provided.
H. Safe and efficient vehicular access and circulation to and within the
site is provided, that off-street parking spaces are adequate and well
located, and that conflicts between vehicular traffic and other uses and
activities are minimized.
I. The proposed installation of drives, landscaping, and other site
details are generally in harmony with the proposed development, adjacent
properties, and with the rights of interests of the general public.
5. Approval of Cluster Development Plan.
A. After receiving the Cluster Development Plan, the Commission shall
review such plan in accordance with the evaluation criteria set forth in
subsection 4 above and shall forward to the Council a written
recommendation advising that the Plan be approved, approved with
modifications, or disapproved, and citing the reasons for such
recommendation.
B. After receiving the Commission’s recommendation, the Council
shall hold a public hearing prior to considering the Cluster Development
Plan. Such public hearing shall be held in accordance with State and
Municipal Codes.
(1) After holding the public hearing, the Council may approve,
approve with modifications, or disapprove the Cluster Development
Plan.
(2) If the Cluster Development Plan is approved with
modifications, no building permits may be issued on the
development until the applicant has filed with the Clerk written
consent to the Cluster Development Plan as modified.
C. Prior to the approval of the Cluster Development Plan, the Council
may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment,
location, design, layout, height, construction, maintenance, aesthetics,
operation, and other elements of the development as deemed necessary for
the protection of the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general
welfare, or to secure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. In
all cases in which cluster developments are granted, the Council may
require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary to assure
that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be
complied with.
D. All common open space shall be either conveyed to a municipal or
public corporation, conveyed to a corporation or entity established for the
purpose of benefiting the owners and residents of the cluster development,
or retained by the owner or owners with legally binding guarantees, in a
form approved by the City Attorney, such that the common open space will
be permanently preserved and maintained as an open area. All land
conveyed to a nonprofit corporation or like entity shall be subject to the
right of said corporation to impose a legally enforceable lien for
maintenance and improvement of the common space.
E. The approved Cluster Development Plan shall be recorded with the
County Recorder and evidence thereof shall be furnished to the Building
Official. In addition, the Building Official shall also be furnished evidence
of recording of the following documents, when applicable; all final plats,
all agreements, provisions, easements, restrictive covenants, or other
materials which govern the use, maintenance, protection, performance,
and/or design of the development and any of its common open area. No
building permits on the development shall be issued until the provisions of
this section have been met.
F. If the Cluster Development involves the subdivision of land as
governed by Chapter 175 of this Code of Ordinances, no building permits
shall be issued on the development until all provisions of said Chapter 175
are satisfied.
G. If no development has begun or no use established in the cluster
development within twenty-four (24) months from the approval of the
Cluster Development Plan, the approved Cluster Development Plan shall
lapse and be of no further effect. In its discretion and for good cause, the
Council may extend for additional six-month increments, the period for the
beginning of the construction or the establishment of a use.
6. Revisions to Cluster Development Plan. Minor changes to the approved
Cluster Development Plan may be authorized by the Zoning Official if required by
engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the Cluster
Development Plan was approved. No change authorized by this section may cause
any of the following:
A. A material change in the use of the development.
B. An increase in the overall coverage of the structures in excess of 10
percent.
C. An increase in the intensity of the use.
D. An increase in projected traffic volumes to and within the site.
E. A material change in the location of the street or utility systems.
F. A reduction in approved open space in excess of 5 percent.
G. A reduction in approved off-street parking facilities.
H. A reduction in building setback from the approved Cluster
Development Plan when such setback deviates from the minimum setback
requirements established in the zoning district regulations or from the
approved Cluster Development Plan.
I. Revisions providing for a reduction in density, lot coverage, or
increase of open space.
All proposed changes not classified as minor must be approved by the Council,
after receiving a recommendation from the Commission. Any changes which are
approved in the Cluster Development Plan shall be recorded as amendments in
accordance with the procedure set forth in paragraph (5)(E) above.
176.29 PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS.
1. General Requirements.
A. Scope. For all buildings and structures erected, and all uses of land
established after the effective date of this Ordinance, accessory off-street
parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of this section and subject to any other applicable regulations
contained elsewhere in this Ordinance.
B. Change In Intensity of Use. When the intensity of use of any structure,
building, or premises is increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross
floor area, seating capacity, additional employment or similar units of
measurements for computing off-street parking and loading requirements,
additional parking and loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for
such expanded use.
C. Changes in Use. Whenever the existing use of a building, structure or
land area is changed to a new use, parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required for such new use. However, if the first use existed prior to
the effective date of this Ordinance, additional parking and loading facilities are
required only in the amount that the new use exceeds the requirements for the
existing use under the parking and loading provisions of this Ordinance.
D. Existing Parking and Loading Facilities. Existing parking and loading
facilities on the effective date of this Ordinance shall not hereafter be reduced
below the requirements for a similar new building or use under the provisions
of this section. If such parking and loading facilities are already less than the
requirements for a similar new building or use under the provisions of this
section, such facilities shall not be further reduced.
E. Driveways. All driveways serving off-street parking and loading areas
shall be in accordance with applicable City standards.
F. Site Plan. Any application for a building permit, or for any occupancy
certificate where no building permit is required, shall
include a site plan in accordance with Section 176.37(3) of this chapter.
2. Off-street Parking Requirements.
A. Central Business District Exemption. For the purpose of minimizing
disruptive curb cuts and driveways and to encourage the use of centralized parking
lots, accessory off-street parking is not required in the C-2 District.
B. Location. All parking spaces required to serve buildings or uses erected or
established after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be located on the same
lot as the building or use served, except as otherwise provided.
(1) Parking spaces to serve industrial buildings or uses may be located
within 500 feet of a main entrance to such use provided said spaces are
located in a district where such parking is permitted and further provided
there is adequate assurance given the City that such area will continue to be
available for parking uses.
(2) Parking spaces to serve commercial buildings and uses may be
located within 300 feet of a main entrance to such use, provided said spaces
are located in a district where such parking is permitted, and further
provided that adequate assurance is given the City that such area will
continue to be available for parking uses.
(3) Parking spaces to serve multiple-family dwellings may be located
within 300 feet of a main entrance to such use, provided said spaces are
located in a district where such parking is permitted, and further provided
that adequate assurance is given the City that such area will continue to be
available for parking uses.
(4) Buildings or uses existing on the effective date of this Ordinance
which are subsequently altered or enlarged so as to require the provision of
additional parking spaces may be served by parking facilities located on
land other than the lot on which the building or use is located, provided that
the conditions set forth in paragraphs (1) through (3) above are met.
C. Yard Requirements. Off-street parking spaces when open to the sky, may
be located in any yard, except as set forth below:
(1) The required off-street parking spaces may not be located in the
required front or corner side yards in the A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6,
R-6A, or O-1 Districts.
(2) In the C-1, C-3, C-4, I-1, and I-2 Districts, the required off-street
parking areas may be located in the required front or corner side yards
provided that there is a minimum "clear zone" distance of fifteen (15) feet
between the back of the curb and the nearest point of the closest parking
space. Off-street parking spaces may be located within the proposed rightof-
way of major streets as set forth in Section 176.38 of this Ordinance,
provided that the fifteen (15) foot minimum "clear zone" is available, and
further provided the owner and lessee (if any) acknowledge and sign an
agreement similar in form to that required for locating signs in proposed
rights-of-way of major streets, as set forth in Section 176.38.
(3) The required front yard setback in the A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and
any single family home, two family, three family or four family home in the
R-5, R-6, R-6A and O-1 zoning districts shall not be paved for parking uses
in excess of the width of the garage plus an additional 12' subject to the
following:
a. Paved parking area shall not have a width greater than 12'
when located directly between home's front facade and the property
line.
b. The paved driveway may have two (2) access points and
continue across required front yard area only if driveway is semicircular
in nature and meets engineering design standards.
c. Shall meet surface requirements of Section 176.29-2H(3).
(Ord. 17-02 – Feb. 17 Supp.)
D. Access. All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate
means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere
with traffic movements.
E. Combined Use. Off-street parking facilities for separate uses may be
provided collectively if the total number of spaces provided is not less than the sum
of the separate requirements governing each use.
F. Utilization. Except as may additionally be provided for the parking of trucks
and other large vehicles, accessory off-street parking facilities provided in
accordance with the requirements of this section shall be solely for the parking of
passenger motor vehicles of patrons, occupants, visitors, or employees of such uses.
G. Computation of Required Parking. For the purpose of this section, the
following rules shall apply:
(1) When units of measurement result in the requirement of a fractional
space, any fraction shall require one parking space.
(2) Employees shall be based on the maximum number of persons on
duty or residing or both on the premises at anyone time.
H. Design and Maintenance.
(1) Character. Accessory parking spaces may be open to the sky or
enclosed in a building.
(2) Size. All parking spaces shall have an area of not less than 180
square feet and a minimum width of 9 feet except as provided:
a. Parking Structure. A structure or portion thereof composed
of one or more levels or floors used exclusively for the parking or
storage of motor vehicles. A parking structure may be totally below
grade or either partially or fully above grade that is fully or partially
enclosed shall meet the following size requirements.
Parking Structure: Standard Parking Stall Size Requirements
Parking
Angle
(Degree)
Space
Width
Space
Length
Aisle
Width
(1 Way)
Aisle
Width
(2 Way)
90 9' 18' 22' 22'
60 9' 21' 18' 20'
45 9' 20' 15' 20'
30 9' 17' 12' 20'
Parallel 8' 24' 12' 24'
Parking Structure: Compact Parking Stall Size Requirements
Compact
Stall
Parking
Angle
(Degree)
Space
Width
Space
Length
Aisle
Width
(1 Way)
Aisle
Width
(2 Way)
90 8' 15' 22' 22'
60 8' 17' 18' 20'
45 8' 17' 15' 20'
30 8' 14' 12' 20'
Parallel 7' 21' 12' 24'
Compact stalls shall not exceed 15% of the total parking
structure capacity.
(3) Surfacing. All residential or commercial, but not industrial, offstreet
parking spaces, access drives, and service drives shall be provided
with an asphaltic or Portland cement concrete surface consistent with
acceptable construction specifications. However, all portions of
commercially zoned property to be used for the display and storage of motor
vehicles and trailers for sale or for lease may be provided with a dust-free
surface as approved by the City Engineer.
(4) Drainage. All off-street parking areas shall be graded and drained so
as to dispose of surface water accumulations within the area.
(5) Marking. Surfacing shall be arranged and marked so as to provide
for orderly and safe loading and unloading and parking storage of vehicles.
(6) Lighting. All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area
shall be arranged as to deflect the light from adjoining premises.
(7) Screening. Screening of off-street parking areas is required for all
uses, except single-family residential uses, in the following circumstances:
a. When the parking area abuts an R-1, R-2, R-3, O-1, or PDR
zoning district or intervening alley.
b. When the parking area is located in Commercial or Industrial
zoned property which directly abuts any R Residential, O-1, or PDR
zoning district or intervening alley.
c. When the parking area abuts a lot zoned A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-4, R-5, R-6, R-6A, O-1, or C-1, or intervening alley, and the
abutting lot contains a single- or two-family dwelling, school,
church, or recreational building or facility.
The required screening shall consist of a solid wall, solid fence, densely
planted compact hedge or evergreen planting, topographic features such as
earth berms or retaining walls, or by a combination thereof, or other
screening deemed suitable by the Zoning Official. Such screening shall be
not less than four (4) feet in height and shall be adequately maintained.
(8) Protection of Adjoining Properties. Except for single-family
residential uses, all parking spaces located adjacent to property lines shall
be provided with wheel guards, bumper guards, curbs, or other means so
designed and located that no part of the parked vehicles will extend
beyond the property line.
(9) Signs. No sign of any kind shall be established and maintained in
off-street parking spaces and lots, except signs used for the direction or
control of traffic or for the purpose of parking lot identification. Such signs
shall be a surface area not exceeding 12 square feet.
I. Space Required – Residential Uses.
Single-family or two family dwellings – 1 space per dwelling unit.
Three or more family dwellings - 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit; however,
dwellings containing three or more bedrooms shall provide 2 spaces per
dwelling unit.
Lodging, rooming or boarding houses – 1 space per dwelling unit or
habitable living unit.
Manufactured/mobile home communities – 2 spaces per trailer space.
Family Homes – One space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Group Homes - One space per employee for the shift having the greatest
number of employees plus one space per resident who is sixteen years or
older.
Rehabilitation Houses - One space per employee for the shift having the
greatest number of employees plus the space per resident who is sixteen
years or older.
J. Space Required - Commercial Uses: Except for uses located in the C-2
District:
Commercial uses except otherwise listed below – 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of
gross floor area.
Amusement parks - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus 3 spaces
per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross land area.
Auction houses – 1 space per 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Automobile laundries/car washes – 1 space per 2 employees.
Automobile service stations and gas stations – 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of
gross floor area, exclusive of stopping spaces adjacent to pumps.
Auto repair establishments; battery, muffler and/or tire service shops - 1
space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space per 3,000 sq. ft. of
gross land area.
Banks, savings and loans, and financial institutions - 1 space per 300 sq. ft.
of gross floor area, plus reservoir space sufficient to accommodate three
times the number of teller windows for drive-in facilities.
Barber shops and beauty shops - 1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Bowling alleys - 4 spaces per bowling lane, plus such additional spaces as
may be required herein for such affiliated uses as bars, restaurants, and the
like.
Clubs or lodges (private) - 1 space per 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Electrical, plumbing, heating or similar showrooms and shops - 1 space per
300 sq. ft. of gross floor area in retail area, plus 1 space per two employees
employed in warehouse or other non-retail area.
Funeral parlors or undertaking establishments - 1 space per 50 sq. ft. of floor
area used for services or six spaces per chapel or parlor, whichever is
greater.
Golf courses – 75 spaces per nine holes.
Golf driving ranges - 1.5 spaces per driving tee, plus such additional spaces
as may be required herein for such affiliated uses as retail sales area, bars,
restaurants and the like.
Greenhouses and nurseries - 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area,
plus 1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. of gross land area.
Grocery or food stores - 1 space per 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Hotels or motels - 1 space per habitable living unit, plus such additional
spaces as may be required for retail sales areas, restaurants, bars, and the
like.
Ice cream stores – 1 space per 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Meeting halls – 25% times seating capacity.
Miniature golf establishments - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area,
plus 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross land area.
Model garage display and sales - 1 space per 3,000 sq. ft. of gross land area.
Motor vehicle, mobile home, bicycle, boat, camper, and recreational vehicle
sales, rental, or service establishments - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor
area, plus 1 space per 3,000 sq. ft. of gross land area.
Music, art, dance, or similar academies - 3 spaces per classroom but not
less than 10 spaces.
Par 3 or "pitch and putt" golf courses - 40 spaces per nine holes.
Restaurants, taverns, bars, night clubs, dance halls, and discotheques - 1
space per 50 sq. ft. of patron dining, lounge, waiting, bar, and dancing
area, plus 1 space per 400 sq. ft. of kitchen and other service area; or 1
space per 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area, whichever is greater.
Skating rinks - 1 space per 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Tennis, handball, racquetball and similar indoor courts and recreation
facilities (private) - 3.5 spaces per court.
Theaters (indoor) – 40% times seating capacity.
Theaters (outdoor/drive-in) - reservoir space of 10% of capacity of use.
K. Space Required – Warehousing and Wholesaling Uses.
Warehousing and wholesaling establishments – 1 space per two
employees.
L. Space Required - Office Uses. Except for uses located in the C-2 Central
Business Commercial District, there shall be provided off-street parking for
motor vehicles as shown hereunder:
Office uses, except as otherwise listed below - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of
gross floor area.
Offices or clinics of a physician, dentist, chiropodist, chiropractor,
optician, or osteopath -1 space per 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
M. Space Required - Industrial Uses. There shall be provided off-street
parking for motor vehicles as shown hereunder:
Industrial uses – 1 space for every two employees.
N. Space Required - Schools, Institutions, and Places of Assembly. Except
for uses located in the C-2 Central Business Commercial District, there shall be
provided off-street parking for motor vehicles as shown hereunder:
Schools, institutions, and places of public assembly, except as otherwise
listed below - 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Churches, synagogues, chapels, or similar places of religious worship -
25% times seating capacity of main seating area.
Commercial, trade, or vocational schools - 1 space per two students
based on design capacity.
Colleges, junior colleges, or universities – 1 space per four students.
Convalescent, nursing, or rest homes – 1 space per three beds.
Convention or exhibition hall – 1 space per 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Elementary or junior high schools – 2 spaces per classroom.
High schools – 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per six students based
on design capacity.
Institutions for care and residence of children or adults, or for treatment
and care of mentally ill, handicapped, alcoholic, or similar persons - 1
space per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area.
Libraries, museums, or art galleries – 1 space per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor
area.
Meeting halls – 40% times seating capacity.
Music, art, dance, or similar academies – 3 spaces per classroom but not
less than 10 spaces.
O. Space Required - Other Uses. For uses not listed in this schedule of
parking requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as
required for the most similar listed use, or as determined by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
P. Space Required - Compact Car Parking. Parking lots containing nine (9)
or more spaces may allot one-third of the total spaces for compact car parking.
Such compact car spaces shall be at least 8 ft. x 16 ft. in size and shall be
designated "compact cars only" by appropriate signage.
3. Off-Street Loading Requirements.
A. Central Business District Exemption. No off-street loading areas are
required in the C-2 District.
B. Location. All required loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as
the use served, except as provided in paragraph D below. No loading space shall
be located within 30 feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets.
C. Yard Requirements. No off-street loading area shall be located in a
required front yard. In addition, no off-street loading area shall be located in a
required side yard in an R-5, R-6, O-1, or C-1 District, or when abutting a
Residential or Office/Transitional District or intervening alley.
D. Central Loading. Central loading facilities may be substituted for loading
areas on individual lots, provided the following conditions are fulfilled.
(1) Each lot served shall have direct access to the central loading area
without crossing streets or alleys at grade.
(2) Total off-street loading spaces provided shall meet the minimum
requirements herein specified based on the sum of the several types
served.
E. Design and Maintenance.
(1) Surfacing. All residential or commercial, but not industrial, offstreet
loading spaces shall be provided with an asphaltic or Portland
cement concrete surface consistent with acceptable construction
specifications.
(2) Drainage and Grading. All off-street loading spaces shall be
graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water accumulated within
the area.
(3) Screening. All off-street loading spaces which abut a rear yard
located in a Residential or Office/Transitional District or intervening
alley shall be screened by a solid fence, solid wall, densely planted
compact hedge or evergreen planting, or other suitable screening, or by
a combination thereof. Such screening shall be not less than six feet in
height.
(4) Access. Each required off-street loading space shall be designed
with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a
manner which will least interfere with traffic movement.
F. Spaces Required. At a minimum, the following off-street loading space
shall be provided, in addition to an area for adequate maneuvering, ingress and
egress.
TYPE OF USE
SQ. FT. OF
GROSS FLOOR
AREA
REQUIRED NO.
OF SPACES
MINIMUM SIZE
OF LOADING
SPACE
Retail stores,
restaurants, hotels,
motels
Less than 2,000 0 --
2,000 to 20,000 1 10' x 25'
20,001 to 50,000 2 12' x 35'
50,001 to 100,000 3 12' x 55'
Each additional
100,000 1 additional 12' x 55'
Banks, office
buildings, funeral
parlors, financial
institutions, medical
and dental offices
Less than 5,000 0 --
5,000 to 100,000 1 10' x 25'
Each additional
100,000 1 additional 12' x 35'
Warehouses, storage &
wholesale establishments,
cartage &
express facilities,
printing and
publications
Up to 20,000 1 12' x 35'
20,001 to 40,000 2 12' x 35'
40,001 to 100,000 3 12' x 35'
For each additional
100,000 1 additional 12' x 55'
All other uses
permitted in
Commercial Districts
Less than 2,000 0 --
2,000 to 20,000 1 12' x 35'
20,001 to 50,000 2 12' x 35'
50,001 to 100,000 3 12' x 55'
Each additional
100,000 1 additional 12' x 55'
Any non-commercial
use permitted in
Industrial District for
production, processing,
cleaning, servicing,
testing, repair or
storage of materials,
goods or products
Up to 10,000 1 12' x 35'
10,001 to 40,000 2 12' x 55'
40,001 to 100,000 3 12' x 55'
Each additional
100,000
1 additional 12' x 55'
Motor freight terminals
Up to 10,000 1 12' x 55'
10,001 to 40,000 1 12' x 55'
40,001 to 100,000 2 12' x 55'
Each additional
100,000
1 additional 12' x 55'
G. Modifications. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may authorize a
modification, reduction or waiver of the foregoing requirements, if it should
find that in the particular case appealed, the peculiar nature of the use or the
exceptional size or shape of the property or other exceptional situation or
condition would justify such action.
(Ord. 15-10 – May 15 Supp.)
176.30 HOME OCCUPATIONS. “Home occupation” is defined as any business,
occupation or activity conducted for gain within a residential building, or an accessory
building thereto, which is incidental or secondary to the use of such building for dwelling
purposes and which does not change the essential residential character of the building.
The regulations of this section dealing with home occupations are designed to protect and
maintain the residential character of a neighborhood while permitting certain limited
commercial activities which are traditionally carried out in a home:
1. No person who is not a member of the family and residing on the premises
shall be employed in the home occupation activity on the premises.
2. No sign other than a name plate not more than one square foot in area shall
be allowed.
3. No display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling shall be allowed.
4. No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the
normal senses off the lot if the occupation is conducted in a single-family
dwelling; or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family
dwelling.
5. All home occupations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed
building.
6. No materials or equipment associated with the home occupation shall be
stored outside the building.
7. The following businesses, occupations or activities are specifically
prohibited:
A. Motor vehicle and accessory sales or rental, repair and/or painting,
including trailer rental or sales.
B. Medical or dental clinic.
C. Restaurant.
D. Kennel (as defined under Section 176.06 of this chapter) and
veterinary clinic.
E. Funeral home.
F. Nursery school but not day care centers with six or fewer children.
G. Repair shops or service establishment, except the repairs of electrical
appliances, typewriters, cameras, lawnmowers, or other similar small items.
H. Beauty shops and barber shops, except when customer visits are by
appointment only and are limited to no more than two customers in any one
hour period. Beauty and barber shops allowed under these provisions shall
be registered with the appropriate licensing and inspection authorities.
176.31 SIGN REGULATIONS.
1. Purpose. The regulation of signs by this Code is intended to promote and
protect the public health, safety and welfare; by creating a more attractive
economic and business climate within the commercial and office areas of the City;
by enhancing and protecting the physical appearance of all areas of the City; and
by reducing the distractions, obstructions and hazards to pedestrian and auto traffic
caused by the indiscriminate placement and use of signs.
2. Scope. The regulations of this section shall govern and control the erection,
enlargement, expansion, alteration, operation, maintenance, relocation and
removal of all signs within the City intended to be viewed from any street,
sidewalk or public or private common open space. Any sign not expressly
permitted by these regulations shall be prohibited. The regulations of this section
relate to the location of signs, by function and type, within zoning districts and
shall be in addition to provisions of the Municipal Code applicable to the
construction and maintenance of signs. Regulations concerning the use and
termination of nonconforming signs appear in subsection 176.14.030 of this Code.
3. Sign Permit Required.
A. Sign Permit. Except as expressly provided in subsection 6 of this
section, no sign shall be erected, enlarged, expanded, altered, relocated or
maintained unless a sign permit evidencing the compliance of such work
with the provisions of this section and other applicable provisions of this
chapter; provided, however, that routine sign maintenance, changing of
parts designed to be changed or changing the content of a sign in any
manner does not change the functional classification of the sign and shall
not, standing alone, be considered an alteration of the sign requiring the
issuance of a sign permit hereunder.
B. Sign Contractor License. Every person, firm or corporation desiring
to erect, install or repair signs for which permits are required, shall apply to
the Marion Planning & Development Department for a Sign Contractor’s
License and shall furnish the following:
(1) Name, address of the proprietor, president or the senior
company officer in charge.
(2) Certificate of insurance to indemnify the contractor against
any form of liability for the principle sum of not less than $250,000
liability to any one person and $500,000 personal injury liability on
account of any one accident and $500,000 liability for property
damage.
(3) As a condition to the issuance of a sign contractor’s license as
required by this section, every applicant shall agree to indemnify and
hold harmless the City, its officers, agents and employees for any
and all claims of negligence, damages, liability, judgments, costs or
expenses that the City may incur or suffer resulting from the
erection, alteration, relocation, maintenance or other work involving
signs.
C. Revocation of Sign Contractors License. In case the holder of a Sign
Contractor’s License shall fail to comply with the requirements of this
section, or with any notices from the City of Marion relative to improper
construction or erection of any sign, the City shall notify the person or
senior officer in charge of such firm or corporation, to appear before the
Zoning Official at a stated time and show cause why the license should not
be revoked. Should such person not appear or to show why his license
should not be revoked, the Zoning Official shall take necessary action to
cause the license to be revoked.
(1) The license shall be automatically cancelled upon the
expiration or cancellation of the liability insurance policy required
by this section.
(2) All licenses automatically expire on January 1st of any year
following the date of issuance of the license or renewal of the same.
D. Fees for License. The fee for the issuance of an initial sign
contractor’s license shall be established by City Council resolution.
E. Additional Application Requirements. Every application for a sign
permit shall be accompanied by:
(1) Plans and specifications showing the location of the sign on
the lot or building face and the methods of construction, illumination
and support of such sign;
(2) A scaled drawing showing sign faces, exposed surfaces and
the proposed message and design, accurately represented as to size,
area, proportion and color;
(3) A landscape plan showing plantings proposed for the area
within three feet of the base of a monument sign per subsection 4B
of this section.
(4) Photographs of the street sides of the property in question,
showing all existing signs on the property;
(5) A calculation of the total amount of sign area presently
existing on the property;
(6) The applicant's attestation that the sum of the areas of the
requested sign or signs and the existing signs does not exceed the
maximum allowed by the provisions of this Code; and;
(7) Sign installation and landscaping must be completed within
one (1) year following issuance of a sign permit.
(8) A separate electrical and/or building permit may be required
in addition to the sign permit application for any signs requiring a
footing and/or having an electrical component.
4. General Standards. The following general standards shall apply to all
signs.
A. Illumination.
(1) Location and Design of Light Source. Whenever an external
artificial light source is used for a sign, such source shall be located,
shielded and directed so as not to produce glare onto any public
street or any adjacent property.
(2) Level of Illumination. All illuminated signs shall have an
indirect or diffused light source and be designed so as not to produce
glare onto public streets or adjacent property, thereby creating a
nuisance or safety hazard.
(3) Flashing Lights Prohibited. Except for traffic control devices
and public service signs when expressly permitted by this section, no
flashing, blinking or intermittent lights shall be permitted. This
provision shall not prevent the use of electronic message center signs
operating in accordance with this chapter.
(4) Light Fixture Screening. Light fixtures placed along the base
of the sign shall be screened from view by site grading or evergreen
shrubs. No unscreened light sources are permitted. Temporary
holiday displays, which contain lights, are exempt from these
provisions.
(5) External Illumination. External illumination shall be
provided by steady, stationary light of reasonable intensity, directed
solely at the sign and not produce glare onto any public street or any
adjacent property.
(6) Internal Illumination. Internal illumination shall be provided
by interior lighting of reasonable intensity with primary and
secondary images lit or silhouetted (i.e., backlit) on an opaque
background. The background of all signs must be opaque excluding
logos and borders.
(7) Additional Lighting Standards. The following are additional
lighting standards for specific sign types:
a. Signs Without Permits: Signs permitted pursuant to
subsection 6 of this section shall be illuminated only as
permitted in that subsection.
b. Awning and Canopy Signs: Interior lighted awnings
shall be permitted if the lighting system is encased or
screened from view underneath.
c. Monument Signs: Monument signs shall be backlit,
directly-lit, or internally illuminated. Any direct light source
shall be oriented so as to be directed away from the right-ofway
and adjacent property.
d. Wall Signs: Cloud cabinets or letters shall be
individually affixed to walls and/or raceway cabinets of a
building.
e. Electronic Message Center Signs: All electronic
message centers used as changeable copy signs or reader
boards shall be required to adjust in intensity related to
ambient light levels via automatic illumination dimmer that
automatically adjusts the sign’s brightness in direct
correlation with ambient light conditions.
B. Landscaping. The base of all permanent ground signs shall be
effectively landscaped and maintained in good condition at all times. The
minimum landscaped area shall extend at least three (3) feet beyond all sign
faces or supporting structures in all directions. Exposed foundations must
be constructed with a finished material such as brick, stone, architectural
metal, or wood. Landscaping must be maintained in a manner that prevents
the screening or blocking of addresses and other information provided on
the monument sign. Sign owner shall be responsible for the submittal of
landscape plan that must be submitted at time of sign permit. Landscaping
must be installed within twelve (12) months of sign installation.
C. Electrical Elements. All wiring, fittings and materials used in the
construction, connection and operation of electrically illuminated signs
shall meet the following requirements:
(1) UL Specifications. Any and all electrical signs shall be
manufactured to meet UL Specifications and be labeled with a UL
listing mark. Equivalent specifications may be accepted as approved
by the Building Official.
(2) City Building & Electric Codes. Electric signs shall meet all
the requirements of the City Building and Electric Codes.
D. Structural Elements. The construction and structural components of
all signs shall be in accordance with the standards and regulations of the
Municipal Code. All permanent signs shall be constructed of fire-resistant
materials and shall be capable of withstanding wind pressures of at least an
80 mile an hour wind load and of receiving dead loads based on the actual
weight of the structure.
E. Minimum Elevation of Certain Signs. The bottom of every awning,
canopy, marquee, wall, projecting and pylon sign shall be elevated at least
eight (8) feet above grade.
F. Obstruction of Access Ways. No sign or sign structure shall obstruct
free ingress to or egress from a fire escape, door, window or other required
access way.
G. Obstruction of Window Surface. No sign shall project over, occupy
or obstruct any window surface required for light or ventilation by any
applicable provision of the Municipal Code.
H. Traffic Safety.
(1) Confusion with Traffic Signals. No sign shall be maintained
at any location where by reason of its position, size, shape, content,
color, or illumination it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with
the view of, or be confused with, any traffic control sign, sign or
device, or where it may interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
(2) Corner Visual Clearance. At all intersections, at a point of
fifteen (15) feet in any direction from the point of intersection of the
street right-of-way, no sign, nor any part of a sign other than a
supporting pole or brace no greater than eighteen (18) inches in
width or diameter shall be located lower than eight (8) feet from
grade.
I. Sign Maintenance.
(1) The owner of a sign and the owner of the premises on which
such sign is located shall be jointly and severally liable to maintain
such sign, including its illumination sources, in compliance with this
Code and all applicable laws, in a safe and secure condition, and in a
neat and orderly condition and good working order at all times, and
to prevent the development of any rust, corrosion, rotting or other
deterioration in the physical appearance or safety of such sign. The
premises around ground and pylon signs shall be kept clean and free
of all rubbish and weeds.
(2) The Zoning Official may inspect, from time to time as
deemed necessary, each sign or supporting structure regulated by
this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether it is secure or
insecure, and whether it is in need of removal or repair.
J. Sign Measurement.
(1) Area to Be Included. The supporting structure or bracing of a
sign shall be omitted in measuring the area of the sign unless such
structure or bracing is made part of the message or face of the sign.
Where a sign has more than once display face, all faces shall be
included in determining the area of the sign. The area of a sign is
determined by the Zoning Official, using actual dimensions where
practical or approximate dimensions when irregularity of the sign
shape warrants. The area of each sign type is to be measured with
either Formula A or Formula B as noted below.
Formula A: The sign area is the sum of the area of contiguous
rectangles, squares and/or circles that enclose the extreme points or
edges of all copy, logos and symbols of said sign. Minor
appendages to a particular regular shape, as determined by the
Zoning Official , shall not be included in the total area of a sign.
(A1 x A2) + (B1 x B2) = Sign Area
Formula B: The sign area is the area of one rectangle, square or
circle that encloses the extreme points or edge of all areas where
copy may be placed on a sign. This area does not include structural
or architectural features of the sign where copy will be located.
(A x B) = Sign Area
(2) Signs on Lots with Multiple Users. Where more than one
user occupies a zoning lot, the owner of the lot shall be responsible
for allocating permitted signage among such users.
(3) General Safety. Notwithstanding any provision of this
chapter, no sign shall be located in any area or in any manner so as
to create a nuisance or a threat to the public safety and welfare.
5. Classification of Signs.
A. Functional Types. For purposes of this Code, signs shall be
classified as follows according to function:
(1) Advertising Sign. A sign, other than an off-premises
identification sign, that directs attention to or identifies a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a
location other than the premises on which the sign is located. This term
shall include signs, other than customary identification lettering and
advertising posters on buses and taxicabs, attached to parked or moving
vehicles.
(2) Attention-getting Device. A sign designed to attract attention
by means of flashing or moving parts, bright color or light, or
movement of any kind. Examples of such signs include pennants
hung in series, whirligigs, spinners, streamers, flashing lights, search
lights and balloons.
(3) Business Sign. A sign that directs attention to or identifies a
business or profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold,
offered or manufactured, or to an entertainment offered on the
premises where the sign is located.
(4) Construction Sign. A temporary sign erected on premises on
which construction is taking place, during the period of such
construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers,
landscape architects, contractors, and similar artisans, and the
owners, financial supporters, sponsors and similar persons or firms
having a role or interest in the construction activity.
(5) Drive-Through Sign. A sign that facilitates the operation of a
drive-through facility by aiding with the pick-up, drop-off, ordering
or service of such a facility. It includes, but is not limited to, such
signs as changeable copy menu boards.
(6) Gas Station Price Sign. A changeable copy sign advertising
gasoline prices. Price information displayed shall be in accordance
with the provisions of Iowa Administrative Code 21-85.48 and other
relevant state regulations.
(7) Governmental Signs. A sign erected and maintained pursuant
to and in discharge of any governmental function or required by any
law, ordinance or governmental regulation.
(8) Holiday Decorations. Signs in the nature of decorations,
clearly incidental to and customarily and commonly associated with
any national, local or religious holiday.
(9) Home Occupation Sign. A sign advertising or identifying a
home occupation on the site of the home occupation.
(10) Identification Sign. A sign giving only the name, trademark
or other readily recognized symbol or address, or any combination
thereof, of a building, business, development or establishment on the
premises where it is located.
(11) Institutional Bulletin Board Sign. A sign that identifies a
religious organization, school, library, community center, or similar
institutional or community service use on whose premises it is
located and that contains only the name of the institution or
organization, the name or names of persons connected with it, and
greetings, announcements or events or activities occurring at the
institution or similar message.
(12) Joint Identification Sign. An identification sign limited in
content to the identification of a planned development, office plaza,
shopping center, business park or the like and not containing any
reference to the individual uses sharing the development, plaza,
center, park or the like.
(13) Memorial Sign. A sign or tablet memorializing a person,
place, event, location or structure.
(14) Name Plate Sign. A sign limited in content to the name or
address, or both, of the owner or occupant of a building or premises
on which it is located. If any premise is occupied by more than one
occupant, the nameplate sign may identify all such occupants, as
well as the premises, and may include necessary directional
information.
(15) Off-premises Identification Sign. A sign giving the name,
trademark or other readily recognized symbol or address, or any
combination thereof, of a building, business, development or
establishment, which sign is located off the lot on which such
building, business, development or establishment is located.
(16) Flag or Emblem. A flag or emblem used for the dissemination
of non-commercial speech or identification.
(17) On-site Directory Sign. A sign, not readable from any public
right-of-way, on which the names and locations of the occupants
and/or uses of a building or group of buildings is given.
(18) On-site Informational Sign. A sign commonly associated
with, and limited to, information and directions necessary or
convenient for persons coming on the property, including signs
marking entrances and exits, parking areas, one-way drives, rest
rooms, pick-up and delivery areas and the like. Logo and business
name shall be permitted on on-site informational signs so long as the
logo is fifty percent (50%) or less of the allotted size of the
informational sign.
(19) Private Sale Sign. A temporary sign advertising private sales
of personal property at “house sales,” “garage sales,” “rummage
sales” and the like.
(20) Private Warning Sign. A sign limited in content to messages
warning, caution or danger.
(21) Public Service Signs. A sign displaying only the time,
temperature, stock market quotations or civic messages.
(22) Real Estate Signs - Standard Size. A sign pertaining to the
sale or lease of the premises, or a portion of the premises, on which
the sign is located and limited to one (1) single or double-faced, nonilluminated
sign per zoning lot, not to exceed six (6) square feet in
area per sign face.
(23) Real Estate Signs - Large Size. A sign pertaining to the sale
or lease of the premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the
sign is located and limited to one (1) single or double-faced, nonilluminated
sign per zoning lot, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square
feet in area per sign face.
B. Structural Types. For purposes of this Code, signs shall be classified
as follows according to structure:
(1) Awning, Canopy or Marquee Sign. A sign that is mounted or
painted on or attached to an awning, canopy or marquee that is
otherwise permitted by this Code. No such sign shall project above,
below, or beyond the physical dimensions of such awning, canopy or
marquee.
(2) Banner Sign. A sign made of fabric or other similar non-rigid
material with no enclosing framework or electrical components that
is supported or anchored on two or more edges or at all four corners.
(3) Billboard Sign. A board, panel, or tablet used for the display
of posters, printed or painted advertising matter, either illuminated or
non-illuminated, that directs attention to goods, merchandise,
entertainment, or services offered elsewhere than the premises where
the sign is located.
(4) Box Sign. A sign that is self enclosed in a typically square or
rectangular structure with or without internal lighting. A box sign
can be single-or double-sided. Internally illuminated. Channelized
lettering, logo, or groupings of letters and/or logos, not providing
any additional sign face, shall not be considered a box sign.
(5) Electronic Message Center/Manual Changeable Copy Sign.
(Does not apply to Gas/Service Stations or to that portion of a sign
dedicated to time and/or temperature). Is a sign or portion thereof
designed to accommodate frequent message changes composed of
characters, or letters, or illustrations and that can be changed or
rearranged, either manually or electronically, without altering the
face or surface of such sign.
(6) Freestanding Sign. A sign on a frame, pole or other support
structure not attached to any building.
(7) Monument Sign. A freestanding sign defined by a solid
support structure (other than support poles). Width of a single
support structure or the total of two support structures must be a
minimum of forty percent (40%) of the total faceplate width.
Support structure shall be constructed of like material to the
principle building on the property with the exception metal box
sheeting around support structure shall not be permitted under any
circumstance.
(8) Moving or Animated Sign. Any sign or part of a sign that
changes physical position by any movement or rotation or that gives
the visual impression of such movement or rotation.
(9) Paint on Wall Sign. A sign painted on the wall of a building
or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a place parallel to
the face of the wall.
(10) Portable Sign. A sign that is not permanently affixed to a
building, a structure or the ground, but not including customary
identification lettering on vehicles and advertising posters on buses
and taxicabs.
(11) Projecting Sign. A sign that is wholly or partially dependent
upon a building for support and that projects more than twelve (12)
inches from such building.
(12) Pylon Sign. A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or
other supports.
(13) Roof Sign. A sign that is mounted or painted on the roof of a
building, or that is wholly dependent upon a building for support and
that projects above the highest point of a building with a flat roof,
the eave line of a building with gambrel, gable or hip roof or the
deck line of a building with a mansard roof.
(14) Sandwich Board Sign. A movable sign not secured or
attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located.
(15) Temporary Sign. A sign or advertising display constructed of
cloth, canvas, fabric, paper, plywood or other light material and
intended to be displayed for a short period of time, not to exceed
thirty (30) days within one calendar year. Temporary signage
intended for a temporary tenant or seasonal display and intended to
be displayed for longer than thirty (30) days is permitted but limited
to a maximum of 45 days must receive written permission of the
property owner and after receiving a sign permit from the City.
(16) Vehicle/Trailer Sign. A sign that is attached to or painted on
a vehicle or trailer that is parked on or adjacent to any property, the
purpose of which is to attract attention to a product sold or business
located on the property.
(17) Wall Sign. A sign fastened to the wall of a building or
structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting
structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and that
does not project more than eighteen (18) inches from such building
or structure, twenty four (24) inches shall be permitted subject to a
special use permit.
(18) Window Sign. A sign that is applied or attached to the
exterior or interior of a window or located within the interior of a
structure so that its message can be read from the exterior of the
structure.
6. Signs Permitted in Any District Without a Permit. Except as regulated by
this subsection and except as expressly prohibited in subsection 7 of this section,
and notwithstanding any other contrary provisions of this Code, the following
signs may, subject to the following limitations, be erected and maintained in any
district without obtaining a City Sign Permit.
A. Governmental Signs. The content and size of any such sign shall not
exceed the requirements of the law, ordinance or regulation pursuant to
which such sign is erected. This includes banner signs for events or
promotional campaigns organized by the City.
B. Holiday Decorations. Such signs shall be displayed for a period of
not more than sixty (60) consecutive days nor more than twenty (20) days
following the holiday in connection with which they are displayed; any
other provision of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, such signs
may be of any type, number, area, height, location, illumination or
animation so long as they create no safety hazard, nuisance or adverse
impact on the adjacent properties.
C. Home Occupation Identification Signs. Such signs shall be limited
to no more than one (1) sign per structure; shall be no more than one (1)
square foot in area; shall be directly affixed to the structure; and shall be
non-illuminated.
D. Name Plate Signs. Such signs shall be limited to no more than one
(1) wall sign per occupancy; shall be no more than one (1) square foot in
area per occupancy and in no event more than three (3) square feet in area;
and shall be non-illuminated.
E. Official Flags and Emblems, Grave Markers, Statues, or
Remembrance of Persons and/or Events. Such signs may be displayed on
flags. Such signs may also be displayed in the form of a wall sign, grave
marker, statue, or remembrance of persons and/or events. Building permit
may still be required for the placement and installation.
F. On-site Informational/Directional Signs. Such signs shall be limited
to wall or freestanding signs of not more than six (6) square feet in area;
shall be, if a freestanding sign, not more than four (4) feet in height; and
shall be illuminated only as necessary to accomplish their intended purpose.
G. Private Sale Signs (Residential Only). Such signs shall be no more
than six (6) square feet in area; shall be located entirely on the premises
where such sale is to be conducted; shall be clearly marked with name,
address and telephone number of the person responsible for the removal of
such sign; shall be erected not more than twenty-four (24) hours in advance
of such sale; and shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours following
the conclusion of such sale. No freestanding sign shall be higher than four
(4) feet, nor closer to any lot line than six (6) feet.
H. Private Warning Signs. Such signs shall be no more than two (2)
square feet in area each; shall be limited to the number necessary to
accomplish the intended purpose and shall be illuminated only as required
to accomplish such purpose.
I. Real Estate Signs - Standard Size. Real estate signs if limited to one
(1) single or double-faced, non-illuminated sign per zoning lot, not to
exceed six (6) square feet in area per sign face, and may be located up to
the property line. The name, address and telephone number of the person
responsible for such removal shall be marked on the sign. Real estate signs
indicating that the property has sold or is under any contractual obligation
shall be permitted for a period to not exceed 90 days. Real estate signs for
multi-unit developments or structures and exceeding six (6) square feet in
area shall require a permit.
J. Window Signs - Temporary. The aggregate area of all such signs
shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the area of the window in which
they are exhibited nor block any window area required for light, ventilation
or emergency exit by any applicable Code. No such sign shall be
illuminated.
K. Political Signs - Temporary. Such signs shall be no more than five
(5) feet in height and the aggregate area of all such signs shall not exceed
twenty-four (24) square feet. Political signs shall be defined as temporary
in nature. No such sign shall be illuminated or posted on public property,
rights-of-way, or private property without the permission of the owner or
authorized agent.
L. Interior Signs. Any signs that are located within a building and not
legible or intended to be viewed from the public right-of-way.
7. Signs Specifically Prohibited in All Districts. The following signs, as well
as all other signs not expressly permitted by this Municipal Code, are prohibited in
all districts and shall not be erected, maintained or, except as provided for
elsewhere in this code, permitted to continue in any district:
A. No sign or sign structure shall be placed on or over any street or
highway right-of-way other than an official traffic or street sign and such
other signs approved for placement by the controlling public agency. If the
controlling public agency is the City, such approval shall be based on codes
and regulations adopted by the City Council pursuant to applicable law.
B. No sign or sign structure shall be placed on private or public
property without the consent of the owner or authorized agent of the owner
of such property.
C. No sign or sign structure shall be erected at any location so as to, by
reason of its size, shape, design, location, content, coloring, or manner of
illumination, constitute a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by
obstructing the vision of drivers by obscuring or otherwise physically
interfering with any official traffic control device. Nor shall any sign be
placed in a fashion or that may be confused with an official traffic control
device. No rotating beacon, beam or flashing illumination resembling an
emergency light shall be used in connection with any sign display or be
visible from an adjacent street. No lights resembling an emergency light, no
words used or displayed in such a way as to imitate a public safety or
warning sign, and no other lights, words, phrases, symbols, or characters
that may interfere with, mislead or confuse vehicle operators shall be used
in a location that is visible to vehicular traffic.
D. No sign shall be erected so as to prevent free ingress to, or egress
from, any door, window or any other exit way required by the Building
Code or Fire Code of the City, or by any other ordinance.
E. No sign shall be attached to a standpipe, gutter drain, un-braced
parapet wall, or fire escape unless the safety of such sign and such
mounting has been verified in writing by a structural engineer licensed to
practice in the state of Iowa.
F. Advertising signs, including billboards (except as permitted in
subsection 9 and subsection 10 of this section).
G. Attention-getting devices.
H. Banner signs (except as approved by City Sign Permit).
I. Box Signs.
(1) Box signs shall be permitted on existing multi-tenant
buildings that have a minimum of fifty percent (50%) existing box
signs affixed to the building at the time of adoption of this
ordinance. Box signs shall be a maximum permitted size of not
greater than the average size of the box signs attached to the
building.
(2) A secondary line of text including, but not limited to, a tag
line or slogan is permitted below the principal business name.
J. Electronic message center/manual changeable copy signs (except as
permitted in subsection 9 and subsection 10 of this section).
K. Moving or animated signs.
L. Off-premises identification signs.
M. Portable signs.
N. Roof signs.
O. Temporary signs, except as expressly authorized in this section and
when approved in connection with temporary uses.
P. Vehicle/Trailer Signs. Any vehicle conspicuously parked adjacent
to or on a public street for more than three (3) hours primarily for
advertisement.
Q. Any sign that is abandoned, in a state of serious disrepair, or is no
longer functional.
R. Any abandoned sign including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) A sign left blank, having significant portions of letters, words,
or other copy missing for more than thirty (30) days.
(2) An on-premise sign advertising a business or institution not
located at that location for more than thirty (30) days.
(3) Any sign that advertises goods or service no longer available
for more than thirty (30) days.
(4) Any sign that advertises an event or purpose that has passed
and no longer applies for more than thirty (30) days.
(Ord. 13-19 – Aug. 13 Supp.)
S. Any sign that becomes structurally unsound, is in danger of falling,
or otherwise unsafe.
T. Any sign that has been erected, placed, or otherwise established or
maintained in violation of the then existing sign regulations or has in
anyway been unlawfully installed, erected or maintained.
U. Any sign painted directly on a wall, roof, or fence.
8. Procedure for Removal of Signs. Following written notice from the Zoning
Official, the owner, agent or person who benefits from the use of the land, building,
or sign structure shall have a minimum of ninety (90) days to remove the subject sign
and/or sign structure that is identified in said notice. The written notice shall identify
the sign or sign structure and state the specific reasons why removal is required. Said
notice shall also provide a minimum of thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice for
an appeal to be filed with the Board of Adjustment. However, if notice involves any
sign that is creating an unsafe or hazardous condition or involves a temporary sign as
defined in this chapter, then the notice shall provide for removal within a maximum
of seven (7) days and four (4) days for filing an appeal. If said notice is not complied
with and there is no appeal as provided, or if an appeal is denied, the Zoning Official
is authorized to cause removal of such sign and structure and any related expenses
incurred shall be paid by the owner of the sign or land, building or structure where
said sign is located. If costs of removal of the sign and/or sign structure pursuant to
this section are not paid within sixty (60) days of the City's issuance of an invoice for
said costs, the City shall be authorized to assess the costs against the property.
9. District Regulations - C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4. Signs shall be permitted in the
C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 Districts as follows:
A. Functional Types Permitted. All signs permitted in any district
without a City permit as provided in subsection 6 of this section.
(1) Business Signs.
(2) Construction Signs, but for no longer than fourteen (14) days
following completion of the construction in question.
(3) Drive-Thru Signs.
(4) Gas Station Price Signs.
(5) Identification Signs.
(6) Joint Identification Signs.
(7) On-site Directory Signs.
(8) Real Estate Signs - Large Size. Real estate signs if limited to
one (1) single or double-faced, non-illuminated sign per zoning lot,
not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area per sign face. Estate
Signs - Large Size may indicate that the property is for sale or lease.
Real Estate Signs - Large Size requires a City sign permit. Real
Estate Signs - Large Size shall not be in place for more than twelve
(12) months, at which time the sign must be removed or another
permit must be issued for another twelve (12) month period. Real
Estate Signs - Large Size must be constructed of quality materials
and maintained in good condition. Signs not maintained in good
condition may be removed by the City. Real Estate Signs - Large
Size are not permitted in residential districts.
B. Structural Types Permitted.
(1) Awning and Canopy Signs.
(2) Billboard Signs, but only when located on property with
direct lot frontage along Highway 13, Highway 151 east of Highway
13, or Highway 100 street frontage and authorized by a special use
permit.
(3) Electronic Message Center/Manual Changeable Copy Signs,
but only if one of the following conditions is met:
a. Such a sign is incorporated into a permitted on premise
monument sign. Copy shall not be changed more than once
every eight (8) seconds. Scrolling messages shall not be
permitted.
b. Such a sign is located within a permitted billboard
sign. Copy shall not be changed more than once every eight
(8) seconds.
(4) Monument Signs.
(5) Projecting Signs, but only if the following conditions are met:
a. The lowest portion of projection signs shall be at least
eight feet (8’) from grade and a distance to not exceed three
feet (3’) from the wall to which it is attached.
b. Projection over the public right-of-way is permitted
within the C-2 zoning district.
(6) Temporary Signs, but only as authorized in subsection 6 of
this section or for construction signs.
(7) Wall Signs.
C. Number of Signs Permitted Per Lot. All signs permitted by
subsection 6 of this section; plus:
(1) One (1) construction sign of any permitted structural type;
plus
(2) One (1) joint identification sign per zoning lot frontage; plus
(3) One (1) monument sign per street frontage for zoning lot
frontage that is less than five hundred (500) feet in length, and up to
two (2) monument signs per street frontage for zoning lot frontage
that is five hundred (500) feet or more in length. Monument signs
must be spaced at least three-hundred (300) feet apart on a zoning lot
when a zoning lot contains two (2) monument signs per street
frontage, and the sign must be a joint identification sign; plus
(4) One (1) electronic message center/manual changeable copy
sign per zoning lot frontage. Such signs are only permitted if
incorporated into a permitted monument sign or billboard sign.
(5) One (1) wall sign per entrance. For buildings single tenant, or
one (1) wall sign per business tenant; plus
(6) One (1) on-site directory sign per zoning lot frontage; plus
(7) One (1) real estate sign - large size; plus
(8) One (1) billboard sign, per zoning lot. All such signs shall be
displayed in the following manner:
a. A billboard sign must be located at least one thousand
(1,000) feet from any other billboard sign, including billboard
signs located in adjacent jurisdictions.
b. Shall be located a minimum of sixty feet (60) feet from
any on-premise freestanding sign on the same zoning lot.
Said distance shall be measured from the nearest part of each
sign.
c. Shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any
residentially zoned property or planned development zoned
property. In addition, no billboards shall be permitted within
300 feet of any park, public or private school, church,
cemetery or any officially designated local, state, or federally
designated historic property and or district.
d. One (1) single-faced painted bulletin, poster panel
display, or electronic message center/manual changeable copy
sign.
e. A display of two (2) poster panels placed side-by-side
in a straight line.
f. A double-faced display of painted bulletins, poster
panels, or electronic message center/manual changeable copy
sign.
g. Forming an angle of less than forty-five (45) degrees,
up to two (2) side-by-side poster panels may be backed by the
same or one (1) painted bulletin, or one (1) painted bulletin
may be backed up by the same or a display of up to two (2)
side-by-side poster panels.
h. No stacking of poster panels or painted bulletins in
whatever manner shall be permitted.
D. Maximum Gross Surface Area of Signs Permitted.
(1) Total Sign Area. The total area of all signs on a zoning lot
shall not exceed one (1) square foot per linear foot of zoning lot
frontage; provided, however, that construction signs, real estate
signs, joint identification signs, and signs allowed without permits,
shall not be counted toward the total allowance gross sign surface
area permitted on a zoning lot. The maximum amount of sign area
shall be allocated proportionally based on the linear zoning lot
frontage. All zoning lots shall be allotted a minimum total sign area
of sixty (60) square feet.
(2) Individual Sign Area Limitations. The following individual
sign area limitations shall apply to all signs.
a. Awning and Canopy Signs: Not to exceed fifty (50)
square feet per sign face. No sign identifying an individual
tenant of a multi-tenant building shall cover more than twenty
percent (20%) of the canopy to which it is affixed.
b. Billboard Signs: Not to exceed forty-eight (48) feet
long by fourteen (14) feet high per sign face. All such signs
shall be required to be freestanding type display.
c. Construction Signs: Not to exceed sixteen (16) square
feet per sign face, nor more than two (2) sign faces.
d. Electronic Message Center/Manual Changeable Copy
Signs:
(i) If located within a monument sign, not to
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the gross surface area of
the monument sign face within which such a sign is
incorporated and therefore, shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the area as regulated in paragraph e
below.
(ii) If located within a billboard sign, not to exceed
the sign area limitations as regulated in paragraph f.
e. Monument Signs: Not to exceed one-hundred (120)
square feet per sign face, nor more than two-hundred forty
(240) square feet total for lots in the C-3 district. Not to
exceed eighty (80) square feet per sign face, nor more than
one hundred sixty (160) square feet total for lots in the C-1
district.
f. Wall Signs: For signs located within the C-1 and C-3
zoning districts signs shall not exceed two-hundred (200)
square feet per sign, or not to exceed covering more than
twenty percent (20%) of the wall to which it is affixed,
whichever is less. For signs located within the C-2 zoning
district signs shall not exceed one-hundred (100) square feet
per sign, or not to exceed covering more than ten percent
(10%) of the wall to which it is affixed, whichever is less.
E. Maximum Height of Signs Permitted.
(1) Signs Without Permits: As provided in subsection 6 of this
section for signs permitted pursuant to that subsection.
(2) Awning and Canopy Signs: Twenty (20) feet; all awning and
canopy signs shall be at least eight (8) feet above grade. Awning
and canopy signs for individual tenants of a multi-tenant building
shall be at the same height on the building to which they are affixed.
(3) Billboard Signs: No billboard sign shall have the lowest edge
of its display face more than ten (10) feet above grade; nor have the
highest edge of its display face more than twenty-four (24) feet
above street grade. The exposed supports of billboard signs shall be
covered and hidden from view of public rights-of-way. This
regulation shall not apply when the road design, natural topography,
buildings, and other objects provide screening to the backs of any
graphic.
(4) Electronic Message Center/Manual Changeable Copy Signs:
No electronic message center/manual changeable copy sign shall
extend beyond the sign face of the monument sign or billboard
within which such a sign is incorporated more than four inches (4”)
and; therefore, shall not exceed a height of said monument or
billboard signs as regulated in paragraphs (3) and (5).
(5) Monument Signs: A maximum height of twelve (12) feet for
lots with less than five (5) acres in area and a maximum of fifteen
(15) feet for lots exceeding five (5) acres in area. A maximum height
of eight (8) feet is permitted for C-1-zoned lots.
a. A maximum two (2) foot architectural feature may be
erected over the top of any monument sign and exceed the
maximum height limitations except for property zoned C-1.
No text, logo, or other advertising feature is permitted within
this two (2) foot architectural feature.
(6) Wall Signs: No wall sign shall extend beyond the roof line or
parapet of the building to which it is affixed. No wall sign shall be
affixed to HVAC screening, elevator overrun, or other features
protruding from the roof of the structure, with the exception of
building parapets which have been designed and integrated into the
building’s architecture and which are in line with and not set back
from the perimeter façade of the building.
F. Minimum Setback Required. As provided in subsection 6 of this
section for signs permitted pursuant to that subsection.
(1) Billboard Signs: Billboard signs shall be erected in
compliance with the building setback requirements of the underlying
zoning district.
(2) Electronic Message Center/Manual Changeable Copy Signs:
Electronic message center/manual changeable copy signs shall
adhere to the setback requirements established for the permitted
monument sign or billboard sign within which they are incorporated.
(3) Monument Signs: Five (5) feet from “right-of-way” and six
(6) feet from all other lot lines. “Sight triangles” shall be
maintained.
(4) Temporary Sign: Five feet (5’).
10. District Regulations - O-1, I-1, and I-2. Signs shall be permitted in the O-1,
I-1, and I-2 Districts as follows:
A. Functional Types Permitted. All signs permitted in any district
without a City permit, as provided in subsection 6 of this section.
(1) Business Signs.
(2) Construction Signs, but for no longer than fourteen (14) days
following completion of the construction in question.
(3) Drive-Through Signs.
(4) Identification Signs.
(5) Joint Identification Signs.
(6) On-site Directory Signs.
(7) Real Estate Signs - Large Size. Real estate signs if limited to
one (1) single or double-faced, non-illuminated sign per zoning lot,
not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area per sign face, and
set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the property line.
The name, address and telephone number of the person responsible
for such removal shall be marked on the sign. Real estate signs
indicating that the property has sold or is under any contractual
obligation shall not be permitted pursuant to this paragraph. Real
Estate Signs - Large Size may indicate that the property is for sale or
lease. Real Estate Signs - Large Size requires a City sign permit.
Real Estate Signs - Large Size shall not be in place for more than
twelve (12) months, at which time the sign must be removed or
another permit must be issued for another twelve (12) month period.
Real Estate Signs - Large Size must be constructed of quality
materials and maintained in good condition. Signs not maintained in
good condition may be removed by the City. Real Estate Signs -
Large Size are not permitted in residential districts.
(8) Gas Station Price Signs.
B. Structural Types Permitted.
(1) Awning and Canopy Signs.
(2) Billboard Signs, but only when located along Highway 13 or
Highway 100 street frontage and authorized by a special permit,
except in the O-1 zoning district where they are prohibited.
(3) Electronic Message Center Signs/Manual Changeable Copy
Signs, but only if one of the following conditions is met:
a. Such a sign is incorporated into a permitted monument
sign. Copy shall not be changed more than once every eight
(8) seconds.
b. Such a sign is located within a permitted billboard
sign. Copy shall not be changed more than once every 10
seconds.
(4) Monument Signs.
(5) Wall Signs.
C. Number of Signs Permitted per Zoning Lot. All signs permitted by
subsection 6 of this section; plus
(1) One (1) awning sign; plus
(2) One (1) construction sign of any structural type; plus
(3) One (1) joint identification sign per zoning lot frontage; plus
(4) One (1) monument sign per street frontage for zoning lot
frontage that is less than five hundred (500) feet in length, and up to
two (2) monuments signs per street frontage for zoning lot frontage
that is five hundred (500) feet or more in length. Monument signs
must be spaced at least three-hundred (300) feet apart on a zoning lot
when a zoning lot contains two (2) monument signs per street
frontage; plus
(5) One (1) electronic message center sign/manual changeable
copy sign per zoning lot. Such signs are only permitted if
incorporated into a permitted monument sign or billboard sign.
(6) Two (2) on-site directory signs per zoning lot frontage; plus
(7) One (1) real estate sign - large size; plus
(8) One (1) billboard sign, per zoning lot.
a. A billboard sign must be located at least one thousand
(1,000) feet from any other billboard sign, including
billboards signs located in adjacent jurisdictions.
b. Shall be located a minimum of sixty feet (60) feet from
any on-premise freestanding sign on the same zoning lot.
Said distance shall be measured from the nearest part of each
sign.
c. Shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any
residentially zoned property or planned development zoned
property. In addition, no billboards shall be permitted within
300 feet of any park, public or private school, church,
cemetery or any officially designated local, state, or federally
designated historic property and or district.
d. One (1) single-faced painted bulletin, poster panel
display, or electronic message center/manual changeable copy
sign.
e. A display of two (2) poster panels placed side-by-side
in a straight line.
f. A double-faced display of painted bulletins, poster
panels, or electronic message center/manual changeable copy
sign as previously described in (a) and (b).
g. Forming an angle of less than forty-five (45) degrees,
up to two (2) side-by-side poster panels may be backed by the
same or one (1) painted bulletin, or one (1) painted bulletin
may be backed up by the same or a display of up to two (2)
side-by-side poster panels.
h. No stacking of poster panels or painted bulletins in
whatever manner shall be permitted.
D. Maximum Gross Surface Area of Signs Permitted.
(1) Total Sign Area. The total area of all signs on a zoning lot
shall not exceed one (1) square foot per foot of zoning lot frontage;
provided, however, that construction signs, real estate signs, joint
identification signs, and signs allowed without permits, shall not be
counted toward the total allowance gross sign surface area permitted
on a zoning lot. The maximum amount of sign area shall be allocated
proportionally based on the linear zoning lot frontage.
(2) Individual Sign Area Limitations. The following individual
sign area limitations shall apply to all signs within the O-1, I-1, and
I-2 districts, whether counted toward the total allowable gross sign
surface area established in this code or not:
a. Awning and Canopy Signs: Not to exceed fifty (50)
square feet per sign face. No sign identifying an individual
tenant of a multi-tenant building shall cover more than twenty
percent (20%) of the wall to which it is affixed.
b. Billboard Signs: Not to exceed forty-eight (48) feet
long by fourteen (14) feet high per sign face. All such signs
shall be required to either be a wall or freestanding type
display.
c. Electronic Message Center/Manual Changeable Copy
Signs:
(i) If located within a monument sign, not to
exceed 50% of the gross surface area of the monument
sign face within which such a sign is incorporated and
therefore, shall not exceed 50% of the area as
regulated in paragraph d below.
(ii) If located within a billboard sign, not to exceed
the sign area limitations as regulated in paragraph b.
d. Monument Signs: Not to exceed one-hundred (100)
square feet per sign face, nor more than two-hundred (200)
square feet total.
e. Wall Signs: Twenty percent (20), but not to exceed
one-hundred forty (120) square feet per sign.
E. Maximum Height of Signs Permitted.
(1) Signs Without Permits: As provided in subsection 6 of this
section for signs permitted pursuant to that subsection.
(2) Awning and Canopy Signs: Twenty (20) feet; minimum height
of eight (8) feet above grade.
(3) Billboard Signs: No billboard sign shall have the lowest edge of
its display face more than fourteen feet (14’) above grade; nor have the
highest edge of its display face more than twenty-eight (28’) feet above
street grade.
(4) Electronic Message Center/Manual Changeable Copy Signs:
No electronic message center/manual changeable copy sign shall
extend beyond the sign face of the monument sign or billboard within
which such a sign is incorporated and therefore, shall not exceed a
height of said monument or billboard signs as regulated in paragraphs
(3) and (5) of this subsection.
(5) Monument Signs: A maximum height of twelve (12) feet for
lots less than five (5) acres in area and a maximum height of fifteen
(15) feet for lots more than five (5) acres in area.
a. A maximum two (2) foot architectural feature may be
erected over the top of any monument sign and exceed the
maximum height restrictions. No text, logo, or other advertising
feature is permitted within this two (2) foot architectural feature.
(6) Wall Signs: No wall sign shall extend beyond the roof line or
parapet of the building to which it is affixed. No wall sign shall cover
any architectural features (architectural features shall include, but not
be limited to, pediment, cornice, belt course, pier, windows, pilaster,
roof, decorative stone or tile inlay, kick plate/bulkhead, raised or
colored brick pattern, and corbel) of the building to which it is affixed.
No wall sign shall be affixed to HVAC screening, elevator overrun, or
other features protruding from the roof of the structure, with the
exception of building parapets which have been designed and
integrated into the building’s architecture and which are in line with
and not set back from the perimeter façade of the building.
F. Minimum Setback Required.
(1) Signs Without Permits: As provided in subsection 6 of this
section for signs permitted pursuant to that subsection.
(2) Billboard Signs: Billboard signs shall be erected in compliance
with the building setback requirements of the underlying zoning
district.
(3) Electronic Message Center/Manual Changeable Copy Signs:
Electronic message center/manual changeable copy signs shall adhere
to the setback requirements established for the permitted monument
sign or billboard sign within which they are incorporated as regulated
in paragraphs (2) and (4) of this subsection.
(4) Monument Signs: Five (5) feet from the right-of-way and three
(3) feet from parking areas or driveways. “Sight triangles” shall be
maintained to ensure safety.
(5) Temporary Sign: Five (5) feet.
G. Illumination.
(1) Signs Without Permits: Signs permitted pursuant to subsection
6 of this section shall be illuminated only as permitted in that
subsection.
(2) Awnings and Canopies: Shall be illuminated using a direct light
source. Direct illumination shall be aimed at the exterior of the
awning/canopy.
(3) Monument Signs: Monument signs shall be backlit, directly-lit,
or internally illuminated. Any direct light source shall be concealed
from view from the right-of-way.
(4) Wall Signs: Letters shall be individually affixed to walls of a
building and be either internally illuminated or backlit. All wall signs
mounted above thirty (30) feet shall consist of internally illuminated or
backlit lettering. Wall signs mounted above thirty (30) feet shall
consist of the business name only Wall signs mounted above thirty
(30) feet may also include the company’s primary registered or
trademarked logo.
11. District Regulations-A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-6. Except where
exempted by this chapter, all of the following signs require permits from the City.
Signs shall be permitted in the A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-6 Districts as
follows:
A. Nameplates and Signs. A nameplate for a single-family dwelling shall
not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square inches in area. For a multiplefamily
dwelling, a nameplate shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area, and
may indicate the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the building
and/or the rental agents. A nameplate may be illuminated by non-flashing
direct or indirect illumination.
B. For Sale Signs. One un-illuminated ground sign, not more than six (6)
square feet in area may be located in a front yard or side yard adjoining a street
and shall be located not closer than ten feet (10') from a front and/or side lot
line.
C. Signs for Nonresidential Uses (excluding home occupation signs which
are prohibited). Identification signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted
in accordance with the following regulations:
(1) One identification sign affixed flat against a building wall and
one ground sign, which in both cases may be illuminated by nonflashing
direct or indirect illumination and shielded so that the source
of light cannot be seen at any point within a residential district, may be
erected along each street frontage. For an educational institution, the
sign may contain not only the name of the institution, but may also
announce events or activities occurring at the institution.
(2) Each sign shall be limited in area to not more than sixteen (16)
square feet and shall not project higher than eight feet (8’) above grade.
No ground sign shall be located nearer than eight feet (8') from the
nearest interior lot line nor closer to the front lot line than one-half (1/2)
the depth of the required front yard except:
a. A directional sign shall be not more than nine (9) square
feet in area and shall not be located nearer than ten feet (10')
from right-of-way; and
b. A sign for an educational institution shall not be located
nearer than ten feet (10') from a right-of-way.
(3) Electronic Message Center Signs/Manual Changeable Copy
Signs: If located within a monument sign, not to exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the gross surface area of the monument sign face within
which such a sign is incorporated.
(4) Ground signs shall be limited to one per street frontage. Lots
containing multiple street frontages shall be permitted additional signs
per frontage, but signs must be separated by a minimum of three
hundred feet (300’).
D. Temporary Ground Signs. Temporary ground signs for residential
subdivisions shall be permitted in accordance with the following:
(1) Signs may be erected along each thoroughfare or highway
frontage of the development not less than one thousand feet (1,000')
apart.
(2) Such signs shall not exceed two hundred forty (240) square feet
in area each, and shall contain only the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of the development and the sales or rental agents, and types,
prices, and location of dwelling units.
(3) Such signs:
a. May be illuminated with non-flashing illumination
shielded so that the source of light cannot be seen;
b. Shall not project higher than fifteen feet (15') above
ground grade;
c. Shall not be located nearer than thirty feet (30') from
street curb; and
d. Shall be removed within thirty (30) days of ninety
percent (90%) build-out of available buildable lots.
E. Additional Ground Signs. Additional ground signs may be used on lots
containing model homes being offered for sale or rent to:
(1) Identify the name and price of each house, not to exceed twelve
(12) square feet in area.
(2) Provide directional and safety information, not to exceed two
(2) square feet in area.
(3) No more than one such sign is permitted on any single lot
except a maximum of two (2) signs will be permitted on corner lots, so
that one sign can be located along each street frontage. The maximum
size of these signs is six (6) square feet each.
(Ord. 11-26 – Feb. 12 Supp.)
176.32 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES. This section is intended to provide that
accessory buildings and uses are compatible with the principal use of that property on which they
are located, as well as adjacent properties.
1. Attached Buildings and Structures. Attached accessory buildings and structures
shall meet all the requirements of this chapter which apply to the principal structure to
which they are attached.
2. Detached Buildings. Detached accessory buildings and structures shall:
A. Location:
(1) Not be located in a required front yard.
(2) If located partially or completely between the side lot line and the
main building on the lot, detached accessory buildings and structures shall
meet the minimum side yard requirements established for the principal
building to which it is accessory.
(3) Not be closer than 3 feet to any other lot line. However, a roof or
canopy of an accessory building may project into a required side yard a
point one-third the distance to the lot line from an exterior wall.
(4) Shall not occupy more than 40% of the required rear yard.
(5) Be set back from any adjacent street in accordance with the
minimum distance required for a principal building on a lot.
(6) No portion of an accessory building shall be located closer than three
(3) feet to the principal building or other accessory structure on the same
lot.
B. Size.
(1) In districts that permit single family homes, the aggregate total
square footage of a detached accessory structure shall be no greater than
nine hundred (900) square feet.
(2) The height of a detached accessory structure may not exceed the
height of the principal building.
C. Design:
(1) The detached accessory structure shall be constructed to compliment
the principal building including the use of similar materials and color palette
of the principal building.
3. Exceptions for Accessory Structures.
A. Detached accessory structures may exceed the 900 square feet limitation
after approval of a Conditional Use Permit provided the following conditions are
meet:
(1) All other standards of Section 176.32 are maintained and met.
(2) In the A-I and AA zoning districts the detached accessory structure
shall meet the setback requirements established for the principle building,
except that the setback shall be established at 50' from any property line
adjacent to a residential district.
4. Time and Construction. An accessory structure or use may not be constructed or
established prior to commencement of construction or establishment of the principal
structure or use to which it is accessory.
5. Use of Dwelling Restricted. No accessory structure shall be used for living,
sleeping, or housekeeping services except by domestic employees employed on the
premises and the immediate families of such employees, and then only when said structure
has met all City Codes and Ordinances relating to residential construction and occupancy.
Additionally, no such occupancy shall be permitted prior to issuance of a certification of
occupancy for the principal structure.
6. Accessory Commercial Uses.
A. A coffee shop, gift shop, cafeteria, news stand, barber shop, beauty shop,
pharmacy, or similar accessory commercial service uses may be established as an
accessory use within a nursing, rest, or convalescent home in an R-5, R-6, R-6A,
or 0-1 District, provided such home contains at least 50 patient beds.
B. A coffee shop may be established as an accessory use in a multiple-family
structure provided such structure or related complex of structures contains at least
36 dwelling units.
C. Such accessory commercial service uses shall be for the convenience of and
for service to the residents, patients, guests, or employees occupying the building.
No off-premises advertising of any kind shall be allowed in connection with an
accessory use.
D. No exterior signs shall be placed on the premises indicating to the general
public that a portion of the premises is being used for an accessory use.
7. Accessory Child Care Facilities. Child care facilities, including nursery and
preschools, shall be permitted as accessory uses in churches and public, quasipublic, and
private institutional buildings, subject to compliance with City Building Codes and all other
applicable State and local regulations.
8. Swimming Pools. Private swimming pools may be located in rear yards' subject to
compliance with City Building Codes and all other applicable State and local regulations.
9. Single-family Dwellings in the R-M District. One single-family detached dwelling
may be considered an accessory use in a manufactured/mobile home community, provided
that such dwelling be used only as a residence for a watchman, custodian, or manager and
his/her family located on the premises where he/she is employed.
10. Solar Energy Collector. A solar energy collector and heat storage unit of size
needed to supply the building to which it is appurtenant shall be considered an accessory
use and be so regulated.
11. Bulletin Boards. Church, institutional, public, and quasi-public building bulletin
boards are permitted accessory uses and may be located in a required front or side yard,
provided the placement of such bulletin boards do not obstruct the required corner visual
clearance or otherwise present a traffic safety hazard.
12. Garage Setbacks. The front side (that is, the side containing the main garage door)
if either a detached or attached garage shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the
property line.
(Ord. 18-25 – Nov. 18 Supp.)
176.33 NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
The purpose of this Section is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures,
lots and uses, and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which nonconforming
buildings, structures and uses shall be gradually eliminated upon reaching the end of their
respective normal useful life
1. General Standards of Applicability
A. Authority to Continue
(1) Any nonconforming building, structure, lot, or use which existed
lawfully at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance and which remains
nonconforming, and any building, structure, lot or use which becomes
nonconforming upon the adoption of this Ordinance or any subsequent
amendments, may continue subject to the provisions of this Section, so long
as it remains otherwise lawful.
B. Burden on Property Owner to Establish Legality
(1) In all cases, the burden of establishing the legality of a
nonconformity under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be upon the
property owner of the nonconforming building, structure, lot or use and not
upon the City.
C. Safety Regulations
(1) The existence of a nonconformity does not affect the applicability
to a property of any police power regulations enacted to promote public
health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare including, but not
limited to, all building, fire and health codes.
D. Governmental Action
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this Section 176.33 to the
contrary, no lawfully existing conforming lot, building, structure and/or use
shall be rendered nonconforming, and subject to the provisions of this
Section, as a result of the exercise of eminent domain by a governmental
entity.
2. Nonconforming Uses of Land
A. This Section regulates land, buildings and structures that, on the effective
date of this Ordinance, are used in whole or in part for purposes that are not allowed
in the zoning district, overlay, or Planned Unit Development in which they are
located.
B. Expansion of Use
(1) A nonconforming use of land, buildings or structures shall not be
expanded, extended, enlarged or increased in intensity. Such prohibited
activity shall include, without limitation:
(a) An expansion or extension of a nonconforming use or its
accessory uses to any land area, building or structure, or part thereof,
other than that occupied by the nonconforming use on the effective
date of this Ordinance.
(b) An expansion or extension of the nonconforming use or its
accessory uses within a building or other structure, to any portion of
the building or structure that was not occupied by the
nonconforming use on the effective date of this Ordinance.
C. Relocation
(1) A nonconforming use of land, buildings or structures shall not be
relocated, in whole or in part, to any other location on the same lot or parcel,
or to any other lot or parcel, unless the lot or parcel to which it is relocated
permits the nonconforming use.
D. Change of Use
(1) A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any use other than 1)
a use permitted by right within the zoning district, overlay, or PUD in which
it is located, or 2) a use allowed as a Conditional Use, for which a
Conditional Use applicable to the property has been granted. Thereafter,
that part of the land, building or structure occupied by the permitted use or
granted Conditional Use shall not thereafter be changed back to a use that
is not allowed within the zoning district or PUD in which it is located. Any
change in use in violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed an
abandonment of the previously existing lawful nonconforming use.
E. Abandonment
(1) If that part of a building or structure occupied by a nonconforming
use becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a continuous period of 180
days or more, such nonconforming use shall be deemed to be abandoned
and shall not be reestablished or resumed. Any subsequent use or occupancy
of such land, building or structure shall comply with all regulations of the
zoning district in which such land, building, or structure is located. The
period of such discontinuance caused by government action, acts of God, or
other acts without any contributing fault by the user, such as the default or
bankruptcy of a tenant, shall not be included in calculating the length of
discontinuance for this Section.
F. Damage or Destruction
(1) A building, structure or portion thereof, all or substantially all of
which is designed or intended for a use which is not allowed in the district
in which it is located and which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other
casualty or act of God to the extent that the cost of restoration to the
condition in which it was before the occurrence will exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the total cost of reconstructing the entire building or structure,
shall not be restored unless said building or structure and the use thereof
shall conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located or in
conformity with Section 176.36-4B(4) of this Chapter pertaining to the
powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. In the event that such damage
or destruction is less than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of reconstruction
of the entire building or structure, repairs or construction for restoration may
be made only if such work is started within one year from the date of the
partial destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion.
3. Nonconforming Buildings and Structures
A. This Section regulates land, buildings and structures existing on the
effective date of this Ordinance that do not conform to the yard, height, lot
coverage, or other dimensional or bulk provisions of this Ordinance. (See Section
176.31 for additional provisions relating to signs.)
B. Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance
(1) Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement, and
installation or relocation of nonbearing walls, nonbearing partitions,
fixtures, wiring or plumbing may be performed on any nonconforming
building or structure. No repairs or reconstruction shall be made that would
create any new nonconformity, or increase the degree of any previously
existing nonconformity.
C. Structural Alterations
(1) Structural alterations, other than additions and enlargements, may
be performed on a nonconforming building or structure, only in the
following situations:
(a) When the alteration is required by law or is necessary to
restore the building or structure to a safe condition upon the order of
any official charged with protecting the public safety.
(b) When the alteration will not create any new nonconformity
or increase the degree of any existing nonconformity.
(c) When the alteration will result in eliminating the
nonconformity.
D. Additions and Enlargements
(1) A building or structure, which is nonconforming with respect to its
bulk, shall not be enlarged or added on to unless the addition does not create
any new nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing
nonconformity, except as follows: Where a wall of an existing single-family
or two-family building is nonconforming with respect to the minimum yard
or setback requirement, the nonconforming wall may be extended vertically
and/or horizontally by adding to the existing building, subject to the
following:
(a) The wall extension shall not be any closer to the lot line than
the existing nonconforming wall.
(b) The extended building wall shall not create any additional
nonconformities on the site.
(c) The maximum building coverage and building height shall
not be exceeded.
E. Relocation
(1) A nonconforming building or structure shall not be relocated, in
whole or in part, to any other location on the same zoning lot or parcel, or
to any other zoning lot or parcel, unless the building or structure shall
thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is
relocated.
F. Damage or Destruction
(1) In the event that any nonconforming building or structure is
damaged or destroyed by any means not within the control of the property
owner or tenant to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its
replacement value at that time, then the building or structure shall not be
restored or rebuilt unless the building or structure, including foundation,
thereafter conforms to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located.
(2) The replacement value of the building or structure shall be based on:
1) the sale of that building or structure within the previous year or, if that is
not applicable; 2) an appraisal within the last two (2) years or, if that is not
available; 3) the amount for which the building, structure or property was
insured prior to the date of the damage or destruction or; 4) an alternative
method determined acceptable by the City Council.
(3) When a nonconforming building or structure is damaged or
destroyed by any means not within the control of the property owner or
tenant to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value
at that time, it may be repaired or reconstructed provided that no new
nonconformities are created and that the degree of nonconformity existing
prior to the damage or destruction is not increased. A building permit shall
be obtained for such rebuilding, restoration, repair or reconstruction within
one (1) year of the date of damage or destruction, and the construction shall
be completed within one (1) year of issuance of the building permit.
(4) In the event that a building permit is not obtained within one (1)
year, or that repairs are not completed within one (1) year of the issuance of
the building permit, then the building or structure shall not be restored
unless it conforms to all regulations of the district in which it is located.
(5) In the event that any nonconforming building or structure or part
thereof is removed, demolished or destroyed by means within the control of
the property owner or tenant, the building or structure or part thereof that
was removed, demolished or destroyed, as restored or repaired, shall
comply with all requirements of this Ordinance.
4. Nonconforming Lots of Record
A. This Section regulates lots of record, existing on the effective date of this
Ordinance, which do not conform to the lot area or lot width requirements of the
district in which they are located. No nonconforming lot of record may be improved
except in compliance with this Section.
B. Individual Lots of Record in Residential Districts
(1) In residential districts, a single-family dwelling may be constructed
and maintained on a lot which is nonconforming as to minimum lot area
and/or minimum lot width, if the lot was of record on March 24, 1962, was
in separate ownership on the effective date of this Ordinance and conforms
to all other requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
C. Lots of Record Held in Common Ownership
(1) If on the effective date of this Ordinance there are two (2) or more
lots of record with contiguous frontage in single ownership, and one (1) or
more of the lots is nonconforming as to minimum lot area and/or minimum
lot width, the lots shall be considered to be a single undivided parcel for the
purposes of this Ordinance. No portion of said parcel shall be used or
conveyed which does not meet the lot width and lot area requirements
established by this Ordinance. No division of the parcel shall be made which
leaves the remaining lot(s) with lot width or lot area below the requirements
of this Ordinance. No building permit shall be issued for the use of any lot
or portion of a lot, transferred or conveyed in violation of this Section.
(2) If the Board of Zoning Appeals grants a variation or variations to
the required minimum lot area or width that renders the contiguous
nonconforming lots buildable, then the provisions of this section shall be
considered satisfied and the lots of record may be conveyed and building
permits may be issued, to the extent authorized by the variation.
(Ord. 18-21 – Nov. 18 Supp.)
176.34 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS.
1. Intent.
A. The intent of the Planned Development Districts is to permit greater
flexibility and more creative, innovative and imaginative design in land
development than generally is possible under conventional zoning
techniques. Planned developments are intended to achieve:
B. A maximum choice of design alternatives by allowing a variety of
land use and building types and permitting an increased density per acre
and a reduction in lot dimensions, yards, building setbacks, and area
requirements.
C. A development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural,
topographic and geologic features, scenic vistas, trees, and other vegetation,
and other natural features, and prevents the disruption of natural drainage
systems.
D. A more efficient use of land is generally achieved through
conventional development, resulting in substantial savings through shorter
utilities and streets.
E. A more useful pattern of open space and recreation areas and other
public and common facilities than would otherwise be provided under
conventional land development procedures.
F. A development plan in harmony with the objectives of the City’s
Comprehensive Community Plan with respect to land use, transportation,
open space, and community facilities.
2. Definitions. In the context of this section, the term “planned development”
means an area for which a unitary site plan has been prepared in accordance with
the provisions set forth in this section. In the context of this section, the term
“open space” has the same definition as included in Section 176.06 of this chapter.
In addition, landscaped roof areas and decks may be considered as “open space” if
structurally safe, adequately surfaced and protected, aesthetically designed, and
usable for the purpose for which it is intended.
3. Classifications of Planned Development Districts. The following
designations shall be used to classify Planned Development Districts:
A. PD-R – Planned Development-Residential: A planned development
occupying any quantity of land area in which all buildings to be included in
the district are used for residential or accessory purposes customarily
related to residential uses.
B. PD-C – Planned Development-Commercial: A planned
development occupying a land area of not less than two (2) acres in which
all the interior floor space to be included in the development is used for
commercial purposes or accessory uses customarily related to commercial
uses.
C. PD-I – Planned Development-Industrial: A planned development
occupying a land area of not less than ten (10) acres in which more than
80% of the interior floor space of all buildings to be included in the
development are used for industrial purposes or accessory uses customarily
related to industrial uses.
D. PD-S – Planned Development-Special: A planned development not
otherwise distinguishable under the previous classifications, or containing a
mix of residential, commercial, industrial, and/or other uses. This
classification may occupy any quantity of land area.
E. PD-MH – Planned Development-Manufactured/Mobile Home
Community: A planned development in which the principal use will be
residential occupancy of manufactured or mobile housing units, some or all
of which do not meet the requirements of Section 176.35(19) of this
chapter. This PD-MH classification is intended to accommodate
manufactured/mobile home communities in those areas of the City where
they will be compatible with existing and projected development. This
zoning classification will generally be located in outlying areas of the City
and must be served with adequate sewers, water, storm water facilities,
streets, police and fire protection, and other necessary public facilities and
services as more fully specified in Chapter 151 of this Code of Ordinances.
Notwithstanding subsections 1, 4 and 8(A) of this section, the preliminary
and final development plans and plan of improvements required pursuant to
subsections 9, 10, and 11 of this section must comply with the standards for
development of a manufactured/mobile home community established in
Chapter 151.
4. General Requirement. Whenever there is a conflict or difference between
the provisions of this section and those of the other sections of this Zoning
Ordinance, the provisions of this section shall prevail. Subjects not covered by
this section shall be governed by the respective provisions found elsewhere in this
Zoning Ordinance.
5. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the applicable
districts, provided that the development satisfies all other requirements set forth in
this section:
A. PD-R
(1) Single-family residential dwellings.
(2) Two-family residential dwellings.
(3) Three or four-family residential dwellings.
(4) Multi-family residential dwellings.
(5) Customary accessory or associated uses such as private
garages, storage spaces, recreation and community facilities.
(6) Public or private schools.
(7) Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of
religious worship and instruction.
(8) Golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools, or similar
outdoor sports facilities.
(9) Nursery, rest or convalescent homes or day care centers.
B. PD-C. Any use permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3, or C-4 Zoning
Districts.
C. PD-I. Any use permitted in the I-1 or I-2 Zoning District.
D. PD-S. Any residential, commercial, industrial, or other uses, or
combination thereof.
E. PD-MH.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings including those
manufactured at a remote site and assembled for occupancy on the
site which do not meet the requirements of Section 176.35(19) of
this chapter.
(2) Accessory uses including, but not limited to, garages and
storage buildings, manufactured/mobile home community office,
community/recreational facilities, maintenance facilities and
community storm shelters.
(3) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Section
176.30.
(4) Public, quasi-public and governmental buildings and
facilities:
a. Public and private parks, playgrounds, recreational
buildings and facilities and community centers.
b. Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of
religious worship and instruction.
c. Public elementary, junior high and high schools, and
private non-boarding schools having a curriculum similar to
that in the permitted public schools.
d. Day care centers.
6. Coordination With Subdivision Ordinance. It is the intent of this section
that subdivision review, when applicable, be carried out simultaneously with the
review of the proposed Planned Development. The Development Plans required
under this section may be submitted in a form which will satisfy the subdivision
filing requirements set forth in Chapter 175, Subdivision Regulations, of this Code
of Ordinances, provided that such Development Plans also satisfy the
requirements of this section.
7. Building Permits. No land may be used or building permits issued on land
within the Planned Development District until all procedural and regulatory
provisions set forth in this section are complied with.
8. Design Standards.
A. Lot dimensions, lot area, building setbacks, building height, building
size, off-street parking and loading, landscaping, density, and similar bulk
and design standards are not subject to specific regulations or limits, but
rather shall be subject to approval during the review process of such
development as set forth in this section.
B. The planned development must conform with the spirit and intent of
the City’s Comprehensive Community Plan, and with the intent of this
section.
C. The planned development must not adversely affect the existing
character of the neighborhood in which it is to be located. Adequate
safeguards must be provided to minimize possible detrimental effects on
adjacent properties, the neighborhood, and the community.
D. The planned development must have ample provision for sanitary
sewage disposal, storm and surface water drainage, water supply, and other
utilities.
E. The planned development must allow for adequate availability to
police and fire protection and other appropriate public services and
community facilities.
F. The planned development must provide for safe pedestrian
circulation.
G. The planned development must provide for safe and effective
vehicular access and circulation to and within the site. Traffic circulation
patterns must be designed so as to minimize traffic congestion.
H. The planned development must provide for adequate and well
located off-street parking and loading spaces tailored to the specific needs
of the development.
I. The planned development must provide a beneficial relationship
between vehicular traffic, pedestrian circulation, and other proposed uses
and activities.
J. The planned development must provide a beneficial and efficient use
of such natural characteristics as topography, geography, soil conditions,
trees and other vegetation, water courses, natural drainage systems, soil
conditions, and similar characteristics.
K. The location, height, and bulk of buildings and structures on the site
must be in proportion to each other and relate well to other structures and
visual perspectives in the area.
L. The planned development must provide for effective use and design
of open spaces, landscaping, amenities, and natural land features.
M. The planned development must provide that the installation of
landscaping, driveways, recreational facilities and other site details are
generally in harmony with the proposed development, adjacent properties,
and with the rights and interests of the general public.
9. Filing Procedure - Petition For Zoning Change.
A. A petition for a zoning change to one of the PD-Planned
Development District classifications identified in this section shall be
submitted in accordance with all applicable provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and rules of procedure of the City Planning Commission.
B. A Preliminary Development Plan may, at the option of the
petitioner, accompany the petition for rezoning to a PD-Planned
Development Zone. If no Preliminary Development Plan is submitted, the
petitioner shall submit a concept plan adequate to describe the proposed
land uses and street patterns which the petitioner intends to develop within
the Planned Development. Notwithstanding, the Commission or the
Council may require some or all portions of the Preliminary Development
Plan be submitted in the course of review of a Planned Development
rezoning petition in order to resolve specific development concerns.
C. The filing fee for the petition to change to a PD-Planned
Development District classification shall be the same as for any other
petition for a zoning district classification change as provided in Section
176.39(8) of this chapter.
D. The Council shall refer the petition for PD-Planned Development
District classification and the Preliminary Development Plan to the
Commission for review and recommendation.
E. Commission Review and Approval – The Commission shall review
the request for the zoning district reclassification and make its
recommendation to the Council based upon the broad type of land use
indicated for the Planned Development District requested. If the proposed
rezoning area is ten (10) acres or more, the Commission shall hold a public
hearing upon the request prior to submitting its recommendation to the
Council. The Commission may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing on
any proposed Planned Development prior to making a recommendation.
F. Council Review and Approval – After receiving the Commission’s
recommendation regarding the proposed change to a PD-Planned
Development Zoning District classification, the Council shall hold a public
hearing in accordance with State and local codes. Following the public
hearing, the Council shall consider an ordinance approving, or approving
with conditions, the proposed change to a Planned Development District
classification. The effect of approval of a petition to establish, a Planned
Development District classification shall be equivalent to a moratorium on
development until such time as the required preliminary and final
development plans have been reviewed and approved pursuant to this
section.
10. Filing Procedure – Preliminary Development Plan.
A. A Preliminary Development Plan shall be submitted by the petitioner
either concurrently with or subsequent to the petition for rezoning.
B. The filing fee for a Preliminary Development Plan shall be
determined in the same manner as for a Preliminary Plat as provided in the
Subdivision Ordinance.
C. The Commission shall review and make a recommendation to the
Council on the Preliminary Development Plan in accordance with the
following provisions:
(1) The Commission shall evaluate the Preliminary Development
Plan in terms of conformance with the design standards set forth in
subsection 8 above.
(2) The Commission may conduct a public hearing on any
proposed Preliminary Development Plan prior to making its
recommendation to the Council.
(3) After evaluating the proposed development and holding a
public hearing, if appropriate, the Commission shall consider a
resolution approving, approving with modification, or disapproving
the Preliminary Development Plan.
D. The Preliminary Development Plan shall contain the following:
(1) Narrative – A written statement describing the character of
the development. The statement shall include the following
information:
a. The proposed title of the development and a
description of the land uses planned for the development.
b. The relationship between the proposed development
and the Comprehensive Development Plan for the
Community.
c. The relationship of the development to limiting
conditions such as excessive grade or slope, flood plain, high
water table, woodlands, scenic vistas, water sources, etc.
d. The relationship of the proposed development to
adjoining uses (both existing and projected).
e. The relationship of the proposed development to
existing and projected sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and
other drainage structures, and streets and other transportation
features.
f. An expected schedule of development. If the
development is to be constructed in stages, a description of
the stages of development and identification of the locations
and sequence of stages, density, use, utilities, and public
facilities (including open space, landscaping, and parking) to
be developed in each stage. An identification of estimated
start and completion dates for each stage shall be included.
g. Names and addresses of the owners, developers,
engineers, land surveyors, landscape architects, land planners,
architects, attorneys, or any other professionals associated
with the development.
h. Tabulations of the following information: total land
area, number of buildings, total area covered by buildings,
number of dwelling units, dwelling units per acre, total
common open space area.
(2) Maps and Diagrams – A drawing of the planned development
shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or one inch
equals 50 feet, or such other scale as may be recommended by City
staff. The drawing must show the general location of proposed
streets (public and
private), all buildings and their use, common open space, recreation
facilities, parking and loading areas, service areas, and other
facilities to indicate the character of the proposed development. The
submission may be composed of one or more sheets and drawings
and shall include:
a. All information and specifications required in
submitting a subdivision Preliminary Plat as set forth in
Chapter 175, the Subdivision Regulations, of this Code of
Ordinances.
b. Existing and proposed land uses within or adjacent to
the site.
c. Approximate locations, dimensions, height of existing
and proposed buildings and other structures, including
accessory buildings and structures.
d. The character and approximate density of residential
uses.
e. The approximate amount of interior floor area of
commercial and industrial uses.
f. Location and type of natural conditions within or
adjacent to the tract which may present limitations to
development such as water courses, flood plains, marshes and
wetlands, rock outcrops, wooded areas, isolated preservable
trees one foot or more in diameter, and other significant
features.
g. Map and data, including north point, scale, and date of
preparation.
(3) In conjunction with or following approval of the requested
change in zoning district classification, the Council may review and,
by resolution, approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions, the
Preliminary Development Plan. If the Preliminary Development
Plan is not considered concurrently with the zoning district
classification, a separate public hearing shall be held thereon.
11. Improvements.
A. Before the Final Development Plan is approved and recorded, the
development shall contain the required improvements or have such
improvements assured by the posting of a bond as set forth in this section.
All improvements shall conform to the Standard Specifications as set forth
in this section.
B. Required Plan of Improvements – The following drawings, prepared
by a registered professional engineer in Iowa, shall be submitted by the
owner to the Council prior to the approval of the Final Development Plan:
(1) Sanitary sewer plan and profile.
(2) Storm sewer plan and profile.
(3) Street plan and profile.
(4) Sidewalk location and grades, if varying from City standard
specification.
(5) Water main plan and profile.
(6) Such other engineering plans, profiles, or drawings as may be
stipulated by the Council.
C. The required plans and profiles shall conform to the provisions set
forth in Chapter 175, Subdivision Regulations, of this Code of Ordinances.
D. Permission to construct improvements – Following Council approval
of the plan of improvements and before construction of each improvement,
the owner shall have submitted an application to the City Engineer
requesting permission to construct the improvement. The City Engineer
shall then be notified as set forth under Chapter 175, Subdivision
Regulations, regarding Inspection of Improvements.
E. Required Improvements – The improvements in the Planned
Development shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 175, Subdivision
Regulations, of this Code of Ordinances, unless otherwise approved by the
Council in the Preliminary Development Plan and/or Plan of
Improvements.
F. Guarantees of Performance – If, at the time of the presentation of the
Final Development Plan, the required improvements are not completed or
accepted before the Final
Development Plan is approved, the owner shall enter into a contract with
the City to make such improvements at such time as may be therein stated,
and in accordance with detailed engineering plans and specifications,
contained in the plan of improvements which has been approved by the
City Engineer and Council. The performance of the contract shall be
secured by the filing of a surety bond or cash equal to the cost of the
improvements as estimated by the City Engineer. The owner shall be the
principal on any such surety bond. Although one bond covering all
improvements is anticipated, separate bonds may be submitted and a
contractor may be listed as an additional principal on any such bonds so as
the bond clearly states that the owner and such contractor are jointly and
severally liable on the bonds as obligors and so long as the only obligee on
the bond is the City of Marion. In those cases where none of the lots or
area in the Final Development Plan are improved with structures, the
guarantees of performance provided for in this Section may be waived,
where the only required improvement that has not been installed and
accepted by the City consists of sidewalks. It shall be sufficient if the
owner promises the installation of such sidewalks in accordance with the
terms set out in the Memorandum of Agreement or contract with the City
with respect to improvements and such sidewalks to be completely installed
by a date not later than two years from the date of the approval of the Final
Development Plan. The performance bond guaranteeing the construction of
improvements in the planned development shall be drawn on a standard
form as approved by the City Attorney. If the improvements are not
completed within the time specified, the Council may use the security or
any necessary portion thereof to complete said improvements. The Council
may allow an extension of time for completion of improvements. The
performance bond or certified check shall not be released until the
Maintenance Bonds, as may be required in the specifications, are on file
and the improvements have been satisfactorily completed and accepted by
the City.
12. Filing Procedure – Final Development Plan.
A. Within eighteen (18) months following the approval of the
Preliminary Development Plan, a Final Development Plan shall be
submitted to the City. In its discretion and for good cause, the
Council may extend for six (6) months the period for the filing of the Final
Development Plan upon request of the applicant.
B. The Final Development Plan may be in stages with each stage
reflecting the approved Preliminary Development Plan, provided such stage
conforms to these regulations.
C. Thirty (30) copies of the final Development Plan containing the
information set forth in this section shall be submitted to the Clerk.
D. Filing Fee – The filing fee for a Final Development Plan shall be
$10.00 per acre or fraction thereof, with a minimum fee of $40.00. If a
Final Development Plan is submitted in conjunction with a Final
Subdivision Plat, the applicant shall pay either the Final Development Plan
fee or the Final Plat filing fee, whichever amount is greater. The filing fee
is not refundable.
E. The Final Development Plan shall be submitted to the Commission
which shall review such Plan and make a recommendation to the Council
within a reasonable period of time after receiving the Plan. The
Commission shall evaluate the Final Development Plan in terms of its
conformity with the Preliminary Development Plan and the provisions of
this section and recommend that the Final Development Plan either be
approved, approved with minor modifications or disapproved.
F. If the Final Development Plan contains substantial changes from the
approved Preliminary Development Plan as determined by the Council
upon recommendation of the Commission, then the Final Development
Plan shall not be approved until a revised Preliminary Development Plan
has first been approved in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
section.
G. In no event shall a Final Development Plan be approved without a
revised Preliminary Development Plan if the Final Development Plan
varies from the Preliminary Development Plan as follows:
(1) A material change in the use of the development.
(2) A 10% increase in the overall coverage of structures.
(3) A 10% increase in the density of a residential
development.
(4) A 10% reduction in open space.
(5) A 10% reduction in off-street parking spaces.
(6) A significant change in the location of the street or utility
system.
(7) A reduction in density, coverage or increase in open space
may be permitted by the Zoning Official.
H. After receiving the recommendation of the Commission, the Council
shall approve, approve with minor modifications, or disapprove the Final
Development Plan.
I. All conditions, modifications, documents, and plans required by the
Council must be delineated in the Final Development Plan or agreed to in
writing prior to the Council approval.
J. Final Development Plan Content – The Final Development Plan
shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) All information and specifications required in submitting a
Final Plat, as set forth in Chapter 175, Subdivision Regulations, of
this Code of Ordinances.
(2) An accurate legal metes and bounds description of each
separate unsubdivided area, including common open space.
(3) Location of all buildings and structures to be constructed
within the development.
(4) Tabulations of the following information: total land area,
number of buildings, number of dwelling units, dwelling units per
acre, total common open space area, percentage of total land area
covered by buildings.
(5) All agreements, provisions, easements, or covenants which
govern the use, maintenance, protection, performance, and/or design
of the development and any of its common open area.
K. Recording the Final Development Plan – The approved Final
Development Plan and, when applicable, final plat, and all agreements,
provisions, or restrictive covenants which govern the use, maintenance,
protection, performance and/or design of the development and any of its
common open space shall be recorded
with the County Recorder and evidence of such recording shall be
furnished to the Building Official before any building permits may be
issued for such development. The recording of all Final Development
Plans shall be accompanied by the recording of a restrictive covenant which
shall provide that no lot, tract, parcel or other division of land shall be
subdivided into two or more lots, tracts, or other division of land for the
purpose of sale, transfer, or building development, whether immediate or
future, including the re-subdivision or re-platting of land or lots, except in
conformance with Chapter 175, Subdivision Regulations, of this Code of
Ordinances.
L. Changes in the Final Development Plan – Minor changes from the
Final Development plan in the location and siting of buildings and
structures may be authorized by the Zoning Official if required by
engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final
Development Plan was approved. No change authorized by this section
may cause any of the following:
(1) A change in the use of the development.
(2) An increase in excess of five percent (5%) in the overall
coverage of structures.
(3) An increase in excess of five percent (5%) in the intensity of
use.
(4) A significant change in the location of the street or utility
system.
(5) A reduction in excess of five percent (5%) of approved open
space.
(6) A reduction in excess of five percent (5%) of approved offstreet
parking space.
A reduction in density, coverage, or increase in open space may be
permitted by the Zoning Official. All non-minor changes must be approved
by the Council after receiving a recommendation from the Commission.
Any changes which are approved in the Final Development Plan must be
recorded as amendments in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
section.
13. Open Space. All common open space shall either be conveyed to a
municipal or public corporation, conveyed to a corporation or entity established
for the purpose of benefiting the owners and residents of the planned development,
or retained by the owner or owners with legally binding guarantees, in a form
approved by the City Attorney, that the common open space shall be permanently
preserved and maintained as an open area. All land conveyed to a corporation or
like entity shall be subject to the right of said corporation to impose a legally
enforceable lien for maintenance and improvement for the common space.
14. Subdivision. If the planned development involves the subdivision of land
as governed by Chapter 175 of this Code of Ordinances, no building permits may
be issued until the procedural provisions of said Chapter 175 are satisfied.
15. Conditions and Guarantees. Prior to the approval of any planned
development, the Council may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, design, layout, height, density, construction, maintenance,
aesthetics, operation and other elements of the planned development as deemed
necessary for the protection of the public interest, protection of the adjacent area,
and to secure the compliance with standards set forth in this section. In all cases
in which planned developments are granted, the Council may require such
evidence and guarantees, in addition to the guarantees of performance required
under this section, that the Council may deem necessary as proof that the
conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
16. Failure to Begin Planned Development. If no construction has begun or no
use established in the Planned Development within twenty-four (24) months from
the approval of the Final Development Plan, the approved Final Development Plan
shall lapse and be of no further effect. In its discretion and for good cause, the
Council may extend for additional six month increments, the period of the
beginning of the construction or the establishment of use.
176.35 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.
1. Lot of Record – Establishment of Use. Every structure or group of
structures, and every use or group of uses, shall be located on a lot of record.
2. Lot Frontage and Access. Hereafter, no lot shall be created, nor shall any
principal building be constructed or placed, on any lot or tract of land unless such
lot or tract has frontage on or direct access to a public street or to a private street
which has been specifically approved by the Council for that purpose.
3. Number of Principal Buildings Permitted on a Lot. More than one main
institutional, public or quasi-public, multiple-family, commercial, or industrial
building may be located on a zoning lot, provided that no such buildings or portion
thereof is located outside the buildable area of the lot. Except in Planned
Development and Cluster Development District areas, no more than one detached
single-family building shall be located on a zoning lot, nor shall either such type
of building be located on the same lot with any other principal building.
4. Division of Lot. No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be divided into two
or more lots unless all lots resulting from each such division shall conform with
the applicable regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located
and provided that such division complies with the provisions of Chapter 175.
5. Nonconforming Lots. Where two or more contiguous substandard lots of
record are in common ownership and are of such size as to constitute at least one
conforming lot, such lots or portions thereof may be so jointed, developed and
used for the purpose of forming an effective and conforming lot.
6. Location of Yard. All yards and other open spaces allocated to a building
or group of buildings shall be located on the same lot or lots as such building or
group of buildings.
7. Provision of Open Space. The provision of open space as required in this
chapter shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or property
on which it is located as long as the building is in existence. Such open space,
except for walkways, shall be completely landscaped with such materials as grass,
shrubbery, and trees, and continuously maintained. The storage of motor vehicles
in the required open space areas is specifically prohibited.
8. Permitted Encroachment in Yards.
A. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky except where
accessory buildings are permitted and except for the ordinary projections
from principal buildings of sills, belt courses, cornices, fireplace chimneys,
gutters and downspouts, and ornamental features projecting not to exceed
24 inches.
B. A roof or deck may project into a required side yard, provided that
every part of such structure is unenclosed and is removed at least five feet
from the nearest side lot line.
C. A covered porch or a paved terrace, including a roof, roof extension,
or canopy associated therewith, may project into a front yard for a distance
not exceeding five (5) feet, provided that the sides of such porch or terrace
are unenclosed. A balcony located about the ground floor may project into
a front yard a distance not exceeding five (5) feet, provided that no steps
associated with the balcony are located in the front yard.
D. Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fire-proof outside stairways,
and balconies opening upon fire towers, and the ordinary projections of
chimneys and flues into the rear yard may project not more than five feet
into the rear yard, provided that such projection does not obstruct light and
ventilation.
E. Solar energy collectors and heat storage units to supply the building
may project into the required rear or side yard not to exceed 24 inches, but
shall not project into the required front yard.
F. Accessory buildings and uses shall comply with the provisions set
forth in Section 176.32.
G. Air conditioning units and furnaces to supply the building may
project into the required side yard not to exceed 36 inches, but shall not
project into the required front yard.
9. Exception to Height Limitations. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, the height limitations in this Zoning Ordinance shall not apply to tanks,
water storage facilities, fire towers, cooling towers, ornamental towers and spires,
radio and television towers, antennas, aerials, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, flag
poles or necessary mechanical appurtenances. Buildings that are only to be used
for storage purposes may exceed the maximum number of stories permitted in the
district in which they are located provided no such buildings exceed the height
limit otherwise provided in such district. No tank or liquid storage facilities
exceeding 6 feet in height, except municipal water towers or tanks, shall be
located within 100 feet of a residential district, unless approved by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
10. Corner Visual Clearance. In all zoning districts, except C-2, nothing shall
be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow on a corner lot in such a manner as
to significantly impede vision of drivers or obscuring, physically interfering with
an official control device described as follows: that triangular shaped area
bounded by the street right-of-way lines of a corner lot or tract and a straight-line
joining points on said right-of-way lines that are thirty (30) feet from the point of
intersection of said right-of-way lines. Signs are permitted subject to the provisions
of Section 176.31 of this chapter.
11. Railroad Uses. Existing railroad uses may continue to be operated and
maintained in dwelling and commercial districts, but no new railroad structures other
than usual repair and maintenance items shall be established except when authorized
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
12. Fences and Walls.
A. Fences or walls not exceeding six (6) feet in height may be erected in a
required yard or along the lot line, except as follows:
(1) No opaque fence or wall may be located in a required front yard.
In the context of this section, a rear yard of a double-fronted lot is not
considered a “front yard.”
(2) An opaque fence or wall may be located in a corner side yard or
rear yard of a double-fronted lot in any R zoning district provided such
fence or wall is at least 12 feet from any driveway, alley or back of
street curb.
(3) All solid fences shall comply with the provisions of subsection
10 of this section regarding corner visual clearance.
(4) In the context of this section, “opaque” is defined as a structure
which blocks or otherwise prevents the passage of light through 50% or
more of its surface area.
B. In the C-4, I-1, and I-2 Zoning Districts, fences or walls may be
installed to a height not to exceed 8 feet except when such fence or wall abuts
an A-1, R, O-1, C-1, or C-2 district in which case such fence or wall shall not
exceed a height of 6 feet, except:
(1) In all zoning districts, public or quasi-public buildings and
facilities essential to the physical welfare of an area, such as electrical
distribution substations, pipeline pumping stations, gas regulator
stations, water storage facilities and similar uses may be surrounded by
a fence having a height above grade not more than 12 feet.
(Ord. 01-33 – Nov. 01 Supp.)
C. Fences or walls that are installed on a corner lot shall comply with the
provisions regarding corner visual clearance as described in subsection 10.
D. Fences or walls may be erected in utility easements in accordance with
the provisions of this ordinance, except that no fence or wall may be erected
without the prior approval of the City Engineer and as a condition of that
approval, the City Engineer may require that the applicant acknowledge the rights
of the City as an easement holder and waive any and all damages that might be
otherwise accrued if the City shall need to remove the fence or wall in the
exercise of its rights under the easement.
13. Temporary Buildings and Structures.
A. Temporary buildings, including manufactured/mobile homes, that are used
solely for office or storage purposes in conjunction with construction work only,
may be permitted in any zoning district during the period that the construction
work is in progress, but such temporary buildings shall be removed upon
completion of the construction work.
B. Temporary offices, both incidental and necessary for the sale or rental of
real property within a residential subdivision or residential development in which
such offices are located, may be permitted in any zoning district until such time as
the real property has been sold or rented.
14. Tents. No tent or similar structure shall be erected, used, or maintained for
human residence, except such small tents that are used for temporary recreational
purposes. Erection, use, and maintenance of tents and similar structures for nonresidential
uses shall be subject to the fire prevention and other applicable regulations of
the City.
15. Setbacks for Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage lots shall have front yards
on both street frontages. Front yard requirements and restrictions included in the district
regulations within which the lot is located shall apply on both frontages.
16. Sediment Control Regulations.
A. Intent. It is the intent of these regulations to regulate sediment control
and/or soil loss in a form as equally effective as the rules adopted by the Linn
County Soil Conservation District in preventing erosion from exceeding
established soil loss limits. For this reason, the sediment control/soil loss
regulations set forth hereunder contain the same provisions as the Soil Loss Limit
Regulations as officially adopted by the Linn County Soil Conservation District.
B. Agricultural and Horticultural Lands – Maximum rates of soil erosion for
those lands will be the average annual soil loss expressed in tons per acre per year
for each soil type as established by the Linn County Soil Conservation District.
C. Non-Agricultural Lands, Including Public Parks, Urban Lands,
Industrial Parks, Airports, Public and Private Recreation Lands, Roads, Streets,
Highways and Other Public Lands – Maximum rate of soil erosion permitted on
such lands will be 5 tons per acre per year leaving the site.
D. Construction sites, including housing developments, shopping centers,
industrial park developments, commercial building sites, highways, drainage
channels, floodways, water impoundment structures, and other similar projects –
Maximum rate of soil erosion permitted on such lands will be 5 tons per acre per
year leaving the site.
17. Barbed Wire. Barbed wire is permitted to be used only under the following
circumstances:
A. In the C-4, I-1 and I-2 Districts, barbed wire may be used only in
connection with non-residential uses. In these zoning districts, barbed wire may
only be used when installed atop a fence or wall having a height above grade of at
least six (6) feet.
B. In the A-1 District, barbed wire may be used only in connection with
general agricultural activities.
C. In zoning districts other than C-4, I-1, or I-2; or in the A-1 zoning district
for uses other than general agricultural activities, barbed wire may only be
installed upon specific approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
D. When barbed wire is installed atop a fence or wall, the height of that fence
or wall shall be determined as the distance between grade and the uppermost
strand of barbed wire. The height regulations for fences and walls established in
subsection 12(B) of this section shall govern the maximum height of such fences
and walls.
E. Installation of barbed wire must meet the following standards:
(1) Barbed wire shall not be located within seven (7) feet of any
property zoned R, Residential, O-1, Office/Transitional, C-1,
Neighborhood Commercial or C-2, Central Business District Commercial.
(2) Barbed wire shall not be installed within 25 feet of an exterior wall
of any building used for residential, religious, or recreational purposes.
(3) The barbed wire shall have barbs spaced no closer than at threeinch
(3") intervals.
(4) The barbed wire fence or wall shall have not more than four (4)
strands, except for barbed wire fencing used for agricultural activities.
F. In all zoning districts, quasi-public buildings and facilities essential to the
physical welfare of an area, such as electrical distribution substations, pipeline
pumping stations, gas regulator stations, water storage facilities, or similar uses,
fences may have one foot of barbed wire atop a fence having a minimum height
of 8 feet above grade, with barbs tipped inward or outward.
(Ord. 01-33 – Nov. 01 Supp.)
18. Private Light Poles. Private light poles (that is, light poles not regulated
under the utility franchises granted by the City) may be located in the required
front or corner side yards provided such poles be located at least 12 feet from the
back of the curb. Poles may be located in the proposed right-of-way of major
streets provided that the owner and lessee (if any) acknowledge and sign an
agreement similar in form to that required for locating signs in proposed rights-ofway
of major streets as set forth in Section 176.38 of this chapter. Under no
circumstances may poles be located in the public right-of-way without the express
authorization of the Council.
19. Single-Family Detached Dwellings. In all zoning districts permitting
single-family detached dwellings, the following standards shall apply to all singlefamily
detached dwellings:
A. The main body shall have a minimum dimension of not less than 22
feet.
B. There shall be a continuous and complete perimeter foundation of
the main body.
C. The main structure shall be permanently affixed to the foundation.
D. All hitches, wheels, axles, and any types of other towing devices
shall be permanently removed.
E. All manufactured homes, as defined by the Code of Iowa, shall be
converted to real estate and assessed as real property in accordance with the
Code of Iowa, if located outside a manufactured/mobile home community
and must also comply with standards of Section 151.30 of this Code of
Ordinances.
F. A manufactured home must be constructed in accordance with the
National Manufactured Housing construction and Safety Standards Act and
must have displayed an appropriate certification label issued by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and must not have
been altered in violation of applicable codes. If a structure lacks such
certification, it must conform to the State Building Code.
G. All structures must conform to the site and structure requirements
and other provisions applicable to the zoning district in which such
structure is located.
H. All structures are subject to the inspections required of any dwelling
unit and lot, including but not limited to zoning, foundation, sidewalk,
drainage, utility connections, and similar items. The fees pertaining to
relevant plan reviews and inspections shall also apply.
I. In the context of this chapter, the dimensions of a structure shall be
measured at the building line and not at the foundation line.
20. Family Homes, Group Homes and Rehabilitation Houses.
A. Family homes shall be considered as principal permitted uses in the
A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-6A, O-1, C-1 and C-2 districts.
B. Group homes shall be considered as principal permitted uses in the
R-5, R-6, R-6A, O-1, C-1 and C-2 districts. Group homes shall be
considered as conditional uses in the A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts.
C. Rehabilitation houses shall be considered as conditional uses in the
R-6, R-6A, O-1, C-1 and C-2 districts.
D. There shall be a minimum separation of 300 feet between a family
home, group home or rehabilitation house and any other family home,
group home and/or rehabilitation house. The distance separation shall be
measured from lot line to lot line.
21. “Residential sales” are defined as the sale from a lot or parcel on which a
residence is located. Residential sale shall include the commonly referred to terms
“garage sale”, “porch sale”, “rummage sale”, “basement sale”, “attic sale”, “yard
sale” and “neighborhood sale”.
A. No personal property shall be offered for sale or sold at any
residential sale unless it is owned by the resident, the resident’s immediate
family or adjoining residents within one (1) block of the principal resident.
B. A residential sale shall be limited to a term of seventy-two hours (3
days).
C. No more than two (2) residential sales shall be held in any calendar
year per lot.
D. Signs related to residential sales shall be regulated by Section 176.31
– 5F of the Marion Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 05-06 – May 05 Supp.)
176.36 ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
1. Organization. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established, which
shall consist of five regular members and two alternates. The word "Board" when
used in this section shall mean the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Membership of
the Board shall be as follows:
A. Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Council to serve respectively for the following terms one
for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years, and
one for five years. The successor to each member so appointed shall serve a
term of five years.
B. Alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by the Council to serve terms of five years.
C. Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council
for any unexpired term.
D. Members of the Board may be removed by the Mayor, with consent
of the Council, for cause after written charges have been filed and after a
public hearing has been held.
E. One of the members of the board shall be designated by the Mayor,
with the consent of the Council, as Chairperson of the Board and shall hold
office as Chairperson until a successor Chairperson is appointed.
F. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance and the Code of Iowa.
G. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson
and at such other times as the Board may determine.
H. The Chairperson, or in his/her absence, the acting Chairperson, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
I. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. Any person
may appear and testify at a hearing either in person or by duly authorized
agent or attorney.
J. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact. Findings of fact and the reasons for approving or
denying each question before the Board shall be included in the minutes.
Any limitations or conditions imposed on any relief granted or work or use
authorized, shall be specifically set forth.
K. A copy of every rule or regulation, order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Board shall be filed immediately in the office of the
Board and shall be a public record.
The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse
any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Official or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass
under the Zoning Ordinance, or to affect any variance in such ordinance.
2. Appeals to the Board. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person
aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by
any decision of the Zoning Official. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable
time, as may be provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the Zoning
Official and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds of such
appeal. The Zoning Official shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
A. Any person making application to the Board shall at the time of
application, pay a filing fee. The amount of the filing fees for various types
of appeals and approval requests shall be set by City Council resolution.
Said filing fees are not refundable.
B. The Board shall make no finding except to a specific case and after a
public hearing conducted by the Board.
C. Effect of Appeal - An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Official certifies to the Board
after the notice of appeal has been filed that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would in the opinion of the Zoning Official cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed except by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or
by a court of record in application on notice to the Zoning Official and on
due cause shown.
3. Notice of Hearing.
A. Notice of time and place of public hearings to be conducted by the
Board shall be published in a Linn County publication of general
circulation in the City, in accordance with Section 362.3 of the Code of
Iowa, The notice shall contain the address or location of the property for
which the request is being made, legal description of the property in
question, and a brief description of the nature of the request.
B. Each applicant requesting an appeal, variance, exception, or
conditional use from the Board shall secure notification signs from the
Clerk which shall be conspicuously posted by the applicant on the property
for which application has been made. The signs shall be placed so that they
may be seen from an adjoining street. In cases of double-fronted or corner
lots, signs shall be posted on both sides of the lot. The signs shall include
the date, time, and place of the public hearing and brief description of the
request.
(1) Notification signs shall be posted at least four (4) days prior
to the public hearing date and shall remain posted until the Board
has made a determination on the request.
(2) If the notification signs are not posted in accordance with the
preceding requirements, no action shall be taken on the application
by the Board.
4. Powers. The Board shall have the following powers:
A. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Official
in the enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance.
B. To hear and decide by granting or denying an exception to this
Zoning Ordinance in the following instances:
(1) A request for the extension of a district where the boundary
line of a district divides a lot of record held in single ownership.
(2) Interpret the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in such a
way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the official Zoning
District Map where the street layout actually existing on the ground
varies from the street layout as shown on the map.
(3) Permit the erection and use of a building or the use of
premises for railroads or public utility purposes.
(4) Permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which
has been damaged by fire, explosion, or act of God, to the extent of
more than 65% of its fair market value, where the Board finds some
compelling necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming
use and the Board further finds that the public interest will best be
served by permitting a continuance of the nonconforming use.
(5) Waive or reduce the parking, loading, or screening
requirements in any of the zoning districts whenever the character or
use of the building is such as to make unnecessary the full provisions
of such requirements, or where such regulations would impose an
unreasonable hardship on the lot as contrasted with merely granting
an advantage or convenience.
(6) Permit uses not specifically designated as principal permitted
uses in a zoning district, provided that the Board determines that such
use is similar and compatible to uses allowed as principal permitted
uses in that district.
C. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases variances from the terms of
the Zoning Ordinance when the following are made to appear by the property
owner:
(1) That a strict application of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance
will impose upon the property owner unusual and practical difficulties
or particular hardship.
(2) That the variance granted is in harmony with the general
purpose, intent, and spirit of the Zoning Ordinance.
(3) That the Board determines that the granting of the requested
variance will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant but
will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual hardship or difficulty so
great as to warrant a deviation from the Zoning Ordinance.
(4) That surrounding property will be protected.
(5) That by granting the request for a variance, substantial justice
will be done.
D. To authorize the granting of conditional uses as provided in subsection
6 of this section.
E. To authorize the granting or denying of a special use permit for
functional families to reside in excess of the permitted limit for unrelated
persons residing together in a single dwelling in any district that permits
residential uses, subject to the following:
(1) That the proposed functional family must function as a single
housekeeping unit by living, cooking and eating together; or,
(2) That the proposed functional family must be in the nature of
permanent living arrangement and stable rather than a transient living
arrangement, except that a non-permanent/transient living arrangement
is not required when handicapped persons function as a single
housekeeping unit or in the case of a group exclusively made up of
clerics, but in both cases not in a number that is in excess of the limit
on group home occupancy in the applicable zoning district; or,
(3) That the proposed functional family consists of a group headed
by one or two persons caring for a number of unrelated children in a
manner substantially similar to a biologically unitary family; or,
(4) That the proposed functional family consists of a group of not
more than four persons each of which is a recipient of Social Security
benefits.
5. Standards for Review - General. In considering all requests for appeals,
variances, exceptions, or conditional uses, the Board, before making any decision in a
specific case, shall first determine:
A. That the granting of a request will not permit any use which is not
allowed as a permitted use, or as a conditional use except in accordance with
the provisions set forth in this section, in the zoning district in which a
property is located, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited from the
district.
B. That it will not materially diminish or impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property.
C. That it will not materially increase the congestion in public streets.
D. That it will not materially increase the danger of fire or of the public
safety.
E. That it will not unreasonably diminish or impair established property
values within the surrounding area.
F. That it will not in any other respect materially diminish or impair the
public health, comfort, safety, morals, or welfare of the inhabitants of the City.
6. Conditional Use.
A. Intent. Conditional uses are those uses having certain special or unique
characteristics which require a careful review of their location, design,
configuration, and impacts to determine the desirability of permitting their
establishment on any given site. They are uses which may or may not be
appropriate in a particular location depending upon consideration in each case
of the public need, public benefit, local impact, and specific site plan of the
proposed conditional use, all within the context of the intent and purpose of
this ordinance and the Comprehensive Community Plan.
B. Application for Conditional Use - An application for a conditional use
shall be filed with the Zoning Official and shall contain such information and
documentation as the Board, by rule, may require Such application shall in all
instances contain at least the following documents and information:
(1) Petition - A written petition containing the following
information:
a. Applicant's name and address and his/her legal interest in
the subject property.
b. The titleholder's name and address, if different than the
applicant.
c. Street address or common description and complete legal
description of the property.
d. The zoning district classification of the property.
e. A general description of the proposed conditional use.
(2) Vicinity Sketch Map - A map of appropriate scale covering
sufficient adjoining property to clearly indicate nearby street patterns,
property lines, and other significant features which will have a bearing
upon the request. This map shall also identify existing zoning districts
within 600 feet of the subject property.
(3) Site Development Plan - A site plan at an appropriate scale
containing the following:
a. Existing and proposed lot lines and property dimensions.
b. Location of such physical site conditions as water
courses, flood plains, and unique natural features.
c. The location and dimensions of existing and proposed
principal and accessory buildings and structures on site,
including identity of building types by usage, floor area, and
number of units (if for residential purposes).
d. The location and dimensions of driveways, access points,
off-street parking and loading areas, walkways, and screening
areas.
e. Such other information as may be requested by the Board
to perform their review of the request.
C. Application Review Procedure:
(1) The Zoning Official shall forward copies of the conditional use
application to the Board and Commission.
(2) Prior to the Board's scheduled public hearing on the application,
the Commission shall review such application and return a written
report of their findings and recommendations to the Board. In their
review, the Commission shall consider each of the standards for review
of conditional use requests as set forth in this section.
(3) After receiving the report from the Commission, and after
conducting the public hearing on the application, the Board shall
consider the application and shall either grant the application for
conditional use, grant it subject to conditions or modifications, or deny
the application. In their view, the Board shall consider each of the
standards for review of conditional use requests as set forth in this
section.
D. Conditions Imposed - The Board may impose such conditions,
including restrictions and safeguards, upon the proposed conditional use as
considered necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other
properties in the vicinity or upon public facilities and services. Such conditions
shall include a requirement that development be in accord with a site
development plan approved by the Board. Such· conditions shall be expressly
set forth in the approval of the conditional use. Violations of such conditions
shall be a violation of this chapter.
E. Standards for Review of Conditional Use Requests - In addition to the
standards for review applicable to all requests under consideration by the
Board, approval of a conditional use shall be granted only if the Board first
determines:
(1) That the conditional use applied for is provided in the zoning
district within which the property is located.
(2) That the proposed use and development will be in accord with
the intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance and the Comprehensive
Community Plan.
(3) That the proposed use and development will not have a
substantial adverse effect upon adjacent property; the character of the
neighborhood; traffic conditions; parking; utility and service facilities;
and other factors affecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
(4) That the proposed development or use will be located, designed,
constructed, and operated in such a manner that it will be compatible
with the immediate neighborhood and will not interfere with the
orderly use, development and improvement of surrounding property.
(5) That adequate measures have been or will be taken to assure
adequate access designed to minimize traffic congestion and to assure
adequate service by essential public services and facilities including
utilities, storm water drainage, and similar facilities.
F. Conformance to Other Regulations - Conditional uses shall in all
respects conform to the applicable regulations of the zoning district in which
they are located and all other applicable regulations provided in this chapter.
G. Revisions to Approved Site Development Plans:
(1) Minor changes from the approved Site Development Plan in the
location and siting of buildings and structures may be authorized by the
Zoning Official if required by engineering or other circumstances not
foreseen at the time the Site Development Plan was approved. No
change authorized by this section may cause any of the following:
a. A change in the use of the development.
b. A 10% increase in the overall coverage of structures.
c. A change in the location of any building or structure by
more than ten feet.
d. An increase in the intensity of use.
e. A reduction in approved open space.
f. A reduction in approved off-street parking spaces.
(2) All proposed revisions not classified as minor shall be submitted
for approval in accordance with the provisions set forth in paragraph C
of this subsection.
H. Pre-Existing Uses - Any building or structure, or use of land, in
existence prior to the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance which is
classified as a conditional use under the provisions of such ordinance shall be
considered a lawful conditional use, and may continue without approval of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. However, any expansion or extension of such
pre-existing use, or a change in use to another conditional use, shall be
considered as a conditional use and shall comply with the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance.
7. Relief Less Than Requested. An appeal, variance, exception, or conditional
use different than that requested may be granted when the record supports the
applicant's right to some relief but not to the relief requested.
8. Conditions Imposed. The Board may impose such conditions, including
restrictions and safeguards, upon the property benefited from the appeal, variance,
exception, or conditional use granted as considered necessary to prevent or minimize
adverse effects upon other property in the vicinity or upon public facilities and
services. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the grant of appeal, variance,
exception, or conditional use. Violation of such conditions shall be a violation of this
chapter.
9. Permits And Approvals Still Necessary. The granting of an appeal, variation
exception, or conditional use by the Board shall not necessarily authorize immediate
action. As appropriate and as required by the codes and ordinances of the City and
State, other permits and approvals shall be obtained.
10. Failure To Act. In case an appellant or applicant does not exercise his/her
rights, act, begin construction or operation or occupancy, as the case may be, in
accordance with any appeal variance or permit granted by the Board within six (6)
months after the matter has been acted upon by the Board, such variance or permit
shall become null and void.
11. Appeals. Decisions of the Board may be appealed to the District Court within
thirty (30) days by anyone objecting the decision.
(Ord. 15-19 – Aug. 15 Supp.)
176.37 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
1. Zoning Official. The Zoning Official, and such deputies or assistants that have
been or shall be duly appointed, shall have the responsibility and authority to enforce
this chapter.
A. The Zoning Official shall issue all building permits and certificates of
occupancy and make and maintain records thereof.
B. The Zoning Official shall conduct inspections of buildings, structures,
and uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter.
C. The Zoning Official shall forward to the Commission copies of all
applications for conditional uses that are filed with his/her office.
D. The Zoning Official shall forward to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
applications for appeals, variances, conditional uses, and other matters on
which the Board is required to pass under this chapter.
2. Certificates of Occupancy.
A. General:
(1) No building or addition thereto constructed, reconstructed, or
structurally altered after the effective date of this ordinance shall be
occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
Zoning Official stating that the building and use comply with all the
provisions of this chapter applicable to the building, premises, or use.
(2) No land vacant on the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance
shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the Zoning Official stating that the use complies with all the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance applicable to the use or premises.
B. Buildings and Additions:
(1) Every application for a building permit shall be deemed to be an
application for a certificate of occupancy.
(2) A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Zoning Official
within three (3) days after the lawful construction, reconstruction, or
structural alteration of a building, addition, or other improvement has
been completed and the premises inspected and certified by the Zoning
Official to be in conformity with this ordinance and the plans and
specifications upon which the building permit was based.
(3) If the Zoning Official determines that a certificate of occupancy
cannot be issued, the Zoning Official shall give written notice to the
applicant stating the reasons why such certificate cannot be issued.
Such written notice shall be given to the applicant not later than
fourteen (14) days after the Zoning Official is notified, in writing, that
the building and premises are ready for occupancy.
C. Vacant Land:
(1) Application for a certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant
land or change in the use of land as herein provided shall be made to
the Zoning Official before any such land shall be occupied or used.
(2) A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Zoning Official
within ten (10) days after the application has been made, provided such
use is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) If the Zoning Official determines that a certificate of occupancy
cannot be issued, the Building Official shall give written notice to the
applicant stating the reasons why such certificate cannot be issued.
Such written notice shall be given to the applicant not later than
fourteen (14) days after the applicant has applied for, in writing, such
certificate.
D. Temporary Certificates of Occupancy.
(1) Pending the issuance of a regular certificate of occupancy a
temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued to be valid for a
period not to exceed six (6) months from the date of issuance and to
permit partial occupancy of the premises during completion of the
construction.
(2) Such temporary certificates of occupancy shall not be construed
as in any way altering the respective rights, duties, or obligations of any
other matter covered by this chapter.
(3) Such temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be issued
except under such restrictions and provisions as will adequately insure
the safety of the occupants.
3. Site Plans.
A. General – Except for single-family residential uses, every application
for a building permit or a certificate of occupancy shall be accompanied by a
site plan.
B. Contents – The site plan shall be drawn to scale and fully dimensioned
and contain the following information:
(1) The actual dimensions of the lot or tract to be built upon.
(2) The location, size, and dimensions of existing buildings or
structures on the lot or tract to be built upon.
(3) The location, size, and dimensions of the building(s) or
structure(s) to be erected.
(4) The location, size, and quantity of off-street parking and loading
spaces.
(5) The location of existing and proposed drives, aisles, access
points, and sidewalks.
(6) The location and size of screening, landscaping, and open space
if required in the zoning district in which the property is located.
(7) The location of any signs.
(8) Such other information as may be required by the Building
Official to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
C. Review – The Zoning Official may submit a copy of the site plan to
other City departments for their review, evaluation and recommendations prior
to issuing a building permit or certificate of occupancy.
4. Inspection and Enforcement.
A. General – In furtherance of the enforcement of this chapter, the Zoning
Official shall undertake such regular and continuing programs of inspection of
work approved and underway and of existing structures and uses as may be
feasible and proper within the limits of staff and funds.
B. Complaints – The Zoning Official shall receive from any person
complaints alleging, with particularity, violation of this ordinance and, when
appropriate, shall cause such investigations and inspections as may be
warranted by such complaints to be made.
C. Violations – The Zoning Official shall, upon determination of any
violation of this chapter, notify in writing the person responsible for such
violation. Such written notification of violation shall indicate the nature of the
violation and order the action necessary to correct it and specifically shall
order one or more of the following actions:
(1) The discontinuance of any illegal use of land, buildings, or
structures.
(2) Order removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions, or
alterations.
(3) Order discontinuance of illegal work being done.
(4) Take any other action authorized by this ordinance to insure
compliance with, or to prevent violation of its provisions, and in
particular shall, where necessary or appropriate, recommend to the City
Attorney the institution of legal or equitable actions that may be
required for the enforcement of this chapter.
D. Relief – Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prevent any
person entitled to relief in law or equity by reason of a violation of the
provisions of this chapter from bringing an appropriate action to secure such
relief.
5. Appeals of Decisions. Any person affected by a decision of the Zoning
Official in his/her enforcement of this chapter may appeal said decision to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment according to the procedures contained in Section 176.36 herein.
176.38 (Repealed by Ord. 14-04 – May 14 Supp.)
176.39 FLOOD HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS.
1. Intent. It is the intent of this section to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare by minimizing flood losses within the City with provisions
designed to:
A. Reserve sufficient flood plain area for the conveyance of flood flows
so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
B. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood
heights or velocities.
C. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public utilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction or substantial improvement.
D. Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
E. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood
Insurance Program.
2. Findings of Fact.
A. The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation
which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, and impairment of the
tax base; all of which adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare
of the community.
B. These losses, hazards and related adverse effects are caused by
occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages which
create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or
otherwise protected from flood and the cumulative effective of flood plain
construction on flood flows which causes increases in flood heights and
flood water velocities.
C. This section relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing
flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the
Department of Natural Resources.
3. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this section its most reasonable application.
A. “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has its
floor or lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see
“lowest floor.”
B. “Development” means any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations.
C. “Factory-built home” means any structure designed for residential
use which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or
assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and
installation on a building site. For the purpose of this section, factory-built
homes include mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular homes and
also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed
on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
D. “Factory-built home park” means a parcel or contiguous parcels of
land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.
E. “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow
of streams or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters
from any source.
F. “Flood elevation” means the elevation floodwaters would reach at a
particular site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the
100-year flood elevation is the elevation of floodwaters related to the
occurrence of the 100-year flood.
G. “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map
prepared as part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance
Study which delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
H. “Flood Insurance Study” means a study initiated, funded and
published by the Federal Insurance Administration for the purpose of
evaluating in detail the existence and severity of flood hazards; providing
the City with necessary information for adopting a flood plain management
program; and establishing actuarial flood insurance rates.
I. “Flood plain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water as a result of a flood.
J. “Flood plain management” means an overall program of corrective
and preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the
wise use of flood plains, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, floodproofing and flood plain
management regulations.
K. “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including
utility and sanitary facilities which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to
such structures.
L. “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those
portions of the flood plains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably
required to carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that
confinement of flood flows to the floodway area will not result in
substantially higher flood levels and flow velocities.
M. “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the flood plain, other
than the floodway, which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed
without causing substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.
N. “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building including a basement except when all the following criteria are
met:
(1) The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the
provisions of Section 176.39(12)(D)(1); and
(2) The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.)
and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building
access, parking or storage; and
(3) Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater,
furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located
at least one foot above the 100-year flood level; and
(4) The enclosed area is not a “basement” as defined in this
section.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria (1), (2), (3) and (4)
above, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that
does not satisfy the criteria above.
O. “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks)
means those structures or development for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map,
July 5, 1982.
P. “One Hundred (100) Year Flood” means a flood, the magnitude of
which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year or which, on the average, will be equaled or exceeded at least
once every one hundred (100) years.
Q. “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
R. “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
S. “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories,
sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks and other similar uses.
T. “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage
condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
U. “Substantial improvement” means:
(1) Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value
of the structure either (i) before the “start of construction” of the
improvement, or (ii) if the structure has been “substantially damaged”
and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not,
however, include any project for improvement of a structure to comply
with existing State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe conditions for the existing
use. The term also does not include any alteration of an “historic
structure,” provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as an “historic structure.”
(2) Any addition which increases the original floor area of a
building by twenty-five percent (25%) or more. All additions
constructed after the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map,
shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the
total increase in original floor space would exceed twenty-five
percent.
4. Lands to Which Section Applies. The provisions of this section shall apply
to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map to be within the 100-year flood boundaries. The Floodplain (Overlay)
District boundaries shall be as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM)
for Linn County and Incorporated Areas, City of Marion, Panels 19113C0295D,
0303D, 0304D, 0308D, 0311D, 0312D, 0313D, 0314D, 0316D, 0318D and
0320D, dated April 5, 2010, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be
the Official Floodplain Insurance Rate Map. The flood profiles and all
explanatory material contained with the Flood Insurance Study and the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps are also hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this section.
(Ord. 10-04 – May 10 Supp.)
5. Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries. The boundaries of the flood
plain and floodway districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the
Official Flood Plain Zoning Map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of the boundaries as shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map, the
City Engineer shall make the necessary interpretation, subject to appeal as set
forth in subsection 20 of this section. The person contesting the location of the
district boundary shall be given two reasonable opportunities to present his or her
case and submit technical evidence.
6. Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure
shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations which
apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this section.
7. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this section to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this section imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
section shall prevail. Any ordinances inconsistent with this section are hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
8. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
section shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed
in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other powers granted by State statutes.
9. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on
rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes,
such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This section does not
imply that areas outside the flood plain districts will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of the City or any
officer or employee thereof for such flood damages that result from reliance on
this section or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
10. Establishment of Flood Plain Zoning Districts. The flood plain areas within
the jurisdiction of this section are classified into the following districts:
A. Floodway (Overlay) District – The Floodway District shall be
consistent with the boundaries of the floodway as shown on the Official
Flood Plain Zoning Map.
B. Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District - The Floodway Fringe District
shall be those areas shown as floodway fringe on the Official Flood Plain
Zoning Map.
C. General Flood Plain (Overlay) District – The General Flood Plain
District shall be those areas shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map
as being within the approximate 100 year flood boundary.
D. Shallow Flooding (Overlay) District – The Shallow Flooding
District shall be those areas shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map
as being within the 100 year flood boundary and identified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map as AO or AH zones.
11. Floodway (Overlay) District - FW.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the
Floodway District to the extent they are not prohibited by the underlying
zoning district or any other ordinance and provided they do not include
placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstruction, the
storage of material or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse.
(1) Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, forestry, sod
farming, and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Industrial and commercial accessory uses such as loading
areas, parking areas, airport landing strips.
(3) Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses,
tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature
preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target
ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and
horseback riding trails.
(4) Accessory residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking
areas and play areas.
(5) Such other open-space uses similar in nature to the above
uses.
B. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses which involve
structures (temporary or permanent), fill, storage of materials or equipment
are permitted in the Floodway District only when authorized by the Board
of Adjustment as provided for in subsection 20. Such uses must also meet
the applicable provisions of the Floodway District Performance Standards.
(1) Uses or structures accessory to open-space uses.
(2) Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement
enterprises.
(3) New and used car lots, signs, and billboards.
(4) Extraction of sand, gravel, and other materials.
(5) Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, and wharves.
(6) Utility transmission lines and underground pipelines.
(7) Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as principal
permitted or conditional uses in this district.
C. Performance Standards. All Floodway District uses allowed as a
permitted or conditional use shall meet the following standards:
(1) No use shall be permitted in the Floodway District that would
result in any increase in the 100-year flood level. Consideration of
the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon
the assumption that an equal degree of development would be
allowed for similarly situated lands.
(2) All uses within the Floodway District shall:
a. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
b. Use construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.
c. Use construction materials and utility equipment that
are resistant to flood damage.
(3) No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel
or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or
any other facility or system.
(4) Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if
permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the
Floodway Fringe District and shall be constructed or aligned to
present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
(5) Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage
potential and shall not be for human habitation.
(6) Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant,
flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited. Storage of other material may be allowed if readily
removable from the Floodway District within the time available after
flood warning.
(7) Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and
modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying
capability within the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such
alterations or relocations must be approved by the Department of
Natural Resources.
(8) Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some
beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount
necessary.
(9) Pipeline stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and
banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to
channel degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood
flows.
12. Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District - FF. All uses within the Floodway
Fringe District shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by the
underlying zoning district or any other ordinance and provided they meet
applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe District. All uses must
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and shall meet the
following applicable performance standards.
A. All structures shall be:
(1) Adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure.
(2) Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(3) Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
B. Residential Buildings. All new or substantially improved residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a
minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level. Construction shall be
upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot
above the 100-year flood level and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet
beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of
elevating (such as piers) may be allowed, subject to favorable consideration
by the Board of Adjustment, where existing topography, street grades, or
other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used
must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various
forces and hazards
associated with flooding. All new residential structures shall be provided
with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during
the 100-year flood.
C. Nonresidential Buildings. All new or substantially improved nonresidential
buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level, or together
with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level.
When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the
State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate
to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces
and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that the structure,
below the 100-year flood level, is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification
indicating the specific elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical
Datum) to which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the
City Engineer.
D. All new and substantially improved structures.
(1) Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor” (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade.
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(2) New and substantially improved structures must be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
(3) New and substantially improved structures must be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
E. Factory-built homes shall meet the following standards:
(1) Factory-built homes, including those placed in an existing
factory-built home park or subdivision, shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(2) Factory-built homes, including those placed in existing
factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a
minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level.
F. Utility and Sanitary Systems.
(1) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located or designed to
avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
(2) All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into
the system as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters.
Wastewater treatment facilities shall be provided with a level of
flood protection equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year
flood elevation.
(3) New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
Water supply treatment facilities shall be provided with a level of
protection equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood
elevation.
(4) Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and
the risk associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
G. Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or
injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a
minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level. Other material and
equipment must either be similarly elevated or (i) not be subject to major flood
damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to flood waters or (ii) be
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
H. Flood control structural works such as levees, flood-walls, etc. shall
provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a minimum of 3
feet of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage. In
addition, structural flood control works shall be approved by the Department
of Natural Resources.
I. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or
floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or other drainage
facility or system.
J. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions)
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision lots intended for residential
development shall provide all lots with a means of vehicular access that will
remain above the flood level during occurrence of the 100 year flood.
(1) Development associated with subdivision proposals (including
the installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable standards of
this section.
(2) Proposals for subdivisions greater than five (5) acres or fifty
(50) lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-year flood elevation data
for those areas located within the Floodplain (Overlay) District.
(Ord. 10-04 – May 10 Supp.)
K. The exemption of detached garages, sheds and similar structures from
the 100-year flood elevation requirements may result in increased premium
rates for insurance coverage of the structure and contents, however, said
detached garages, sheds and similar accessory type structures are exempt from
the 100-year flood elevation requirements when:
(1) The structure shall not be used for human habitation.
(2) The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential.
(3) The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
(4) Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which
may result in damage to other structures.
(5) The service facilities of the structures, such as electrical and
heating equipment, shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot
above the 100-year flood level.
L. Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the
requirements of subsection 12 E (Factory-built homes) of this section
regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when the following
criteria are satisfied:
(1) The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than
180 consecutive days; and
(2) The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.
Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180
consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy the
requirements of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built
homes.
(Ord. 10-04 – May 10 Supp.)
13. General Flood Plain (Overlay) District - FP.
A. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the
General Flood Plain District to the extent they are not prohibited by the
underlying zoning district or any other ordinance and provided they do not
include placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions;
the storage of materials or equipment; excavation or alteration of a
watercourse.
(1) Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas,
and airport landing strips.
(3) Private and public recreation uses such as golf courses, tennis
courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching
ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game
farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet
ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
(4) Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play
areas.
B. Conditional Uses. Any use which involves placement of structures,
factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions; the storage of materials or
equipment; excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be allowed only
upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the Board of Adjustment as
provided for in subsection 20. In addition, all such conditional uses shall be
reviewed by the Department of Natural Resources to determine (i) whether the
land involved is either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe
and (ii) the 100-year flood level. The applicant shall be responsible for
providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical
information to make the determination as to whether the land is in the
floodway or floodway fringe.
C. Performance Standards.
(1) All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the
floodway as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall
meet the applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway
(Overlay) District.
(2) All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the
floodway fringe as determined by the Department of Natural Resources
shall meet the applicable standards of the Floodway Fringe (Overlay)
District.
14. Shallow Flooding (Overlay) District - SF. All uses within the Shallow
Flooding District shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by the
underlying zoning district or any other ordinance and provided they meet the
applicable performance standards of the Shallow Flooding District. The performance
standards of the Shallow Flooding District shall be the same as the performance
standards for the Floodway Fringe District with the following exceptions:
A. In shallow flooding areas designated as an AO Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection elevation
shall be equal to the number of feet as specified on the Rate Map above the
crown of the nearest street.
B. In shallow flooding areas designated as an AH Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing/
flood protection elevation shall be equal to the elevation as specified on the
Rate Map.
15. Administration. The City Engineer shall administer and enforce this section.
The duties and responsibilities of the City Engineer include, but are not necessarily
limited to, the following:
A. Review all flood plain development permit applications to insure that
the provisions of this section will be satisfied.
B. Review all flood plain development permit applications to insure that
all necessary permits and approvals have been obtained from Federal, State or
local governmental agencies.
C. Record and maintain a record of (i) the elevation (in relation to
National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor of all new or
substantially improved structures or (ii) the elevation to which new or
substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
D. Notify adjacent communities and/or counties and the Department of
Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Insurance
Administrator.
E. Keep a record of all permits, appeals, variances and such other
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this
section.
F. Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report
concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administrator.
G. Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations or
modifications to the community’s boundaries.
H. Review subdivision proposals to insure such proposals are consistent
with the purpose of this section and advise the Council of potential conflicts.
16. Flood Plain Development Permit Required. A Flood Plain Development
Permit issued by the City Engineer shall be secured prior to initiation of any flood
plain development. Flood plain development shall include any manmade changes to
improved or unimproved real estate, such as buildings or other structures, mining,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or placement of factory-built
homes.
17. Application for Permit. Application for a Flood Plain Development Permit
shall be made on forms supplied by the City Engineer and shall include the following
information:
A. Description of the proposed work to be covered by the permit.
B. Identification of the land on which the proposed work is to be done.
C. Type of use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
D. Elevation of the 100-year flood.
E. Elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a
building is floodproofed.
F. For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
G. Such other information as the City Engineer deems reasonably
necessary for the purpose of this section.
The application for a flood plain development permit shall be accompanied by permit
fee which is nonrefundable. The fee for a flood plain development permit shall be
established by Council resolution to reflect the current costs of issuing the permit and
supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work. (Ord. 08-14 – Aug. 08 Supp.)
18. Action on Permit Application. The City Engineer shall, within a reasonable
time, make a determination as to whether the proposed flood plain development meets
the applicable provisions and standards of this section and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in
writing, as to the specific reasons for disapproval. The City Engineer shall not issue
permits for conditional uses or variances except as directed by the Board of
Adjustment.
19. Construction and Use to be as Provided in Application and Plans. Flood Plain
Development Permits issued on the basis of approved plans and applications
authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans
and applications and no other use, arrangement or construction. Any use,
arrangement, or construction at variance with the approved plans and applications
shall be deemed a violation of this section. Prior to the applicant requesting a final
building inspection for occupancy, the applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor registered in the State of
Iowa, that the finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing or other flood
protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this
section, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.
20. Conditional Uses, Appeals and Variances. The Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall hear and decide all applications for conditional uses, appeals, and variances in
accordance with the provisions of Section 176.36, except as provided in this section.
Variances from the terms of this flood plain section must meet the following
standards:
A. All variances as granted must have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
B. No variance shall be granted for any development within the Floodway
District which would result in any increase in the 100-year flood level.
Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based
upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed
for similarly situated lands.
C. Variances shall only be granted upon (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the
granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public.
D. A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection for buildings
than what is ordinarily required by this section, the applicant shall be notified in
writing by the City Engineer that the issuance of a variance will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage and such construction increases risks to life and property.
21. Factors Upon Which the Decision is Based. In passing upon applications for
conditional uses, variances, or appeals, the Board of Adjustment shall consider the
factors set forth in Section 176.36, and:
A. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
B. The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or downstream
to the injury of others.
C. The proposed water supply and sanitary systems and the ability of these
systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
D. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
E. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
City.
F. The requirements of the facility for a flood plain location.
G. The availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
H. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and projected
development.
I. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
flood plain management program for the area.
J. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
K. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood water expected at the site.
L. Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this section.
22. Conditions Attached to Conditional Uses or Variances. Upon consideration of
the factors listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of a conditional use or variance as it deems necessary to further the purpose
of this section. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
A. Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
B. Limitation on periods of use and operation.
C. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
D. Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees,
and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the Department
of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to
achieving the purpose of this section.
E. Floodproofing measures which are designed consistent with the flood
protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with
the regulatory flood. The Board of Adjustment shall require that the applicant
submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that
the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
23. Nonconforming Uses.
A. A structure or the use of a structure or land which was lawful before the
passage or amendment of this section but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this section may be continued subject to the following
conditions:
(1) If such use is discontinued for twenty-four (24) consecutive
months, any future use of the property shall conform to this section.
The County Assessor shall notify the City Engineer in writing of
instances of non-conforming uses which have been discontinued for 24
months.
(2) Uses or accessory uses thereof which are or become nuisances
shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
(3) If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including flood, to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of
its value prior to destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in
conformity with the provisions of this section.
(4) No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a
way which increases its degree of nonconformity.
(5) No structural alteration, addition or repair to any nonconforming
structure shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of its value at the time of its
becoming a nonconforming use, unless the structure is permanently
changed to a conforming use.
B. Except as provided in paragraph (A)(2) above, any use which has been
permitted as a conditional use or variance shall be considered a conforming
use.
24. Amendments. The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this
section may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed as
provided in the Code of Iowa and this chapter. However, no amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be adopted without the prior approval from the
Department of Natural Resources.
25. Violations. Violations of this section or failure to comply with any of the
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with grants of conditional uses or variances) shall constitute a
misdemeanor and may be punished as provided in Section 1.06 of this Code of
Ordinances. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained prevents the City from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy a violation, including but not limited to actions under
Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 10-04 – May 10 Supp.)
176.40 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS.
1. For use in this section the following terms are defined:
A. “Antenna” means any exterior transmitting or receiving device
mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that
radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or
other communication signals.
B. “FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration.
C. “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.
D. “Height” means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the
distance measured from the finished grade to the highest point on the tower
or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
E. “Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas” means any tower or
antenna existing prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 00-6.†
F. “Public” means the State of Iowa or any of it governmental
subdivisions.
G. “Tower” means any structure that is designed and constructed for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar
communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed
towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term
includes the structure and any support thereto.
2. Applicability.
A. New Towers and Antennas. All new towers or antennas in the City
shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in the following
paragraphs B through E, inclusive.
B. Public Towers or Antennas. Any tower or antenna owned and
operated by the State of Iowa or any of its governmental subdivisions or
used by the State of Iowa or any of its governmental subdivisions, shall be
exempt from this section provided the tower or antenna is for governmental
purposes.
(Ord. 01-25 – Nov. 01 Supp.)
C. Amateur Radio Station Operators/Individual Residential Antennas.
This section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna,
that is seventy (70) feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 00-6 was passed and approved by the Council on March 2, 2000.
federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
an individual residence (dish antenna, etc.). Any tower, or the installation
of any antenna, that is greater than seventy (70) feet in height and is owned
and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is
used exclusively for an individual residence (dish antenna, etc.) shall be
subject to a conditional use review pursuant to Section 176.36(6) of this
chapter.
D. Preexisting Towers or Antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section,
other than the requirements of paragraphs 3(F) and (G) of this section.
E. AM Array. For purposes of implementing this section, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which
functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower.
Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured
from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array.
Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the AM array
by right.
3. General Requirements.
A. Principal or Accessory Use. Antennas and towers may be
considered either principal or accessory uses.
B. Lot Size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including
but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and
other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even
though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such
lot.
C. Inventory of Existing Sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or
tower shall provide to the Zoning Official an inventory of
its existing towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the City or
within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about
the location, height, and design of each tower. The Zoning Official may
share such information with other applicants applying for administrative
approvals or conditional use permits under this section or other
organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the City,
provided, however that the Zoning Official is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are
available or suitable.
D. Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following general
aesthetic requirements.
(1) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral
color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening and landscaping that will blend them into the natural
setting and surrounding buildings.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be
of a neutral color that is identical to or closely compatible with the
color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
E. Lighting. Towers and antennas shall not be artificially lighted,
unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is
required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
F. State or Federal Requirements. All towers and antennas must meet
or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any
other agency of the State or Federal government with the authority to
regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are
changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this
section shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such
revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date
of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is
mandated by the controlling State or Federal agency. Failure to bring
towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna
at the owner’s expense.
G. Building Codes; Safety Standards. Notwithstanding any provisions
of this section, the construction of towers, antennas and supplemental
buildings and equipment shall comply with applicable State and local
building, electrical and mechanical codes, as amended from time to time.
If, upon inspection, the City concludes that such facility fails to comply
with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or
property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility, the
owner shall bring such facility into compliance as set forth in said notice.
H. Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in
the City irrespective of municipal and County jurisdictional boundaries.
I. Not Essential Services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or permitted as
essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
J. Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower, other than
safety or warning signs.
K. Buildings and Support Equipment. Buildings and support
equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the
requirements of subsection 15 of this section.
L. Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan. The City encourages the users of
towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple
towers and/or antenna sites.
M. Co-location. No wireless communications owner, operator, lessee and/
or employee thereof shall act to exclude or attempt to exclude any other
wireless communications provider from using the same building, structure or
location. Wireless communications owners, operators, lessees and/or
employees thereof shall cooperate in good faith to achieve co-location of
wireless telecommunication towers, antennas and equipment with other
wireless communications providers.
N. Certification of Information. Any information of an engineering
nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical,
shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer.
4. Administratively Permitted Uses Generally. The following provisions shall
govern the issuance of administrative approvals for towers and antennas.
A. The Zoning Official may administratively approve the uses listed in
subsection 5 of this section.
B. Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the Zoning
Official providing the information set forth in subsection 8 of this section.
C. The Zoning Official shall review the application for administrative
approval and determine if the proposed use complies with subsections 5
and 8 through 15 of this section, as applicable.
D. If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant may file an
appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to Section 176.36 of
this chapter.
5. List of Administratively Permitted Uses. The following uses may be
permitted by the Zoning Official after conducting an administrative review:
A. Locating a tower, including the placement of additional buildings or
other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower, in the
following Zoning Districts:
I-1, Restricted Industrial
I-1P, Industrial Park
I-2, General Industrial
B. Locating a tower, including the placement of additional buildings or
other supporting equipment in Planned Development Zoning Districts,
provided said facilities are in compliance with an approved Final
Development Plan. If not specifically included on an approved Final
Development Plan, a revised Final Development Plan shall be required
pursuant to subsection 176.34 of this chapter.
C. Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with
the terms of paragraphs (1) and (2) below.
(1) Any antenna which is not attached to a tower, that is an
accessory use to a public structure in any district, or an accessory use
to a commercial or industrial structure located in any district except
those listed in paragraph 7(B) of this section, provided:
a. The antenna is located as far from the edge of the roof
or top of the structure as possible and does not extend more
than fifteen (15) feet above the highest point of the structure
when attached to the roof or top of the structure;
b. The antenna is mounted in a configuration as flush to
the wall as technically possible and does not project above the
wall on which it is attached when mounted to the wall of a
structure;
c. The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and
FAA regulations;
d. The antenna complies with all applicable building
codes; and
e. A license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower
has been approved by the property owner.
(2) Any antenna which is attached to an existing tower provided
a licensed engineer certifies the existing tower can structurally
accommodate the additional antenna.
6. Conditional Uses Generally. Applications for conditional use permits from
the Zoning Board of Adjustment under this subsection shall be subject to the
procedures and requirements of Section 176.36 of this chapter and subsections 3
and 6 through 15 of this section as applicable.
7. List of Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
A. Locating a tower, including the placement of additional buildings or
other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower, in the
following Zoning Districts:
O-2, Office Park
RT-1, Residential/Transitional Use
C-3P, Commercial Park
C-3, General Commercial
C-4, Warehouse Commercial
B. Locating antennas on existing structures consistent with the terms of
subsections (1) through (6) in the following districts:
A-1, Rural Restricted
R-1, Low Density Single-Family Residential
R-2, Medium Density Single-Family Residential
R-3, Two-Family Residential
R-4, Four-Family Residential
R-5, Moderate Density Multiple-Family Residential
R-6, High Density Multiple-Family Residential
R-6A, Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential
R-M, Mobile Home Park
PD-R, Planned Development Residential
O-1, Office-Transitional District
C-1, Neighborhood Commercial
C-2, Central Business District Commercial
(1) The antenna is an accessory use to any commercial,
industrial, or multi-family structure of eight or more dwelling units.
(2) The antenna is located as far from the edge of the roof or top
of the structure as possible and does not extend more than fifteen
(15) feet above the highest point of the structure when attached to
the roof or top of the structure.
(3) The antenna is mounted in a configuration as flush to the wall
as technically possible and does not project above the wall on which
it is attached when mounted to the wall of a structure.
(4) The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations.
(5) The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
(6) A license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been
approved by the property owner.
8. Submittal Requirements. Applicants for a permit to construct a tower
and/or antenna shall submit the following information (as applicable):
A. A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of
the proposed tower and/or antenna, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent
land uses and zoning, Comprehensive Plan land use designation and zoning
of the site and all properties within the applicable separation distances set
forth in subsection 12 (including when adjacent to other municipalities),
adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines,
elevation drawings of the proposed tower and/or antenna and any other
structures, topography, parking, and other information deemed by the
decision maker to be necessary to assess compliance with this section.
B. Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable).
C. The separation distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residentially zoned property.
D. The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory
of existing sites submitted pursuant to subsection 3(C) shall be shown on an
updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of
construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing
tower(s), if known.
E. A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
F. Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method
of camouflage and illumination.
G. A description of compliance with subsections 3 and 8 through 14 of
this section and all applicable Federal, State or local laws.
H. A statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower
will accommodate co-location of additional antennas for future users.
I. Identification of other cellular sites owned or operated by the
applicant within the City.
J. A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other
structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or
structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the
proposed new tower.
K. A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or antennas
within the geographic area based upon existing physical, engineering,
technological or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is
erected.
9. Factors Considered in Granting Conditional Use Permits for Towers. In
addition to any standards for consideration of conditional use permit applications
pursuant to Section 176.36(6) of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional
use permit, although the Zoning Board of Adjustment may waive or reduce the
burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the Board concludes that
the goals of this section are better served thereby.
A. Height of proposed tower;
B. Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
C. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
D. Surrounding topography;
E. Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
F. Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
G. Proposed ingress and egress; and
H. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as
discussed in subsection 10 of this section.
10. Availability of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures or Alternative
Technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates
to the reasonable satisfaction of the decision maker that no existing tower,
structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant’s needs.
Evidence submitted shall address the following:
A. No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area that meet the applicant’s engineering requirements.
B. Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
applicant’s engineering requirements.
C. Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant’s proposed antenna and related equipment.
D. The applicant’s proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with
the applicant’s proposed antenna.
E. The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or
structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower
development are presumed to be unreasonable.
F. Other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures
unsuitable are demonstrated.
G. Alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or
structures, such as a cable micro cell network using multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wire line system, is unsuitable.
11. Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all wireless
communications towers:
A. Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least seventy-five
percent (75%) of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
B. Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
12. Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to all
wireless communications towers.
A. Separation From Residentially Zoned Property.
(1) Wireless communications towers shall be separated from any
residentially zoned property (regardless of development status) by a
distance of 300 feet or 300% of the height of the tower, whichever is
greater.
(2) Separation distances between towers and residentially zoned
property shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line
from the base of the proposed tower to the nearest point of the
residential district boundary.
B. Separation Distances Between Towers.
(1) Separation distances between towers shall be measured
between the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation
distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line
between the base of the existing tower and the proposed base,
pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower.
(2) The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as
shown in Table 1.
TABLE 1
Existing Towers – Types
Lattice Guyed
Monopole
75 Feet in Height or
Greater
Monopole
Less than 75 Feet
in Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole
75 Feet in Height
or Greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole
Less than 75 Feet
in Height
750 750 750 750
13. Security Fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six
feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device.
14. Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding ground-based towers unless the tower is located in an Industrial zoned
district.
A. Ground-based towers shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from
adjoining properties. The standard buffer shall consist of an evergreen
hedge with an ultimate height of at least 5 feet and a planted height of at
least 36 inches outside the perimeter of the compound.
B. In locations where the visual impact of the ground-based tower
would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived
by the decision maker.
C. Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall
be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as
towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property
perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
15. Buildings or Other Equipment Storage. Any buildings and support
equipment associated with antennas or towers are subject to the following:
A. When located on a roof or top of an existing structure, the buildings
and support equipment shall be located as far from the edge of the roof or
top as possible.
B. When located on the ground, the buildings and support equipment
shall meet or exceed the minimum setbacks of the applicable zoning
district.
C. Roof-mounted buildings and support equipment shall be screened by
parapet walls or screen walls in a manner compatible with the building’s
design, color and material.
D. Ground-mounted buildings and support equipment shall be enclosed
by a 6-foot high wood fence. An evergreen hedge with an ultimate height
of at least 5 feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches shall be planted
along the perimeter of the fence.
16. Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers. Any antenna or tower that
is not operated for a continuous period of twenty-four (24) months shall be
considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the
same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the City notifying the owner
of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within
said ninety days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner’s
expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall
not become effective until all users cease using the tower.
17. Nonconforming Uses.
A. Not Expansion of Nonconforming Use. Towers that are constructed
and antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this
section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming
use or structure.
B. Preexisting Towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including
replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be
permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than routine
maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of
this section.
C. Rebuilding Damaged or Destroyed Nonconforming Towers or
Antennas. Notwithstanding subsection 16, bona fide non-conforming
towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without
having to first obtain administrative approval or a conditional use permit
and without having to meet the setback and separation requirements
specified in subsections 11 and 12. The type, height, and location of the
tower on site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility
approval. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the
then applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from
the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if
said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as
specified in subsection 16.
176.41 AMENDMENTS.
1. Authority. The regulations and restrictions imposed and district boundaries
created by this ordinance may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented,
changed, modified, or repealed.
2. Intent. The amendment process herein established is intended to provide a
means for making changes in the text of this ordinance and in the official zoning
district map.
3. Initiation of Amendments. An amendment may be initiated by a motion of
the Council or Commission, or by the filing of an application for such action by
property owners within the area proposed to be changed or affected by the
proposed amendment.
4. Application for Amendment. Each application requesting a change in the
text of this ordinance or the Zoning District Map shall contain at least the
following information, when applicable:
A. Applicant’s name and address and his/her legal interest in the subject
property.
B. The titleholder’s name and address, if different than the applicant.
C. Street address or common description and complete legal description
of the property.
D. Present zoning district of the property.
E. Proposed zoning district of the property.
F. A description of the amendment or change requested.
G. A statement describing the reasons for the request.
H. A vicinity sketch map of appropriate scale covering sufficient
adjoining property to clearly indicate nearby street patterns, property lines,
and other significant features which will have a bearing upon the request.
This map shall also identify existing zoning districts within 600 feet of the
subject property.
5. Notification Signs.
A. Each applicant requesting an amendment to the official zoning
district map shall secure notification signs from the Clerk which shall be
conspicuously posted by the applicant on the property for which application
has been made. The signs shall be placed so that they may be seen from an
adjoining street and in cases of double-fronted or corner lots, signs shall be
posted on both sides of the lot. The signs shall include the date, time, and
place of the meeting or public hearing (as appropriate) and a brief
description of the request.
B. Notification signs shall be posted at least four (4) days prior to the
public meeting or public hearing of the Commission respecting the request.
C. Notification signs shall be posted at least seven (7) days prior to the
public hearing of the Council respecting the request and shall remain posted
until the conclusion of the public hearing.
D. If the notification signs are not posted in accordance with the
preceding requirements, no action shall be taken on the application.
6. Commission Review.
A. The Commission shall review each proposed amendment to the
Zoning Ordinance and report is recommendations to the Council.
B. Before submitting its report to the Council, the Commission shall
hold at least one public meeting thereon.
(1) If an application for a change in the official Zoning District
Map involves ten (10) acres or more of land, then the Commission
shall not submit its report to the Council until the Commission has
first held a public hearing thereon.
(2) The Commission may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing
on any proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance prior to
submitting its recommendations to the Council.
(3) Due notice of public hearings held by the Commission on
proposed amendments to the Zoning Ordinance shall be given as
follows: publication at least once in a newspaper published in Linn
County and of general circulation in the City, which date of
publication shall be in accordance with Section 362.3 and 414.4 of
the Code of Iowa.
(4) Following the public meeting or public hearing, the
Commission shall recommend to the Council that the proposed
amendment be approved, approved with modifications, or denied.
These recommendations shall then be certified and submitted to the
Council within thirty (30) days of each public meeting or public
hearing.
7. Council Action.
A. After receiving the Commission recommendations on proposed
amendments, the Council shall hold a public hearing on said amendments
and due notice thereof shall be given by publication in a legal newspaper of
general circulation published in Linn County and of general circulation in
the City in accordance with Section 362.3 and 414.4 of the Code of Iowa.
B. After holding such public hearing, the Council shall vote on the
passage of the proposed amendment.
C. In case of a written protest against a change or repeal in zoning
classification which is filed with the Clerk and signed by the owners of
20% or more of the area of the lots included in the proposed change or
repeal, or by the owners of 20% or more of the property which is located
within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries such property, the change or
repeal shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of at least ¾
of all the members of the Council.
8. Filing Fee. Any person making application or petition for amendment of
the Zoning Ordinance or to change the Zoning District
classification of a parcel of land shall at the time of application or petition pay a
filing fee. The amount of filing fee shall be set by resolution of the Council. The
filing fee is not refundable.
9. Limitation on Successive Applications.
A. Whenever any application requesting an amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance has been denied by the Council, or when an application has been
withdrawn by the applicant after consideration by the Commission and
recommendation but prior to the Council action, another application
requesting the same change on the same property shall not be considered by
the Commission or Council during the succeeding twelve months since the
time said application was denied by the Council or withdrawn by the
applicant.
B. However, such new application may be considered within the
twelve-month period if the Council determines that at least one of the
following has occurred:
(1) The request is for a different zoning classification.
(2) A different parcel of property is involved.
(3) The request is for a planned development district.
(4) There has been a material change in circumstances.
10. Expiration. Whenever any application requesting an amendment to the
Zoning Ordinance or Zoning District Map has been tabled at the request of the
applicant for a period of six months, or the applicant has not taken affirmative
action to process the application for a period of six months, said application shall
be considered to be expired. The Council may, at their discretion, extend the
expiration date for a period of three months upon request of the applicant.
176.42 VIOLATION AND PENALTY. Any person, firm, or corporation who
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be in violation of this Code of
Ordinances. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation
of this ordinance, the City Council, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
proper action or proceedings in the name of the City to prevent such unlawful erection
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use, to
restrain, correct, or abate such violations, to prevent the occupancy of said building
structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about said
premises.
176.43 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS.
1. Intent. The landscaping and screening regulations are intended to improve
the physical appearance of the community; to improve the environmental
performance of new development by contributing to the abatement of heat, glare,
and noise and by promoting natural percolation of storm water; reducing the visual
impact of parking lots, unsightly equipment, or materials from the view of persons
on the public streets or adjoining properties and buffering from uncomplimentary
land uses and by improving the quality of air, to buffer potentially incompatible
land uses from one another and to conserve the value of property and
neighborhoods within the City. The scale and nature of landscaping materials
shall be appropriate to the size of the structures and the available space. Materials
shall be located to avoid interference with overhead or underground utilities and
utility easements or vehicular and pedestrian movement and visibility. Growth
characteristics should be considered.
2. Applicability. Landscaping and Buffering Standards shall apply to
development within the R-5, R-6 and R-6A Multi-Family Residential Zoning
Districts. The standards shall also apply to all Office Districts, all Commercial
Districts, except the C-2 Zoning District, and all Industrial Districts. Parking Lot
Landscaping and Street Front Landscaping shall be required of any development
with off-street parking areas except single family residential development or
development located in the C-2 Zoning District. The landscaping and screening
requirements standards shall apply to:
A. New development, including principle and accessory structures on
property located with the districts listed in this section.
B. Expansion and reconstruction of parking lots with forty (40) or more
parking spaces.
C. Expansion and major renovation of an existing building that includes
significant site modification as determined by the Planning and
Development Department based on site conditions and improvements.
Major renovation will generally increase the assessed valuation of the
subject property by at least fifty percent
(50%). In the event that the property owner or developer does not agree
with the Planning and Development Department determination regarding
the applicability of the standards an appeal to that determination may be
filed for review by Zoning Board of Adjustment.
D. The landscaping and screening requirements shall not apply to golf
course, park, cemetery and nursery developments.
3. Applicability and Exceptions of Landscaping and Screening Elements. The
landscaping and screening requirements include a number of design elements as
identified in this section. These elements will have varying applicability
depending on the Zoning District and adjoining land uses. For the purpose of this
section, undeveloped properties shall be considered based on their expected use
based on the Future Land Use Map of the Marion Comprehensive Plan.
Design Elements Applicable Districts
Street Trees Street trees are not permitted in any zoning district
except by appeal to the Marion Tree Board
Street Front Landscaping Multiple Family, Office, Commercial (except C-2)
and Industrial Districts.
Parking Lot Landscaping Multiple Family, Office, Commercial (except C-2)
and Industrial Districts.
Bufferyards
All Multiple Family, Office, Commercial and
Industrial Districts where the property adjoins
Single, Two-family, Multiple Family Districts,
Office Districts and Industrial Districts. See Matrix
below. For the purpose of this section the term
district shall also include property designated for
such uses under the Future Land Use Map of the
Marion Comprehensive Plan.
Bufferyard Matrix
(X Denotes Required Bufferyard)
District*
Adjoining District
Single
Family
Multiple
Family Office Commercial Industrial
Single/Two Family
Multiple Family X
Office X X
Commercial X X X
Industrial X X X
*District shall mean areas zoned, developed, or designated for such use under the
Future Land Use Map of the Marion Comprehensive Plan.
4. Definitions. The following definitions shall be used for terms contained
within this section.
A. Berm - A mound or embankment of earth, usually two to six feet in
height, used to shield or buffer properties from adjoining uses, highways or
noise.
B. Bufferyard - A landscaped area along lot lines provided to separate
and partially obstruct the view of two (2) adjacent land uses or properties
from one another. No structures except fences shall be allowed in the
bufferyard.
C. Deciduous overstory tree - A shade producing woody plant having a
mature height and spread of at least thirty (30) feet with one well-defined
trunk having no branches at or near the base.
D. Deciduous shrubs - Woody plants that range from three (3) to fifteen
(15) feet tall at maturity and often are multi-stemmed with low branching.
E. Deciduous understory tree - A woody plant at least fifteen (15) feet
tall at maturity with one or more well-defined trunks.
F. Evergreen/conifer shrub - A woody plant having green needle-like
foliage throughout the year and ranging from three (3) to fifteen (15) feet
tall at maturity and often are multi-stemmed with low branching.
G. Evergreen/conifer tree - An upright cone-bearing plant having green
needle-like foliage throughout the year and at least fifteen (15) feet at
maturity.
H. Landscaped area - The area within the boundaries of a given lot
consisting primarily of plant material, including but not limited to grass,
trees, shrubs, flowers, vines, ground cover and other organic plant
materials. Inorganic materials, such as brick, stone, or aggregate, may be
used within landscaped areas as identified in this section.
I. Landscaping Plan - A plan containing the information provided for
in Section 176.43(3).
J. Minimum street landscaping - The minimum landscaped area which
must be provided in a street yard, expressed as a percent of the total area
contained within that street yard.
K. Street yard (Street Frontage) - A contiguous area along the street
right-of-way.
L. Vehicular use area (Parking Area) - All areas subject to vehicular
traffic, including but not limited to access-ways, driveways, loading areas,
service areas and parking stalls for all types of vehicles. This definition
shall not apply to covered parking structures, underground parking lots or
public streets.
5. General Requirements. Landscaping and screening requirements shall be
subject to the following general requirements:
A. Landscaping plans to be provided for each phase of the development
review and building permit processes - the detail and extent of such plans
shall include detailed landscape plans provided with the building permit. At
a minimum the landscaping plan shall require the following:
(1) The applicants name and address and interest in the property.
(2) The owners name and address, if different from the applicant,
and the owners signed consent to the filing of the plan.
(3) The street address and legal description of the property.
(4) Title, scale, north marker, and date.
(5) Zoning classification of site and all adjoining property(s).
(6) All lot lines, easements and rights-of-way.
(7) All surrounding roads including names.
(8) The total square foot of the vehicle use areas and the street
yard.
(9) Location, scientific name, common name, quantity and size of
all existing plant materials and designation of all vegetation to
remain and/or be removed.
(10) Proposed landscaped planting by location, scientific name
and common name, planting size and planting method. A plant list
should be provided listing this information and keyed to plant
location on the plan.
(11) All existing and proposed drainage and detention areas.
(12) Designation of area(s) to be used for snow storage.
(13) Other information or documentation as the Zoning
Administrator may deem necessary to allow a full and proper
consideration and disposition of the particular plan.
B. Landscaping shall be provided within the minimum setback area
along street frontages as provided in this section.
C. Bufferyards between various types of land use and residential areas,
both existing and planned shall include design elements in a combination to
provide effective buffering with consideration of existing topography and
site conditions. The proposed plan for said design elements shall be
reviewed by the Planning and Development Department to determine
consistency with the provision of this section. Placement of trees and
shrubs shall be designated to meet City requirements regarding minimum
sight lines from driveways and intersections, proximity to utility lines, and
underground utility easements. These factors shall be addressed by the
Marion Engineering and Planning and Development Department as part.
D. Landscaping plans provided for construction shall identify the
minimum size and number of required trees, shrubs, and provisions for
living groundcover such as grass. Non-living ground cover such as rock
and walk on bark, that does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the
overall planting area may be used. Impervious materials, such as concrete
or asphalt paving, shall not be used within required landscaping areas with
the exception of sidewalk areas or edging.
E. Existing appropriate mature trees and vegetation may be
incorporated into overall site design and shall be considered in meeting the
requirements of this section. The extent that such existing vegetation meets
the requirements of these standards shall be reviewed and approved by the
Planning and Development Department.
6. Street Trees/Groundcover.
A. No trees are permitted to be located within the public street right-ofway
without obtaining approval from the Marion Tree Board per the
requirements of Section 152.05 (9). The location,
size, and number of trees within the right-of-way is to be determined by the
Tree Board at time of appeal.
B. Living ground cover, such as grass, shall be provided within rightof-
way areas of all districts. Non-living materials (such as walk on bark,
mulch, and ornamental rock) may be used for up to twenty-five percent
(25%) of the right-of-way exclusive of access.
7. Street Front Landscaping. All areas adjoining public or private street
frontage shall be landscaped to include trees, shrubs, and living ground cover as
required by this section. Landscape areas between the public or private street and
parking areas are strongly encouraged to include mounding to enhance the
screening of vehicles from the street. For the purpose of this section, said street
front landscape depth of the Commercial and Industrial Zoning District shall
average at least fifteen feet (15') along street frontages and ten feet (10') along
street side frontages. Double frontage lots shall maintain a minimum street front
landscape depth of five feet (5'). Landscape depth for Multiple Family and Office
Districts shall comply with the underlying setback required under the Zoning
District. Street front landscaping shall include all areas along public or private
street frontage, public or private street side setbacks, and setbacks along other
property lines boarding a public or private side setback, and setbacks along other
property lines bordering a public or private street. For lots having a depth of less
than one hundred fifty feet (150') and a total area not exceeding twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet the minimum street frontage landscape depth shall be at least
five feet (5').
A. Landscaping shall comply with the general standards indicated
below. It is intended that the standards shall provide landscape design
flexibility in plant section while still meeting the objectives of this section.
B. Trees. Street trees shall be provided at a rate of one tree per forty
feet (40') of frontage excluding driveway openings. A minimum of fifty
percent (50%) of the required trees shall be at least two inch (2") diameter
shade trees. The remaining trees may be any combination, at least two inch
(2") diameter shade trees, at least one and one-half inch (1½") flowering
trees and/or six foot (6') high evergreen trees. Street frontage trees shall not
be required for lots having a depth of less than one hundred fifty feet (150')
and an area not exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
C. Shrubs. Six (6) per one thousand square feet (1000 sf) of planting
area where parking does not adjoin street and sufficient shrubs to provide
sixty-six percent (66%) screening to a height of three feet (3') where
parking adjoins a street. Up to twenty percent (20%) of the required shrubs
may be replaced by ornamental grasses or perennial flowers at a rate of four
(4) such plants per shrub replaced.
D. Ground Cover. Living ground cover, such as grass, shall be
provided within all required street frontage landscaped areas. Non-living
materials (such as walk-on bark, mulch, and ornamental rock) may be used
for up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the landscaped area.
E. The specific location of trees and landscaping within the required
setback area shall be approved by the Planning and Development
Department based on site characteristics.
F. Mounding, not exceeding one foot (1') in height for every three (3)
of depth is strongly encouraged to screen vehicles for street frontages
adjoining parking lots with a depth of ten feet (10') or greater.
8. Parking Lot Landscaping. All parking lots shall include landscaping and
trees located within the parking area as required by this section. Trees required by
this section shall be in addition to trees and landscaping required under other
sections of this section. It is the objective of this section to provide shade within
parking areas and break up large expanses of parking lot pavement.
A. Trees at a rate of one (1) tree per twelve (12) parking spaces shall be
provided for all parking lot areas. Required parking area trees shall be large
shade tree varieties and have a minimum two inch (2") diameter at breast
height at the time of planting.
B. For parking lot areas having forty (40) or more spaces such trees
shall be located in protected landscape areas within the parking lot with the
provision that up to fifteen percent (15%) of the required trees may be
located within ten feet (10') of the parking lot perimeter. The location, size,
and design of the landscaped areas shall be approved by the Planning and
Development Department to ensure viability of the planting and protection
from damage by vehicles while also meeting the objectives of this section.
C. For parking lot areas with forty (40) or more spaces, a continuous
planter, including trees, shall be provided for every fourth parking bay. Said
continuous planter shall include large shade trees planted no closer than
twenty (20) foot centers. The width and design of said continuous planter
shall be approved by the Planning and Development Department to ensure
viability of the planting and protection from damage by vehicles.
D. Planter areas shall be a minimum width of six feet (6') measured
from the inside of the protective curbing. These areas may be widened to
accommodate head in parking with a thirty inch (30") vehicle overhang into
the planter area so long as the required six foot (6') minimum width for the
tree planting is maintained.
9. Bufferyards. Yards separating multiple family, office, commercial, and
industrial development closer than one hundred feet (100') from Zoning Districts
where bufferyard is required by this section shall provide an effective buffer as
indicated in this section. It is the objective of the bufferyard to lessen, rather than
completely eliminate, land use conflicts between such uses. It is not expected that
bufferyards will totally screen such uses. It is expected that the bufferyard design
elements identified below will provide immediate lessening of land use conflicts
and such buffering will be enhanced over time as landscaping matures.
Bufferyards may include a combination of elements including setback distances as
separation, tree and shrubs, solid fencing, and/or berming. It is encouraged that
existing topography and vegetation be included in the design of the bufferyard as
approved by the Planning and Development Department. Retention of existing
matures trees is strongly encouraged in meeting the requirements of this section.
The standards provided in the bufferyard options identified below may be used in
combination to meet the intent of this section.
A. Rear bufferyards shall have a minimum depth of fifteen feet (15')
and include standards as identified below.
(1) Natural Buffers. Four (4) evergreen variety trees, two
flowering variety trees, and ten (10) shrubs per one hundred feet
(100') of linear distance (evergreen shrubs to be spaced at five feet
(5') on center with a minimum mature height of five feet (5') or
fifteen (15) large deciduous shrubs, per one hundred feet (100') of
linear distance planted in a staggered double row.
(2) Structural Buffers. Solid six foot (6') high wall or fence with
two (2) evergreen variety trees, two (2) flowering variety trees, and
five (5) large shrubs per one hundred feet (100') of linear distance.
(3) Earthen Berm Buffer. Minimum fifteen foot (15') rear
bufferyard with berming not to exceed a 1"3 slope, three (3) large
evergreen trees, two (2) flowering variety trees per one hundred
(100) feet of linear distance, and sufficient evergreen shrubs with a
combined height (berm and mature shrub) of five feet (5') to form a
continuous screen within three (3) years of planting and/or sufficient
deciduous shrubs with a combined height of five feet (5') to form a
continuous screening within three (3) years of planting.
B. Side bufferyards shall have a minimum depth of fifteen feet (15')
and include standards as identified below.
(1) Natural Buffer - Evergreen. Four (4) evergreen variety trees,
two (2) flowering variety trees and ten (10) evergreen shrubs per one
hundred feet (100') of linear distance.
(2) Natural Buffer – Deciduous. Four (4) deciduous variety trees,
two (2) flowering variety trees, and fifteen (15) large shrubs per one
hundred feet (100') of linear distance.
(3) Structural Buffers. Solid six foot (6') high wall or fence with
two (2) flowering trees and five (5) large shrubs per one hundred
feet (100') of linear distance.
10. Additional Landscaping/Screening Requirements. Landscape and building
elements shall be used to screen areas of low visual interest or visually intrusive
site elements (such as trash collection, open storage, service areas, loading docks
and blank walls) from off-site view. Such screening shall be established on all
sides of such elements except where an opening is required for access. If access is
possible only on a side that is visible from a public street, a removable or operable
screen shall be required.
A. Screening of Ground Mounted Mechanical Units. For all uses,
except any individual lot occupied by a single-family, two-family, or threefamily
dwelling, all ground-mounted mechanical
units, including but not limited to: air-conditioning condensers, heat pumps,
ventilation units, computer cooling equipment, etc., and any related utility
structures and equipment, that are visible from any adjacent public
thoroughfare shall be visibly screened from public view. The screen shall
be designed and established so that the area or element being screened is no
more than twenty (20) percent visible through the screen.
B. Screening of Roof Mounted Mechanical Units. All roof-mounted
mechanical units shall be screened from adjacent public thoroughfares by
the use of an opaque screening material compatible with the architecture of
the building or architecturally designed screening such as a parapet wall.
The screening of the roof-mounted units shall be designed to blend with the
building and roof materials. Additional screening may be required due to
topographic differences in the adjoining properties.
C. Screening of Trash Receptacles. For all uses, except any individual
lot occupied by a single-family, two-family, or three- family dwelling,
using a common trash receptacle and all nonresidential uses:
(1) Solid material screening or full screening landscaping on
three sides to a height that screens the containers, typically six feet
(6'). Use of materials that are not solid, such as slates in chain-link,
shall not be used to meet this requirement.
(2) Enclosure openings directly visible from a public right-ofway
and/or adjoining residential areas shall have a solid material
gate. For larger enclosures areas a separate gate access is
encouraged.
(3) Access drives shall be constructed of material and thickness
to accommodate truck loading. Year round accessibility to the
enclosure area for service trucks shall be maintained by the property
owner or tenant.
(4) Enclosures shall be of an adequate size to accommodate
expected containers. It is encouraged to design the enclosure area to
be expandable to accommodate future additional containers.
(5) Enclosure structures shall be designed to protect the walls
from damage by containers. Such protection may be provided by use
of barrier curbing, reinforced masonry walls, or other similar means.
(6) Materials and elevations for enclosures that are attached to
buildings shall be designed to be compatible with the main structure.
(7) If enclosures are to be attached to buildings they shall comply
with applicable fire and building codes.
(8) Trash enclosures shall not be located within a required street
front or street side setbacks or occupy area used for required parking
spaces.
11. Administrative Requirements.
A. Previously Approved Site Plans. Any site plan or landscaping plan
approved by the Planning and Development Department prior to the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall remain
enforceable and in force.
B. Installation. All landscaping required by this section shall be
installed prior to occupancy or commencement of a use. If the landscaping
cannot be installed prior to occupancy or commencement of a use because
of climatic conditions, the building inspector may issue a temporary
certificate of occupancy and grant a delay of landscaping installation until
the calendar date of June 1 immediately following the date of said
temporary certificate of occupancy.
C. Maintenance of Required Landscaping. Trees and vegetation,
irrigation systems, fences, walls and other landscaping elements shall be
considered as elements of the project in the same manner as parking,
building materials and other site details. The applicant, landowner or
successors in interest shall be responsible for the regular maintenance of all
landscaping elements in good condition. All landscaping shall be
maintained free from disease; pests, weeds and litter, and all landscape
structures such as fences and walls shall be repaired and replaced
periodically to maintain a structurally sound condition in order to maintain
the required landscaping of the site.
D. Rights-Of-Way, Easements, and Drainage. Required landscaping
shall not disturb drainage systems or be placed upon easements of rights-ofway.
12. Changes to Approved Landscape Plan. The landscaping shall be installed
and maintained according to the approved landscape plan except where authorized
changes are permitted. The approved landscape plan and supporting data shall be
binding on the applicants, their successors, and grantees.
(Ord. 03-21 – Nov. 03 Supp.)
176.44 EU EXCLUSIVE USE DISTRICT.
1. General Intent. Activities placed in an exclusive use zone are those uses
that cannot be readily classified as agricultural, residential, business, professional
office, or industrial uses; however such activities are generally intense uses of
property and shall be directed to areas land use designated for industrial purposes.
To this end, the exclusive use zone:
A. Establishes Specific Standards. Classification of these activities
within exclusive use zones will enable specific site location, design and
performance standards to be enumerated and applied for the basis of
evaluation criteria. Such standards will protect the public health, safety and
welfare more adequately, and will assure more equal treatment of the same
or similar uses.
B. Avoids Confusion Concerning Requirements. By specifically
delineating the standards to be applied to these activities, perception,
understanding and enforcement of these standards will be enhanced.
C. Increases Compatibility with Adjacent Uses. Exclusive use zones
are intended to make the considered activities more compatible with
adjacent uses, allow greater flexibility in site selection for the activity, and
require the zoning of the site to be re-examined upon termination of the
permitted activity within such an exclusive use zone.
2. Regulations In Exclusive Use Zones. The regulations adopted in this
section relating to each exclusive use zone shall include but not be limited to the
following:
A. Definition. A detailed definition of the specific use or uses to be
permitted.
B. Site Design and Location Standards. Specific site design and
location standards may be established prior to reclassification of property.
C Operational Standards. Performance standards may be established
relating to those aspects of the activity that must be controlled to protect the
public health, safety, or welfare.
D. Bonding Requirements. Performance bonds or letters of credit may
be required, and the amount, duration and supervisory agency should be
established.
E. Reference to Other Applicable Laws. A listing of local, state and
federal requirements applicable to such use may be included to facilitate
effective coordination between the various agencies having jurisdiction
over the particular use. Such a list shall not be considered exhaustive but is
merely to be available to assist persons requesting such zoning.
3. Procedures and Standards for Approval. The procedures and standards for
approval of an Exclusive Use Zone are as follows:
A. Creation of New Exclusive Use Zone(s). A proposal for creation of
an Exclusive Use Zone shall be processed as an amendment to the zoning
regulations. Each new Exclusive Zone adopted shall be designated
Exclusive Use Zone (Number) (Name of Use) in order of adoption. The
abbreviated designation shall be EU-1, EU-2, etc. A “Findings of Fact”
shall be included in the Exclusive Use Zone Ordinance to ensure that the
spirit and intent of Exclusive Use District Regulations are met.
B. Zoning District Reclassification to an Exclusive Use Zone. Any
activity that must be conducted within an Exclusive Use Zone shall be
permitted only upon approval of the zoning district reclassification by the
City Council. Requests for reclassification shall be made according to the
procedures set forth in the proposed Exclusive Use Zone Ordinance.
(Ord. 05-14 – Nov. 05 Supp.)
176.45 EU-1 EXCLUSIVE USE ZONE 1 SANITARY LANDFILL.
1. Findings of Fact. The following facts establish the need to place sanitary
landfills into an Exclusive Use Zoning District.
A. Characteristics of a Sanitary Landfill. A sanitary landfill is primarily
a one-of-a-kind community facility which may be a necessary part of the
community's waste disposal system. The high volume of heavy truck traffic
and the potential for associated noise, odor and other nuisance-like
characteristics suggest industrial zoning would be appropriate. However, a
sanitary landfill has limited duration use, and the filled land may not be
suitable for industrial uses that require substantial weight bearing
foundations. This limitation makes industrial zoning inappropriate for the
location of subsequent uses on this land. Major factors in determining the
proper site location for landfills are the suitability of the soil and underground
drainage systems - neither of which is usually factors in the location of
industrial zones. Therefore, the site location criteria for a sanitary landfill
must be defined separately.
B. Need for Specific Standards. If proper sanitary landfill standards are
not strictly adhered to, the operation may result in an open dump and create
a serious health hazard. A completed landfill will settle and require periodic
maintenance. Because of this settlement factor, special design and
construction must be utilized for buildings constructed on a completed
landfill. As a result of all these factors listed above, sanitary landfills must
be placed in an exclusive use zone that includes specific design standards and
appropriate protection for subsequent use.
2. General Intent. The major purposes and objectives of this zone are to place
sanitary landfills in an exclusive use zone in order to establish site location and
design standards which will:
A. Protect public health by preventing water pollution, rodent infestation,
air pollution, or other health hazards as would occur as a result of improper
location, design, or operation of a landfill.
B. Protect public safety by requiring proper design of access roads to
accommodate the heavy equipment necessary for collection, transportation
and disposal of solid wastes.
C. Improve compatibility with adjacent uses by requiring adequate
screening and set back, regular policing of access road and heavily traveled
routes to the site, and careful review of subsequent uses allowed on the
landfill site.
D. Promote public welfare by providing a suitable location for the
disposal of the solid wastes generated by the community and preserve prime
agricultural ground.
E. Incorporate local siting approval as specified in Iowa Code
§455.305A. This State Code provision requires that prior to siting of a
proposed, new sanitary landfill the City Council must approve the site based
on meeting certain criteria. It is the intent of this section that to the greatest
extent possible that the local siting approval process and the zoning district
reclassification process run concurrently.
3. Other Applicable State of Iowa Laws and Administrative Code
Requirements. Other State of Iowa laws and administrative code requirements may
apply to an application, including, but not limited to laws and rules related to: the
issuance or renewal of permits for construction and operation of sanitary landfills,
processing facilities, composting facilities, recycling facilities, solid waste
management facilities, infectious waste incinerator projects, and waste tire facilities;
handling and disposal of hazardous waste and waste oil; and local approval.
4. Applicability. The requirements and performance standards as herein
provided shall apply to all new or lateral expansions of lawful sanitary landfill
projects.
5. Principal Permitted Uses. Sanitary Landfill.
6. Accessory Uses.
A. Transfer Station
B. Recycling Facility
C. Compost Facility
D. Household Hazardous Waste Facility
E. Agricultural Uses
F. Wild Life Refuge or Similar Public Purpose Uses
7. Site and Structure Requirements.
A. Minimum Lot Area. There shall be no minimum lot area requirement,
except that a site must be of sufficient size to accommodate the amount of
waste estimated for deposit during the planned life of the landfill.
B. Minimum Lot Width. None
C. Setback Requirements. The principal permitted use, including all
activities related to operation of the principal permitted use such as stock
piles, shall meet the following minimum setback requirements:
Front Yard Setback 200 Feet
Rear Yard Setback 200 Feet
Side Yard Setback 200 Feet
Corner Side Yard Setback 200 Feet
Maximum Structure Height 100 Feet
D. Accessory Uses, Buildings and/or Structures. All accessory uses,
buildings and/or structures, except those as set forth in subsection 6(E) and
6(F) herein, shall meet the same site and structure requirements as principal
permitted uses and shall be set out in the application.
E. Fencing. The footprint of the planned waste disposal area shall be
enclosed with a substantial wall, chain link fence, other adequate barrier, at
least eight (8) feet in height, designed to keep people, children and animals
out of the active landfill area, or an alternative provision which will
accomplish the same. The entrance gate must be capable of being locked and
posted for non-entry.
F. Sign and Directions. Necessary identification and directional signs
shall be provided. A sign shall be posted at the entrances to inform the public
of the hours of operation, cost of disposal, and rules and regulations
regarding disposal. Interior signage shall be provided that directs users to
the appropriate unloading area.
G. Lighting. Lighting shall be provided in such a way as to not interfere
with roadway traffic, spill over on adjacent properties, and/or pollute the
night sky.
H. Parking. Two (2) spaces per employee shall be required.
I. Buffer. The landfill shall be adequately buffered on all sides between
the footprint of the planned waste disposal area and perimeter boundaries of
the property so as to offset fugitive dust, noise, vibration and visual impact
to adjacent property. All screening and buffering shall be completed on site.
The buffer areas shall be landscaped and graded consistent with the approved
site plan prior to the acceptance of any solid waste.
8. Application for Landfill Siting and EU - Exclusive Use District
Reclassification. The applicant shall submit an application for zoning district
reclassification and local site approval to the City Council. The Council shall
forward the application to the Department to review the completeness of the
application. A complete application includes the following:
A. A completed application form. The application must be on forms as
provided by the Department which will include, but not be limited to,
information required by Iowa law for local siting approval. The application
form must be signed by the owner(s) of the property as such and, if
applicable, the entity seeking the reclassification as applicant.
B. The application fee for the specific review and processing of the
rezoning reclassification shall be set by the Council.
C. The applicant shall provide proof of written notice and proof of
publication of notice of their intent to submit an application to the Council
for local siting approval and zoning district reclassification in the manner as
prescribed for in Iowa Code §455B.305A(3). One complete paper copy and
one complete electronic copy of the mailing list utilized to provide written
notice to property owners shall be provided to the Council.
D. The applicant shall demonstrate notice to the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources (IDNR) that the local siting process has been initiated.
E. Detailed plans, maps and reports shall be submitted in the numbers as
indicated herein or as approved by the Department. The data in the following
reports shall be prepared in a form which facilitates its use in proper
engineering design of the landfill. Problem areas must be delineated and
recommendations for proper solution included in the report. The following
shall be submitted:
(1) Map or Aerial Photograph. The map or photograph shall be at
a scale of not more then 400 ft. to the inch. The map or photograph
shall locate the boundaries of the site and identify the following:
a. North compass point.
b. Zoning and land use within one mile.
c. Haul routes to and from the site with load limits or other
restrictions.
d. Residential structures and other buildings within at least
one mile.
e. Section lines and/or other legal boundaries.
f. Nearby runway used or planned to be used by turbojet
or piston-type aircraft at FAA certified airports.
g. Lakes, ponds, watercourses, wetlands, dry runs, and/or
rock outcroppings within one mile of the site.
h. Topography and drainage patterns within one mile.
i. All wells within one mile.
j. A bench mark.
(2) A Major Site Development Plan. The plan shall be prepared in
the following manner and with the following information:
a. Number of Copies and Size. Ten (10) copies on 8½" x
11" sheet size minimum - larger as required (18" x 24"
preferred). Ten (10) copies of the same site development plan
on 11" x 17" sheet size (must be legible).
b. Scale. 1" = 50' or as approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
c. Preparation. Only by an engineer certified in the State
of Iowa.
d. Orientation. Include North directional arrow and map
scale indication.
e. Location map showing relation to surrounding roads,
streams, and public facilities.
f. Address and legal description of parcel or lot.
g. Title block including the name, address and phone
number of the petitioner and owner and the engineer's name,
seal, the date, and the date of all revisions.
h. Existing and proposed zoning classification, use of
property, number of employees.
i. Ownership, land use, and zoning of all adjoining
properties.
j. Any anticipated planned systems for collection, storage,
transport, and disposal of leachate, methane or other byproduct
of the facility.
k. Existing and proposed property lines (proposed
property lines must be delineated in a heavier line weight).
Provide dimension of existing and proposed lot boundaries.
l. Existing and proposed right-of-way lines, setback lines
and buffer areas.
m. Existing contour lines at intervals of ten (10) feet.
n. Proposed contour lines at intervals of five (5) feet.
o. Watercourses, floodways, flood plains, and wetlands.
p. Any unique natural feature.
q. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures. All structures shall be delineated in square feet, and
dimensions to existing and/or proposed lot lines must be
provided as well as dimensions between structures.
r. Existing and proposed structures must be labeled as to
their use (i.e. existing warehouse). Structures include wells,
fences, septic, utility poles, LP tanks, etc. Also existing roads
must be shown.
s. Existing and proposed parking spaces (number, type,
dimension and class). Must provide notation of the number of
spaces required and the number provided.
t. All utility easements.
u. Radius of curvature of ingress and egress drives.
v. Circulation patterns of traffic.
w. Access to all public and private streets.
x. Location and size of existing or proposed free standing
and/or attached signs and their illumination techniques if
applicable.
y. All existing and proposed locations, intensity, height,
spacing, efficiency, and shielding of all exterior lighting.
z. Locations of outside refuse collection areas, and the
type of screening to be provided. Refuse containers must be
enclosed from public view.
aa. Estimate of increase in vehicle trips per day by type of
vehicle.
bb. Any other information deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator.
(3) Traffic Routing Plan. The plan must be prepared by a qualified
traffic engineer. The plan must comply with the City's Major Street
Ordinance and delineate the following:
a. Major transportation routes.
b. Overpasses with height limitations.
c. Bridges with weight limitations.
d. Railroad crossings.
e. Flow of traffic to proposed site by type.
f. Current and anticipated daily traffic flows to site.
(4) Preliminary Hydrogeologic Investigation Report. The report
must be prepared by a registered professional engineer licensed in the
State of Iowa or qualified hydrogeologist. Information included in the
report must include:
a. General site description including slope, topography,
surface drainage and geologic setting.
b. Description and characteristics of soils including soil
types, dominant soil texture, hydraulic conductivity, and
suitability of soil for cover and liner construction.
c. Description and characteristics of bedrock including
type, thickness, and physical characteristics (ease of
excavation, fractures, sinkholes, direction of dip, and solution
holding capacity), porosity, and hydraulic conductivity.
d. Description of site hydrogeology, including distance to
permanent streams, springs and lakes, depth to water table,
flood hazard potential and underlying aquifer characteristics.
e. An assessment of the impact on any existing
hydrogeological conditions on the proposed or surrounding
site.
f. Specific recommendations as to site suitability for use
of the property as a sanitary landfill.
(5) Habitat and Wetland Inventory. A listing of plant and animal
species prepared from the records of the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources - Preserves and Ecological Service Bureau. The applicant
shall request that the Bureau search its records to determine the
presence of or habitat for any threatened or endangered species or
communities and any forest, prairies or wetlands or the potential
thereof. The applicant shall submit a wetland delineation report
prepared by a qualified consultant. An assessment of the impact on
any habitat or wetland on the proposed or surrounding sites shall be
completed by a qualified consultant.
(6) Impact Report on Archaeological, Historical, or
Architecturally Significant Properties. An assessment of the impact
on any archaeological, historical, or architecturally significant
properties on the proposed or surrounding sites. The applicant is
required to request review and comment from the State Historical
Society of Iowa and the Marion Historic Preservation Commission.
(7) Report on Compliance with Solid Waste Planning Documents.
The applicant shall submit a report on how its proposed sanitary
disposal project is consistent with the Cedar Rapids/Linn County
Solid Waste Agency Integrated Solid Waste Management Plan and
the East Central Iowa Council of Government's Regional Solid Waste
Management Plan. A letter of compliance from each entity must
accompany the report.
(8) Need. The applicant must provide a report that outlines the
need for siting of the new or lateral expanded sanitary landfill.
Current supporting data must accompany the report which
substantiates the need as well as the type and size of sanitary landfill.
(9) Operations Site Plan(s) and Report(s). The plans and reports
shall indicate the following:
a. The proposed fill area.
b. Any borrow area.
c. Access roads.
d. On-site drives.
e. Grading plan and cross sections to identify ultimate
height above existing grade.
f. Special drainage devices, if necessary.
g. Location and type of fencing.
h. Structures existing or to be located on the site.
i. Existing wooded areas, trees, ponds or other natural
features to be preserved.
j. Existing and proposed utilities.
k. Conceptual timetable and sequence of phasing of
landfill operations on the site.
l. Proposed method of operation including weighing of
wastes, cross-sectioning the site at definite time intervals,
thickness of cover material, depth of cells and lifts,
compaction, wet weather procedures, cold weather procedures,
amount, type and size of equipment and personnel.
m. Proposed methods to prevent surface water runoff of
possible pollutants.
n. Proposed systems for collection, storage, transport, and
disposal of leachate.
o. Conceptual plan for control of methane gas including
recovery, collection, monitoring and disposal.
p. Any other pertinent information to indicate clearly the
orderly development and operation of the facility.
(10) Land Value Assurance Program. The applicant shall submit a
conceptual plan on how the proposed land value assurance program
will operate and shall include the following at a minimum:
a. Written description of overall program, goals,
objectives, intent and schedule.
b. Identification of property owners who may be eligible
for the program and duration for eligibility.
c. Number and type of appraisals to be conducted, how
appraisals should be conducted and who pays for the
appraisals.
d. Period of time during which program exists.
e. Explanation and example of how compensation could
be calculated.
(11) Conceptual End Use Plan. The plan shall include the
following:
a. A proposed plan and schedule for site restoration and
completion.
b. A plan outlining the ultimate land use of the site, or a
plan that demonstrates possible ultimate land uses.
c. Any other pertinent information that would address
final site restoration and possible future reuses of the property.
d. The applicant must provide in a written report on how
maintenance after closure will be ensured in compliance with
State Code requirements for closure and post closure.
9. Procedure for Zoning District Reclassification and Local Siting Approval.
The following procedure shall be followed for review of the zoning district
reclassification:
A. The Council, upon receipt of a complete application, shall forward
copies of the joint application for local siting approval and zoning
reclassification to the Commission. The Commission and Council shall hold
one joint public informational meeting within thirty (30) days of receipt of a
complete application. The purpose of the meeting is to provide an outline of
how the City will process, review and make a decision on the application.
The applicant shall provide a complete over view of the application
submitted and address how compliance with all federal, state, and local site
and structure requirements and all performance standards are either being
met or an alternative solution is being proposed.
B. The Commission shall, within thirty (30) days after the public
informational meeting, hold a special meeting to consider the joint
application and shall formulate and forward to the Council a
recommendation regarding the zoning district reclassification.
C. Notice of the special meeting to consider the joint application shall be
published in the official newspapers in accordance with Iowa Code §331.305
utilizing the same mailing list of property owners as provided by the
applicant as prescribed in Iowa Code §455B.305A(3). The Department shall
notify property owners of the special Commission meeting by ordinary first
class mail.
D. The Council shall receive the recommendation of the Commission and
hold a public hearing in conformance with Iowa Code §455B.305A(5) and
this section. The Council shall not make a decision on the joint application
until the public has had an additional thirty (30) day opportunity to provide
written comments on the application for zoning district reclassification.
E. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the official
newspapers in accordance with Iowa Code §331.305 utilizing the same
mailing list of property owners as provided by the applicant as prescribed in
Iowa Code §455B.305A(3) The Department shall notify property owners of
the public hearing by ordinary first class mail.
F. At the conclusion of the thirty (30) day review period the Council shall
determine upon first consideration the zoning district reclassification. The
Council can approve, continue consideration or deny the application. If the
reclassification is denied the joint application shall be deemed concluded.
G. Within fourteen (14) days after approval of first consideration the
Council shall hold second consideration of the zoning district reclassification
request. The Council may approve, continue or deny the application. If the
reclassification is denied the joint application shall be deemed concluded.
H. Within fourteen (14) days after approval of second consideration the
Council shall hold third and final consideration of the rezoning district
reclassification. The Council may approve or deny the application. If the
reclassification is denied, the joint application should be deemed concluded.
If the zoning district reclassification is approved, the Council shall have the
joint application submitted to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for
consideration of the local siting approval request.
I. An applicant shall not file a request for zoning district reclassification
and/or local siting approval, which is substantially the same as a request
which was denied, within the preceding two years. The two-year time period
starts from date of issuance of the Council's written decision.
J. Prior to final approval of the rezoning classification the applicant and
Council shall sign an agreement which binds the applicant to meeting local
conditions of the rezoning classification.
10. City Council Reclassification Evaluation Criteria. The following criteria
shall be the basis upon which the Commission shall formulate their recommendation
to the Council and upon which the Council shall render their decisions on
reclassification.
A. Need Criteria. The project is necessary to accommodate the solid
waste management needs of the area in which the project is intended to serve.
In addition, the following standards shall be met:
(1) The applicant's proposal conforms to the most currently
approved East Central Iowa Council of Government's - Regional
Solid Waste Plan.
(2) The applicant's proposal conforms to the most currently
approved Cedar Rapids/Linn County Solid Waste Agency's -
Integrated Solid Waste Management Plan.
(3) The applicant's proposal justifies the size and type sanitary
landfill proposed.
B. Protection of the Public Health, Safety, and Welfare Criteria. The
project is located and proposed to be operated so that the public health,
safety, and welfare will be protected. In addition, the following standards
shall be met:
(1) Public health shall be protected by preventing water pollution,
ground water contamination, excessive noise, odor or dust, leachate
contamination, methane gas exposure, rodent infestation, air
pollution, or other health hazards as would occur as a result of
improper location, design, or operation of a landfill.
(2) Public safety shall be ensured by requiring proper design of
access roads to accommodate the heavy equipment necessary for
collection, transportation and disposal of solid wastes.
(3) Compatibility of land uses shall be assured by requiring
adequate screening, buffering and set back, regular policing of access
road and heavily traveled routes to the site, and careful review of
subsequent uses allowed on the landfill site.
(4) Public welfare shall be protected by providing a suitable
location for the disposal of the solid wastes generated by the
community.
C. Compatibility Criteria. The project is located so as to minimize
incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area and to minimize
the effect on the value of the surrounding property. In addition, the following
location and design standards must be met:
(1) The landfill cannot significantly impact a unique scenic,
cultural or historic area. If unavoidable, the applicant will provide
mitigation either in design provisions or host community benefits.
(2) The landfill cannot be located in a primary residential area as
designated on the most recently adopted City of Marion Future Land
Use Plan.
(3) The landfill cannot be located in park and open space areas as
designated on the most recently adopted City of Marion Future Land
Use Plan.
(4) The applicant shall provide a land value assurance program, as
defined herein, for all privately owned properties within one mile of
the landfill boundaries and to the host community and all other
affected taxing bodies for loss of taxable valuation.
D. Plan of Operation Criteria. The project is designed to minimize the
danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills, or other operational
accidents. To this end the applicant must demonstrate, in their site plan,
operational site plan, and plan of operations that the additional following
standards can be met:
(1) An aggressive and effective vector and litter control program
shall be provided.
(2) Solid waste will not be deposited in such a manner that material
or leaching from the waste could cause pollution of ground or surface
waters.
(3) All fill areas are accessible for solid waste disposal during all
weather conditions under which solid waste can be received.
(4) An aggressive soil erosion program and cover maintenance
program are provided. To that end the finished surface of the site must
be kept in good repair, covered with soil, and seeded with native
grasses or other suitable vegetation immediately upon completion or
promptly in the spring to areas terminated during winter conditions.
(5) The facility management and its employees are properly
trained in landfill operations and that an emergency response program
is provided for.
E. Traffic Patterns and Roadway Provisions. The site should be easily
reached by asphalt or concrete paved city or county trunk roads, state
highways or federal interstates. All roads to the site should be of sufficient
width and construction to safely handle all sizes of trucks when fully loaded
during all weather conditions. Problems such as narrow bridges, low
underpasses, and steep grades on access routes must be avoided. The City
may require the applicant to pay in whole or in part the cost to the City for
providing roadway improvements necessary for the siting of a landfill. In
addition, the following standards must be met:
(1) The traffic patterns to and from the project have been designed
to minimize the impact on existing traffic flows.
(2) Safe design of entrances and exits, with provision for right turn
deceleration lanes, protected left turn lanes, acceleration lanes and, if
needed, signalization of intersections.
(3) The site should be accessible at all times. Several access routes
are planned so that if one route is temporarily unusable, the site can
still be reached.
(4) The distance of driveway entrance or exit from any adjacent lot
line should be at least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. The landfill
access drive, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the public street,
shall be paved.
(5) The on-site roads to the unloading area should be of all weather
construction and wide enough to permit two-way truck travel. Road
grades should be designed for the largest fully loaded trucks to travel
at a reasonable rate.
F. Previous Operating Experience of a Private Agency. A private
applicant shall submit information regarding the previous operating
experience of the agency and its subsidiaries or parent corporation in the area
of solid waste management or related activities. Past performance shall be
considered as an indicator of how the proposed landfill could likely affect
the health, safety, and welfare of area residents or businesses.
11. Zoning Board of Adjustment Siting Evaluation Criteria. The following
criteria shall be the basis upon which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
formulate their decision. The following criteria are site location design standards
and/or performance standards which shall be met. This listing of standards is not
intended to be inclusive of all that may be required of the applicant to satisfy the
evaluation criteria.
A. Protection of the Public Health, Safety, and Welfare Criteria. The
project is designed, located and proposed to be operated so that the public
health, safety, and welfare will be protected. In addition, the following
standards shall be met:
(1) The fill area is to be located and designed so as to obviate any
predictable lateral movement of significant quantities of leachate from
the site to standing or flowing surface water or to shallow aquifers that
are in actual use or are deemed to be of potential use as a water
resource.
(2) The fill area is to be located and designed so that the base of
the landfill is at least 5 feet above the high water table unless a greater
separation is required to ensure that there will be no significant
adverse effect on ground or surface water or a lesser separation is
unlikely to have a significant adverse effect on ground and surface
waters.
(3) The footprint of the planned waste disposal area is located
outside of a delineated flood plain.
(4) The footprint of the planned waste disposal area is so situated
as to ensure: i) no adverse effect on any well within 1,000 feet of the
site and in existence at the time of application which is being used or
could be used without major renovation for human or livestock
consumption; or ii) at least 1,000 feet from any such well unless
hydrologic conditions are such that a greater distance is required to
ensure there is no adverse effect on the well; or an agreement between
the owners has been provided for.
(5) The fill area is located so that the source of any community
water system in existence at the time of application is within one mile
of the site or is at least one mile from the source of any community
water system in existence at the time of application. One mile shall
be the minimum distance from the fill area unless hydrologic
conditions are such that a greater distance is required to ensure no
adverse effect on the water system.
(6) The footprint of the planned waste disposal area is not located
in fragile land areas including, but not limited to, wetlands, and/or
karst terrain.
(7) The footprint of the planned waste disposal area is not located
in areas with rare or valuable ecosystems or geologic formations or
significant wildlife habitat.
(8) The footprint of the planned waste disposal area is not located
in areas with slopes of greater than twenty-five percent.
(9) The design of the landfill shall be compatible with the natural
terrain of the surrounding landscape.
B. Plan of Operation Criteria. The project is designed to minimize the
danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills, or other operational
accidents. To this end the applicant must demonstrate, in their site plan,
operational site plan, and plan of operations that the additional following
standards can be met:
(1) An aggressive and effective vector and litter control program
shall be provided.
(2) Solid waste will not be deposited in such a manner that material
or leaching from the waste could cause pollution of ground or surface
waters.
(3) All fill areas are accessible for solid waste disposal during all
weather conditions under which solid waste can be received.
(4) An aggressive soil erosion program and cover maintenance
program are provided. To that end the finished surface of the site must
be kept in good repair, covered with soil, and seeded with native
grasses or other suitable vegetation immediately upon completion or
promptly in the spring to areas terminated during winter conditions.
(5) The facility management and its employees are properly
trained in landfill operations and that an emergency response program
is provided for.
12. Post Construction of Sanitary Landfill.
A. Inspection. An inspection of the entire site shall be made by the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources, or their designee, to determine compliance
with IDNR approved plans and specifications prior to issuance of an
occupancy permit by the Department. In addition, an inspection of the entire
site shall be made by the designee(s) of the Council to determine compliance
with all site and structure requirements or other standards to be met as
outlined in the written decision of the Council prior to issuance of an
occupancy permit by the Department. Any necessary correcting work as
directed by IDNR or the County shall be performed before the landfill project
is accepted as completed and ready for issuance of an occupancy permit by
the Department.
B. Subsequent Zoning. The Exclusive Use District (EU) designation
replaces the previous zoning classification and, upon completion of the
sanitary landfill operation, no other use shall be permitted without a rezoning
and map amendment as provided in this chapter.
13. Waiver of Requirements or Standards. Whenever strict application of the
requirements or standards of this section would result in substantial hardship or
injustice, the Zoning Board of Adjustment, after recommendation by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, may vary or modify such requirements or standards. Said
waiver or modification may be granted so long as the applicant can demonstrate the
public health, safety, welfare, and interests of the City and the surrounding area are
protected, and that the general intent and spirit of this section are preserved.
(Ord. 05-14 – Nov. 05 Supp.)
176.46 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM.
1. For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
A. “Aggregate project” means those which are developed and operated
in a coordinated fashion, but have multiple entities separately owning one
or more of the individual WECS within the larger project. These projects
are prohibited in this section.
B. “Commercial WECS” means a WECS which is intended to produce
electricity specifically for sale to a regulated or non regulated utility or for
use off site. WECS which have a rated capacity equal to or greater than 100
kW will be considered commercial in this section.
C. “Fall zone” means the area, defined as the furthest distance from the
tower base, in which a tower will collapse in the event of a structural
failure.
D. “Feeder line” means any power line that carries electrical power
from one or more wind turbines or individual transformers associated with
individual wind turbines to the point of interconnection with the electrical
grid, in the case of interconnection with the high voltage transmission
systems the point of interconnection shall be the substation serving the
WECS.
E. “Gigawatt” (GW) is equal to 1,000,000,000 Watts.
F. “Guyed tower” means a tower that is supported, in whole or in part,
by guy wires and ground anchors.
G. “Kilowatt” (kW) is equal to 1,000 Watts.
H. “Lattice tower” means a self-supporting tower with three or four
sides, open, steel framed structure used to support equipment.
I. “Megawatt” (MG) is equal to 1,000,000 Watts.
J. “Meteorological tower” for the purpose of this Wind Energy
Conversion System section, meteorological towers are those towers which
are erected primarily to measure wind speed and directions plus other data
relevant to siting WECS. Meteorological towers do not include towers and
equipment used by airports, the Iowa Department of Transportation, or
other similar applications to monitor weather conditions.
K. “Monopole tower” means a tower consisting of a single pole,
constructed without guy wires and ground anchors.
L. “Non-Commercial WECS” means a WECS which has a rated
capacity of up to 100 kW which is incidental and subordinate to a permitted
use on the same parcel and which is intended to produce electricity
primarily for use on site. Such system may be connected to the electrical
grid when a parcel on which the system is installed also receives electrical
power supplied by a utility company. Excess electrical power generated
and not presently needed for on-site use may be used by the utility
company in accordance with Section 199, Chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa
Administrative Code.
M. “Residential WECS” consists of a wind turbine, tower, and
associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of
not more than 10 kW and which is intended to primarily reduce on-site
consumption of utility power. A system is considered a residential wind
energy system only if it supplies electrical power solely for onsite use,
except that when a parcel on which the system is installed also receives
electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical power
generated and not presently needed for onsite use may be used by the utility
company.
N. “Rotor diameter” means the diameter of the circle described by the
moving rotor blades.
O. “Total system height” means the height above grade of the system,
including the generating unit and attached blades or rotors.
P. “Tower” means the vertical component of a WECS that elevates the
wind turbine generator and attached blades/rotors above the ground.
Q. “Tower height” means the height above grade of the fixed portion of
the tower, excluding the generation unit and attached blades or rotors.
R. “Watt” (W) is the International System of Units' standard unit of
power, the equivalent of one joule per second.
S. “WECS - Wind Energy Conversion System” means an electrical
generating facility comprised of one or more wind turbines and accessory
facilities, including but not limited to: power lines, transformers,
substations, and meteorological towers that operate by converting the
kinetic energy of wind into electrical energy. The energy may be used onsite
or distributed into the electrical grid.
T. “Wind turbine generator” means the component of a wind energy
conversion system that transforms mechanical energy from the wind into
electrical energy.
2. Permitted Uses.
?
? District
? Resid
ential WECS
? (Up to
10 kW)
? N
on-Commercial
WECS
? (
? Comm
ercial WECS
? (Over
to 100 kW)
Up to 100 kW)
? A-1 ? C ? X ? X
? R-1 ? X ? X ? X
? R-2 ? X ? X ? X
? R-3 ? X ? X ? X
? R-4 ? X ? X ? X
? R-5 ? X ? X ? X
? R-6 ? X ? X ? X
? R-6A ? X ? X ? X
? R-M ? X ? X ? X
? RT-1 ? X ? X ? X
? O-1 ? X ? X ? X
? O-2 ? X ? X ? X
? C-1 ? X ? X ? X
? C-2 ? X ? X ? X
? C-3 ? C ? C ? X
? C-3P ? C ? C ? X
? C-4 ? C ? C ? X
? I-1 ? C ? C ? X
? I-2 ? C ? C ? X
? ? C =
Conditional Use
? X
= Not Permitted
? P =
Permitted Use
3. Regulations.
A. Accessory Use. All WECS shall be considered accessory uses.
B. Clearance of Blades. No portion of any WECS rotor blades shall
extend within 30 feet of the ground. No blades may extend over parking
areas, driveways, or sidewalks.
C. Set-back. No part of the WECS structure, including any guy wire
anchors, may extend closer than ten feet to the property boundaries of the
installation site. The system tower may be no closer to the property line
than 1.1 times the total system height, provided that it also complies with
any applicable fire setback requirements. Any non-commercial WECS
shall meet a minimum setback of three hundred (300) feet from the nearest
residential zoning district line.
D. Fall-Zone Clearance. No existing or proposed dwelling unit shall be
located within the fall zone of any WECS. Other accessory structures may
be located within 75% of the designated fall zone of the WECS.
E. Automatic Over Speed Controls. All WECS shall be equipped with
manual (electronic or mechanical) and automatic over speed controls to
limit the blade rotation speed within the design limits of the specific
system.
F. Sound. All WECS shall conform to Chapter 53 of the Marion Code
of Ordinances.
G. Approved WECS. All wind energy conversion systems must be
approved under an Emerging Technology program recognized by the
American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the U.S. Department of
Energy. Non-certified residential wind turbines must submit a description
of the safety features of the turbine, prepared by a registered mechanical
engineer.
H. Compliance with the Building Code. Building permit applications
for all WECS shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind
turbine structure, including the tower, base, and footings. An engineering
analysis of the tower showing compliance with the Building Code and
certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted.
I. Compliance with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
Regulations. All WECS must comply with applicable FAA regulations,
including any necessary approvals for installations close to airports.
J. Compliance with the National Electric Code. Building permits for
WECS shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components
in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of the
installation conforms to the National Electric Code.
K. Utility Notification. No WECS shall be installed until evidence has
been given that the utility company has been informed of the customer’s
intent to install an interconnected customer-owner generator.
L. Tower Configuration. Any WECS tower under fifty (50) feet in
total system height may have a monopole, guyed wire, or lattice design for
the support of wind generation equipment. All WECS towers with a total
system height of more than fifty (50) feet shall only be allowed a monopole
design.
M. Total System Height. Residential WECS shall have a total system
height of no greater than 50 feet, or twenty (20) feet above the tree canopy,
with a maximum total system height of 70 feet. Non-commercial WECS
shall have a maximum total system height of one hundred (100) feet.
N. Color and Finish. All WECS shall be white or grey in color. All
finishes shall be matt or non-reflective.
O. Lighting. Lighting, including lighting intensity and frequency of
strobe, shall adhere to but not exceed requirements established by the FAA
permits and regulations. Red strobe lights are preferred for night-time
illumination to reduce impacts on migrating birds. Red pulsating
incandescent lights should be avoided.
P. Signage. One sign, limited to 4 square feet, shall be posted at the
base of the tower. The sign shall include a notice of no trespassing, a
warning of high voltage, and the phone number of the owner/operator to
call in case of emergency.
Q. Climbing Apparatus. All climbing apparatus shall be located at least
12 feet above the ground, and the tower must be designed to prevent
climbing within the first 12 feet.
R. Fencing. To limit access to the tower, an opaque fence 6 feet high
with smooth side to the outside with a locking portal shall be placed around
the WECS. Residential WECS shall be exempt from these regulations.
S. Landscaping. All landscaping requirements shall comply with
Section 176.43 of the Marion Zoning Ordinance. Residential WECS shall
be exempt from these regulations.
T. Maintenance. Structures and facilities shall be well maintained in an
operational condition that poses no potential safety hazard.
U. Insurance. The owner/operator of a WECS must demonstrate
adequate liability insurance.
V. Removal. If the WECS remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a
continuous period of 1 year, the system shall be deemed discontinued and
shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner/operator shall remove the
abandoned system at their expense. Removal of the system includes the
entire structure, including foundations, transmission equipment, and
fencing from the property. Nonfunctioning or lack of operation may be
proven by reports from the interconnected utility. If removal of towers and
appurtenant facilities is required, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the
owner/operator. Each WECS shall have a Decommissioning Plan outlining
the anticipated means and cost of removing the WECS at the end of its
serviceable life or upon becoming a discontinued use. The cost estimates
shall be made by a competent party; such as a professional engineer, a
contractor capable of decommissioning or person with suitable expertise or
experience with decommissioning. The plan shall also identify the
financial resources that will be available to pay for the decommissioning
and removal of the WECS.
W. Lot Size. No residential WECS shall be constructed on a parcel
measuring less than 5 acres and no non-commercial WECS shall be
constructed on a parcel measuring less than 10 acres.
4. Submittal Requirements.
A. Application. An applicant for a WECS permit shall submit at least 9
full copies of a site plan, prepared by a professional engineer licensed to
practice in the State of Iowa. The professional engineer shall certify, in
writing, that the site plan meets all engineering requirements of the City of
Marion Code of Ordinances. Site plan requirements shall include:
(1) A site plan drawn to scale no greater than 1 inch equals 50
feet, based on a certified instrument survey by a surveyor licensed in
the State of Iowa.
(2) Location of the WECS on the site and total height of the
system, including blades, rotor diameter, and ground clearance. The
area of the base of each tower and depths shall be indicated.
(3) Utility lines, telephone lines and any other lines, both above
and below ground, within a radius of 2,000 feet. Information
presented shall contain details as how the power will be delivered to
the grid, including the route and size of poles and towers to be used.
(4) Property lot lines, land uses and the location and dimensions
of all existing structures and uses on and off site within 2,000 feet of
each WECS.
(5) Dimensional representation of the various structural
components of the wind tower construction, including the base and
footing.
(6) Design data indicating the basis of design, including
manufacturer’s dimensional drawings and installation and operation
instructions.
(7) Certification that the tower design is sufficient to withstand
wind-load requirements for structures as established by the Marion
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(8) Certification that the electrical system design is in compliance
with accepted engineering practices and with the appropriate
provisions of the National Electric Code.
(9) Certification that the rotor over speed control system is in
compliance with accepted engineering practices.
(10) The applicant shall provide a shadow flicker and blade glint
zone model for any proposed WECS as requested by staff. The
model shall:
a. Model and describe the zones where shadow flicker
and blade glint will likely be present within the project
boundary and a 2 mile radius beyond the project boundary.
Include the topography, existing residences, wind speeds and
directions, and existing vegetation and roadways. The model
shall represent the most probable scenarios of wind
consistency, sunshine constancy, and wind directions and
speeds.
b. Calculate the locations of shadow flicker and blade
glint caused by the proposed project; the expected durations
of the flicker and glint at these locations and the total number
of possible hours per year of flicker and glint at all locations.
(Ord. 07-33 – Feb. 08 Supp.)
176.47 CENTRAL CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT. The regulations set forth in
this section, or elsewhere in this chapter when applicable, shall apply in the Central
Corridor Overlay District.
1. Statement of Intent. The Central Corridor Overlay District is intended to
enhance the visual appearance and image of the Central Corridor and advance the
public welfare through the resulting benefits to the economy and quality of life for
the City of Marion. The Central Corridor extends between Highway 13 and Tama
Street through the City of Marion and is the primary gateway to the community and
points beyond. The City has recognized the importance of 7th Avenue/Business 151
to the City of Marion as a thoroughfare for regional traffic, the impact its character
has on the image of the community, and the need to provide restrictions and
guidelines to enhance the visual appearance and image of the Central Corridor.
2. Applicability. The restrictions, regulations, and guidelines on development
and construction set forth by this section shall apply to the Central Corridor (CC)
Overlay District shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City. If the restrictions,
regulations and guidelines of the CC Overlay District require standards, height
regulations, bulk regulations, open space and landscaping requirements, off-street
parking and loading requirements, buffer requirements, architectural standards, sign
regulations, lighting standards, street right-of-way improvements, or other
requirements and standards which are greater, or different than those set forth in the
underlying zoning district, the requirements and standards of this section shall
govern.
3. Bulk Regulations. The following additional bulk requirements shall be
observed in the Central Corridor Overlay District:
A. Lot Area. No subdivision of land shall create a lot of less than one (1)
acre in size. Furthermore, no re-subdivision of any parcels shall reduce in
size any existing lot.
B. Lot Width. No subdivision of land shall create a lot of less than 200'.
Furthermore, no re-subdivision of any parcels shall reduce in width any
existing lot.
C. Multiple use of a lot by more than one (1) principal building is
permitted, if the site is developed as a complex and the approved site plan
demonstrates that buildings are compatible in architectural design and use of
exterior materials; organized in close physical proximity, utilizing a
centralized open space, and provided parking areas are not located between
buildings within the complex.
4. Open Space and Landscaping Requirements. On-site open space and
landscaping requirements shall be the same as required for the underlying zoning
district.
A. Parking lot designs and landscaping standards of Section 176.43 of
this chapter shall also apply within the C-2, Central Business District
Commercial zoning district.
5. Off-Street Parking, Access and Loading. Off-street parking and loading
requirements shall be the same as required for the underlying zoning district, with
the following additional requirements:
A. Parking areas and loading areas, including loading dock, shall be
placed and screened to be obstructed from view from any public street.
B. No part of any parking or loading space and associated access drive
shall be closer than five (5) feet to any public street right-of-way or public
street easement to permit adequate area for landscape screening and to
perpetuate the desired open space character within this overlay district. A
waiver up to 2' may be issued upon staff review.
C. Greater setbacks than noted in (B) above may be required if future
right-of-way is required for 7th Avenue/Business 151 to meet the designated
widths of a major arterial street as identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
D. Redevelopment of a site within the Central Corridor, greater than 25%
of the assessed value of the building and property, shall require that all access
to the site be examined and brought into conformance to City Design
Standards for access management, however in no case shall access to the site
be completely eliminated.
6. Repealed by Ordinance No. 11-26 – Feb. 12 Supplement.
7. Architectural Standards. The requirements, guidelines, and standards set
forth in this section shall apply to any development or redevelopment of property
within the Central Corridor Overlay District.
A. Statement of Intent. In the interest of promoting the general welfare
of the community and to protect the value of buildings and property, the
image and character of a community is considered important. It is recognized
that the community should be visually attractive, as well as financially
prosperous and the manner in which a use is accomplished is as important as
the use. The quality of architecture and building construction is important to
the preservation and enhancement of building and property values,
prevention of the physical deterioration of buildings and the promotion of the
image of the community and the general welfare of its citizens. Architectural
design and use of materials for the construction of any building shall be
subject to the approval of the City Council.
B. Architectural Standards. Architectural plans for buildings shall
include: Documentation to be submitted shall include building elevations
showing the building’s design and exterior materials and any other
information as deemed necessary to make a determination. Detailed
information relating to any lighting or signage on the structure shall be
provided, including backlit material or accent lighting. The architectural
design shall be in accordance with the standards as contained in this section.
(1) Development Within the Area Identified as the Marion Central
Corridor. Building architectural design within this area shall recognize
the importance of material strength and permanency through the selection
of building materials, and the principle of structural strength and
permanency shall dominate the structural and exterior materials and
components. The primary material shall constitute at least 75 percent of the
wall area, excluding glass. The primary exterior material shall consist of a
combination of brick, architectural concrete panels, textured concrete block,
or architectural steel, or stone panels. The standard shall apply to all sides
of any building. The remaining exterior material shall be considered as
building trim. For the purposes of this section, trim is defined as an
ornamental design feature, that when removed does not significantly alter
the appearance of the building. It would commonly consist of building
elements like moldings, cornices, parapet, frieze, sills, lintels, stringcourse,
quoining, and ledgement. The maximum amount of trim on the wall area,
excluding glass, shall not exceed 25 percent. No wood, masonite, asphaltic
exterior wall or roof material, aluminum or steel siding, non-architectural
sheet metal, non-textured concrete block, stucco, vinyl, E.I.F.S. (Exterior
Insulation and Finish Systems) or other similar materials shall constitute a
portion of any building, except as trim.
(2) Wall Area Defined. In the application of these requirements, some
standards are based upon a percentage of the wall area. The wall area is
defined as the total square feet of the exterior elevation of the building that
is vertical to the ground. It may contain a gable end or dormer in the same
plane of view. It does not contain the elevation area of a pitched roof, but
would include the area of a parapet wall. Each elevation must comply with
the standards unless otherwise provided for herein or as approved by the
City Council.
(3) Nonresidential Buildings included under the Central Corridor
Overlay District. In order to achieve continuity along this corridor,
buildings abutting or within 300 feet of 7th Avenue/Business 151 shall be
designed in conformance with paragraph (1) and in addition, shall have
brick constitute at least 50 percent of the wall area that faces the arterial
street, excluding glass.
(4) General Provisions.
(a) Adequate treatment or screening of negative aspects of
buildings (loading docks, loading areas, outside storage areas,
garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any public
street and adjoining properties shall be required. Preference is given
to siting loading docks or loading areas out of view from public
streets.
(b) The City Council, in its sole discretion and after receiving a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, may
approve additional primary materials on a case-by-case basis,
provided that such materials exhibit the structural strength and
permanency desired, contain sufficient architectural relief, and do
not detract from the desired aesthetic character of the building and
the surrounding area.
(Ord. 10-22 – Aug. 10 Supp.)

176.48 MORATORIUMS. The City Council by resolution may establish a temporary
moratorium on the enforcement of any provision of this Code of Ordinances where it
finds that enforcement of said provision will hinder reaction to or recovery from any
natural or manmade disaster or emergency situation located in the City or the
metropolitan area and that a moratorium is in the best interests of the public health, safety
and welfare. The resolution establishing a temporary moratorium may establish such
conditions and restrictions as the City Council deems appropriate in the circumstances
then existing. The City Council may also enact temporary ordinances that are not a part
of the permanent Code of Ordinances and enforce the temporary ordinances as provided
in either Section 1.06 or Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances. The establishment of a
temporary moratorium shall not create any property interest or right in any person or
entity benefiting from the moratorium and a moratorium may be terminated by the City
Council at such time as it deems expedient without prior notice. This section does not
authorize the City Council to grant any permanent variance to any of the provisions of
this chapter or to grant any special use permit.
(Ord. 10-06 – May 10 Supp.)
176.49 URBAN AGRICULTURE.
1. Statement of Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish zoning
regulations for the operation of urban agriculture activities and to provide standards for
the siting, design, maintenance and modification of urban agriculture activities that
address public safety, and minimize impacts on residents and historic resources in the
City of Marion.
2. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings indicated:
A. "Beekeeper" means a person or persons managing and maintaining honey
bees in a hive or hives.
B. "Coldframe" means a temporary, unheated outdoor structure, no higher
than thirty-six (36") inches, used for protecting seedlings and plants from the
cold. Coldframes may be erected for up to 6 months during any given calendar
year.
C. "Colony" means a natural group of honey bees having a queen or queens.
D. "Composting" means a process of accelerated biodegradation and
stabilization of organic material under controlled conditions yielding a product
which can safely be used as fertilizer.
E. "Comprehensive Farm Review" means an evaluation by the Planning and
Development Department staff of the City of Marion for the overall design and
siting of an urban farm and farm structures. Activities defined as urban agriculture
must conform to the Zoning Code, specifically this section, in all other respects,
and must be processed and approved by the Planning and Development
Department for the City of Marion.
F. "Controlled Environment Agriculture (CEA)" means any agricultural
technology that enables the grower to manipulate the environment to desired
growing and/or cultivation conditions.
G. "Farm Area" means the area of a lot designated for activities and uses
defined as urban agriculture.
H. "Farmers' Market" means a public market administered by a market
manager and held multiple times per year to connect and mutually benefit local
farmers, communities and shoppers. Vendors may include local farmers, farmers'
cooperatives and producers selling any of the following: whole produce; valueadded
agricultural products such as jams, jellies, and pickles; prepared food; all
agricultural, and horticultural products including but not limited to whole
produce; plants; flowers; meats; dairy products; shellfish and finfish; and other
food-related products.
I. "Farm Stand" means a farm structure such as a table, stall or tent, in use
during that urban farm's growing season, and operated by a sole vendor for the
sale of agricultural or horticultural products.
J. "Farm Structures" means those structures that may include but are not
limited to sheds (tool and packing), compost bins, shade pavilions, farm stands,
trellises or other vertical supports for growing crops, and structures used to extend
the growing season such as greenhouses, hoophouses, coldframes, freight
containers, and similar structures.
K. Greenhouse" means a permanent structure made of glass, plastic, or
fiberglass in which plants are cultivated year round under controlled temperature
and humidity settings.
L. "Ground Level Urban Farm" means the use of a lot on the ground plane
for urban agriculture for commercial purposes, whether for profit or nonprofit.
M. "Hive" means a manufactured receptacle or container prepared for the use
of honey bees that includes movable frames, combs and substances deposited into
the hives by honey bees.
N. "Honey Bee" means a subset of bees in the genus Apis, primarily
distinguished by the production and storage of honey and the construction of
perennial, colonial nests out of wax.
O. "Hoophouse" means an outdoor structure made of flexible PVC piping or
other material covered with translucent plastic, constructed in a "half-round" or
"hoop" shape, generally tall enough for a person to enter standing up.
P. "Local" means from Iowa or Midwestern States.
Q. "Open Air Rooftop Farm" means an unenclosed area of a rooftop that is
used for urban agriculture for commercial purposes, whether for profit or
nonprofit.
R. "Raised Bed" means a method of cultivation in which soil is placed over a
geotextile barrier, and raised and formed into three (3) to four (4) foot wide
mounds. The soil may be enclosed by a frame generally made of untreated wood.
Raised beds are not considered a structure.
S. "Roof Level Urban Farm" means the use of a roof for urban agriculture for
commercial purposes, whether for profit or nonprofit.
T. "Rooftop Greenhouse" means a permanent structure located on a roof
made of glass, plastic, or fiberglass in which plants are cultivated year round.
U. "Urban Agriculture" means the use of a lot for the cultivation of food
and/or horticultural crops and accessory composting. Such use may include the
accessory keeping of hens, ducks or honey bees where allowed by underlying
zoning.
V. "Urban Farm, Ground Level, Large" means a ground level urban farm
with a farm area greater than one (1) acre that is used for urban agriculture for
commercial purposes, whether for profit or nonprofit.
W. "Urban Farm, Ground Level, Small" means a ground level urban farm
with a farm area less one (1) acre that is used for urban agriculture for commercial
purposes, whether for profit or nonprofit.
X. "Urban Farm, Roof Level, Large" means a roof level urban farm with a
farm area greater than one (1) acre that is used for urban agriculture for
commercial purposes, whether for profit or nonprofit.
Y. "Urban Farm, Roof Level, Small" means a roof level urban farm with a
farm area less one (1) acre that is used for urban agriculture for commercial
purposes, whether for profit or nonprofit.
Z. "Vertical Agriculture" means an exterior building wall or other vertical
structure designed to support the growing of agricultural or horticultural crops.
3. Applicability. No urban agriculture activity shall be conducted, or farm structure
erected, except in compliance with the provisions of this section. The provisions of this
section apply to all urban agriculture activities, whether such activity is a primary use or
an accessory use; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to
any of the following:
A. Any urban agriculture activity for which appeal to the Board of
Adjustment for any zoning relief has been made prior to the first notice of hearing
before the Zoning Commission for adoption of this section, and provided that
such zoning relief has been or is thereafter granted by the Board of Adjustment
pursuant to such appeal; or
B. Any urban agriculture activity conducted or farm structure erected
pursuant to a building permit issued prior to the first notice of hearing before the
Zoning Commission for adoption of this section.
C. Notwithstanding the above, any replacement of either such urban
agriculture activity or farm structure described in this section with another urban
agriculture activity or farm structure must comply with all the requirements of this
section.
4. Permit Required.
A. Permit Required. No person shall grow or maintain an urban farm within
the City of Marion without a valid urban farm permit obtained from the
permitting officer under the provisions of this section.
B. Application. In order to obtain a permit, an applicant must submit a
completed application on forms provided by the permitting officer, either online
or in paper form, and paying all fees required by this section.
C. Requirements. The requirements to the receipt of a permit include:
(1) All requirements of this section are met;
(2) All fees, as may be set from time to time by City Council
resolution, for the permit are paid in full;
(3) All judgments in the City's favor and against the applicant have
been paid in full;
(4) The applicant has provided notice to the residents of all
immediately adjacent dwellings of the applicant's intent to obtain a permit;
(5) The applicant has provided a site plan consistent with the
requirements of a Comprehensive Farm Review.
D. Issuance of Permit. If the permitting officer concludes, as a result of the
information contained in the application, that the requirements for a permit have
been met, then the officer shall issue the permit.
E. Denial, Suspension, Revocation, Non-Renewal. The permitting officer
may deny, suspend, revoke, or decline to renew any permit issued for any of the
following grounds:
(1) False statements on any application or other information or report
required by this section to be given by the applicant;
(2) Failure to pay any application, penalty, re-inspection or
reinstatement fee required by this section or City Council resolution;
(3) Failure to correct deficiencies noted in notices of violation in the
time specified in the notice;
(4) Failure to comply with the provisions of an approved
mitigation/remediation plan by the permitting officer, or designee;
(5) Failure to comply with any provision of this section.
F. Notification. A decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a permit
shall be in writing, delivered by ordinary mail or in person to the address
indicated on the application. The notification shall specify reasons for the action.
G. Effect of Revocation, Etc. When an application for a permit is denied, or
when a permit is revoked, the applicant may not re-apply for a new permit for a
period of one (1) year from the date of the denial or revocation.
H. Appeals. No permit may be denied, suspended, revoked, or not renewed
unless notice and an opportunity to be heard is given the applicant or holder of the
permit. In any instance where the permitting officer has denied, revoked,
suspended, or not renewed a permit, the applicant or holder of an urban farm
permit may appeal the decision to the City Manager, or designee other than the
permitting officer within ten (10) business days of receipt by the applicant or
holder of the permit of the notice of the decision. The applicant or holder of the
permit will be given an opportunity for a hearing. The decision of the officer
hearing the appeal, or any decision by the permitting officer which is not appealed
in accordance to this section shall be deemed final action.
5. Urban Farm, Ground Level.
A. Urban Farm. Ground Level.
(1) Use Regulations. The primary activity to be performed on an urban
farm shall be the cultivation of plants and horticultural crops; other
activities may be subject to permitting.
(a) Urban Farm, Ground Level, Small. Small ground level
urban farms are allowed in all districts.
(b) Urban Farm, Ground Level, Large. Large ground level
urban farms are allowed in all industrial districts. Large ground
level urban farms are conditional in all other districts.
(2) Maximum Height of Farm Structures. Farm structures, including
but not limited to hoophouses, sheds and shade pavilions, shall be subject
to the applicable height limits in the underlying zoning.
(a) Setbacks for Farm Structures.
i Subject to Section 176.32, Accessory Buildings and
Uses, all farm structures shall be set back five (3) feet from
all property lines in all district.
(3) Signage. The following regulations shall apply to signage used for
urban farms:
(a) Types of Signage:
i All ground level urban farms shall be required to
post one (1) identification sign, not exceeding six (6)
square feet in total area, attached at a height of no more
than four (4) feet high stating only the name of the ground
level urban farm and contact information.
ii One (1) temporary sign shall be allowed for a farm
stand and may be displayed during sales hours but must be
removed from the premises and stored inside a structure
when the farm stand is not in operation. Temporary farm
stand signs shall not encroach upon sidewalks, driveways
and/or other rights of way, and shall be displayed so as not
to create a nuisance or hazard.
(b) Sign Design Review.
i Urban farm signage shall be reviewed as required
by Section 176.31 Signs.
ii Urban farms subject to Comprehensive Farm
Review shall provide, as part of their CFR submittal, a
signage plan showing proposed signage and related
architectural features on the sign frontage.
6. Urban Farm Roof Level.
A. Rooftop Greenhouse.
(1) Use Regulations. The primary activity to be performed on an urban
farm shall be the cultivation of plants; other activities may be subject to
permitting.
(a) Rooftop greenhouses are allowed in all commercial, office
and industrial districts.
(b) Rooftop greenhouses are conditional in all other districts.
(2) Maximum Height. Rooftop greenhouses shall be no higher than
twenty-five (25) feet from the roof surface.
B. Urban Farm, Roof Level.
(1) Use Regulations. The primary activity to be performed on an urban
farm, or within a farm structure, shall be the cultivation of plants; other
activities may be subject to permitting.
(a) Urban Farm, Roof Level, Small. Small roof level urban
farms are allowed in all districts.
(b) Urban Farm, Roof Level, Large. Large roof level urban
farms are conditional in all districts.
(2) Maximum Height of Farm Structures. Farm structures, including
but not limited to hoophouses, sheds and shade pavilions, shall be subject
to the applicable height limits in the underlying zoning except for rooftop
greenhouses shall be no higher than twenty-five (25) feet from the roof
surface.
7. Comprehensive Farm Review.
A. Purpose of Comprehensive Farm Review. The purpose of the
Comprehensive Farm Review ("CFR") requirement of this section is to ensure
that all urban farms are sited and designed in a manner that is sensitive to the
surrounding neighborhood. In addition, any urban agriculture activities that are
designed as part of a new building, including but not limited to rooftop
agriculture, are integrated into the overall design and architecture of the new
building through Comprehensive Farm Review.
B. Applicability of Comprehensive Farm Review. Comprehensive Farm
Review shall be required for all urban farms.
C. Urban Farm Permit. A Comprehensive Farm Review shall be completed
prior to issuance of an urban farm permit.
D. Conditional Use Permit Approval. Comprehensive Farm Review shall be
reviewed and approved as a part of the conditional use permitting process for
large ground level or large roof level urban farms. The Board of Appeal shall not
grant a conditional use permit for large urban farm or large roof level farm unless
the conditions of this section are met.
E. Information Required to be a Complete Application for Comprehensive
Farm Review.
(1) The information required for Comprehensive Farm Review shall
include:
(a) At minimum, a sketch plan showing planted areas,
footprints for all farm structures, driveways, parking areas, and
landscape buffers; and
(b) At minimum, a sketch drawing for farm structures; and
(c) Photographs of existing site and adjacent properties to
provide site context; and
(d) Proposed plans for irrigation, and controls for storm water
runoff as required by City of Marion.
(e) Proposed signage plan showing proposed signage.
(2) Such submission materials shall describe or illustrate the
dimensions, location and appearance of:
(a) All proposed urban agriculture activities, materials used,
screening, fencing, landscaping, and the like, in a manner that is
sensitive to the surrounding area; and
(b) Any existing buildings which will remain along with the
proposed urban agriculture activities, if applicable, and any farm
structures within the visible context of such activity.
F. Design Guidelines. This subsection establishes the following design
guidelines for all proposed urban farms subject to Comprehensive Farm Review.
(1) Site Plan.
(a) Site planning, including location of farm structures,
vehicular access, and parking areas, should be designed to enhance
the street frontage and surrounding buildings and spaces. In
addition, placement of farm structures should respect significant
landscape features on the site, such as rock outcroppings, drainage
areas, and mature trees.
(b) Vehicular access and egress to and from an urban farm
should minimize traffic impacts on the adjacent roadways and
provide safe visual access for drivers and pedestrians.
(c) Composting, equipment storage, and disposal areas should
not be located in the front setback, unless there are special
circumstances that make it necessary. While a driveway may be
allowed in the front setback, the parking zone shall only be
permitted within the side or rear setbacks of the property.
(d) Composting which is accessory to an urban farm shall be
used primarily to support onsite operations, and shall comprise no
more than five (5%) percent of the lot area.
(2) Structures.
(a) New farm structures should be compatible with the size,
scale and material of the surrounding built and natural
environment.
(3) Perimeter Fencing.
(a) Any perimeter fencing for ground level urban farms may be
made of one or more materials, such as masonry (piers or walls),
metal pickets, decorative metal, post and rail, wrought iron,
shadow box, vinyl coated chain link, or board-type wood. The use
of un-coated metal chain link fencing is discouraged. The use of
plywood sheeting also is discouraged. Two or more materials may
be used in combination with each other, and piers and walls may
be used in combination with fences.
(4) Screening.
(a) Walls and Fences.
i Screening walls and fences may be made of one or
more materials, such as masonry (piers or walls),
decorative metal, shadow box, or board-type wood. The use
of un-coated metal chain link fencing is discouraged. The
use of plywood sheeting also is discouraged. Two or more
materials may be used in combination with each other, and
piers and walls may be used in combination with fences.
(b) Landscape Screening.
i Street-facing landscape elements, such as fencing,
street trees, plantings and signage, should be compatible
with the surrounding architecture and environment
provided pursuant to this section may be all deciduous or
all evergreen, or a mixture of both types. Shrubs shall be
densely planted. Trees required by this section may be
evergreen or a combination of deciduous and evergreen,
and of a sufficient size to provide adequate screening.
Existing mature trees and shrubs shall be maintained unless
this is not possible.
(5) Lighting.
(a) Lighting for ground level urban farms, roof level urban
farms, and rooftop greenhouses should be limited to that required
for operational and safety purposes of any activity defined as urban
agriculture so as not to create a nuisance through excessive
brightness to abutting residential uses. For ground level urban
farms, roof level urban farms and rooftop greenhouses abutting
residential uses, applicant shall supply a lighting schedule and
plans to mitigate fugitive light.
(6) Materials.
(a) For greenhouses, at least seventy percent (70%) of all roofs
and walls should consist of transparent materials.
(b) For hoophouses, materials should consist of flexible PVC
or metal tubing and transparent or translucent plastic covering.
Hoophouses shall be secured to the ground.
G. Design Requirements. This subsection establishes the following design
requirements for proposed urban farms subject to Comprehensive Farm Review.
(1) Screening and Buffering.
(a) Any composting, loading or disposal areas that abut (a) a
public street, (b) a public park, (c) a residential district or
residential use shall be screened from view as provided. Such
screening can include trees, shrubs, and perennial borders and/or
screening walls and fences. Any fencing shall not be less than fifty
(50%) percent opaque and shall be no less than three (3) feet and
no more than six (6) feet high.
(b) Any material or equipment stored outdoors shall be
surrounded by a wall or fence or vegetative screen of such height,
not less than six (6) feet high, as may be necessary to screen such
material or equipment from view from any public street or public
open space.
(2) Maintenance.
(a) All urban farms required to comply with this section shall
be maintained exclusively for the activities defined as urban
agriculture so long as a use requiring them exists.
(b) Urban farms shall be used in such a manner in which at no
time shall they constitute a nuisance or a hazard to the surrounding
neighborhood. Urban farms shall be maintained in a healthy
growing condition, especially in the off-season.
(c) There shall be no parking of vehicles or equipment between
a fence, hedge or other landscape screening and the public way,
such as the street or sidewalk. Inside storage of any materials,
supplies, or products is preferred.
8. Accessory Composting.
A. Accessory Composting.
(1) Use Regulations. Accessory composting shall be allowed where
any ground level urban farm, roof level urban farm is permitted.
(2) Maximum Height.
(a) Maximum height of composting structures or bins shall not
exceed five (5) feet for ground level and roof level urban farms in
any district.
(b) On a roof level urban farm, any composting must be
contained within an enclosed bin that does not have direct contact
with flammable materials.
(3) Setbacks.
(a) Compost bins, structures and windrows shall be set back
five (5) feet from all property lines on ground level urban farms in
all districts.
(b) Compost bins, structures and windrows shall not be located
in the front yard or in a side yard that abuts a street in all
residential and commercial districts.
(4) Lot Coverage.
(a) Composting which is accessory to an urban farm shall be
used primarily to support onsite operations, and shall comprise no
more than seven and a half (5 %) percent of the lot area.
9. Accessory Keeping of Honey Bees.
A. Use Regulations.
(1) Accessory keeping of honey bees shall be allowed as a conditional
use in all zoning districts, the Board of Appeal shall not grant a
conditional use permit for the accessory keeping of honey bees unless the
conditions of the section are met.
B. Maximum Number of Hives.
(1) The maximum number of hives on any given lot or roof for
personal consumption of honey bee products shall be two (2).
C. Maximum Height and Size.
(1) No hive shall exceed five (5) feet in height and twenty (20) cubic
feet in size on any lot.
D. Beekeeping Requirements.
(1) Setbacks.
(a) Where there is a wall, fence or similar barrier between the
subject property and adjacent property, no setback from the
property line is required. Where there is no wall, fence or similar
barrier between subject property and adjacent property, hives shall
be set back five (5) feet from the property line.
(b) Hives shall not be located in the front yard or in a side yard
that abuts a street in all residential and commercial districts.
(c) No hive shall be located closer than ten (10) feet from a
public sidewalk.
E. Hive Placement and Flyways.
(1) For any ground level hive that is within twenty(20) feet of the
doors and/or windows of the principal building on an abutting lot, either of
the following conditions must exist:
(a) The hive opening must face away from doors and/or
windows; or
(b) A flyway of at least six (6) feet in height comprising of a
lattice fence, dense hedge or similar barrier must be established in
front of the opening of the hive such that the honey bees fly
upward and away from neighboring properties. The flyway shall be
located within three (3) feet of the entrance to the hive and shall
extend at least two (2) feet in width on either side of the hive
opening.
F. Compliance with State and Local Laws.
(1) All beekeeping shall comply with applicable State and local laws
and regulations.
10. Farmers Markets and Farm Stands.
A. Farmers Markets.
(1) Use Regulations. Farmers markets shall be subject to the following
use regulations:
(a) Farmers markets on a lot or lots are allowed where retail is
allowed by the applicable underlying zoning.
(b) Farmers markets on a lot or lots are conditional where retail
is not allowed by the applicable underlying zoning.
(2) Permitting Requirements.
(a) The operation of a farmers market requires all applicable
permits as required by Iowa Administrative Code, 481 Chapter 30
Food and Consumer Safety.
B. Farm Stands. Up to one (1) farm stand may be constructed given the
following regulations:
(1) Use Regulations.
(a) Accessory farm stands selling and/or distributing only
horticultural and agricultural products are allowed where urban
farms are allowed provided that a single stand does not exceed
two-hundred (200) square feet in total floor area.
(b) Accessory farm stands are conditional in all other districts
where retail is not allowed by the applicable underlying zoning,
unless they are accessory to an urban farm.
(c) Accessory farm stands are only permitted to sell products
produced on the urban farm upon which the stand is accessory.
(2) Placement and Safety.
(a) Accessory farm stands shall not encroach upon sidewalks,
driveways and/or other rights of way, and shall be erected so as not
to create a nuisance or a hazard.
(3) Permits Required.
(a) The operation of a farm stand requires all applicable
permits as required by Iowa Administrative Code, 481 Chapter 30
Food and Consumer Safety.
11. Abandonment.
A. Removal Requirements. Any urban farm which has been abandoned shall
be cleared and restored to its original state. The owner/operator shall physically
remove all farm structures no more than one hundred and eighty (180) days after
the date of discontinued operations. More specifically, site clearing shall consist
of:
(1) Physical removal of all farm structures, farm equipment and
machinery;
(2) Disposal of all composting and agricultural waste in accordance
with local and state waste disposal regulations; and
(3) Stabilization of re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize
erosion. The Building Inspections Department may allow the owner to
leave landscaping in order to minimize erosion and disruption to
vegetation.
B. Abandonment. The former ground level or roof level urban farm site shall
be considered abandoned when it fails to operate for more than one year without
the written consent of the Building Inspections Department.
C. The Building Inspections Department shall determine what proportion of
the site is inoperable for the facility to be considered abandoned. If the applicant
fails to remove the farm structures, farm equipment and machinery in accordance
with the requirements of this section within one hundred and eighty (180) days of
abandonment, the Building Inspections Department shall have the authority to
enter the property and conduct all removal activities.
12. Regulations.
A. The City of Marion City Council may promulgate regulations to
administer this section.
13. Severability.
A. The provisions of this section are severable, and if any provision of this
section shall be held invalid by any decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not impair or otherwise affect any other provision
of this section.
(Ord. 15-11 – May 15 Supp.)
176.51 NEW ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS.
Agricultural and Rural Residential Districts
1. AG Agricultural Holding District
A. The AG, Agricultural Holding District is intended to preserve
existing agriculture and other non-intensive uses to prevent premature
development and non-orderly encroachment of intensive urban uses; and
to help guide urban growth into suitable areas. The AG is characterized
by a very rural environment consisting of primarily commercial
agricultural actives, and associated farmsteads. Density and intensity
standards for this district are designed to ensure that development which
requires even a minimum of urban services does not occur until such
services are available. As such, the AG District shall either serve as a
designation which preserves and protects agricultural activities, or as a
holding zone which provides for an interim land use that will easily
permit further development at the appropriate time. (35 Acre Minimum)
2. RR-1 Rural Residential District
A. The RR-1, Rural Residential District is intended to preserve low
density residential development which has been annexed into the City.
The RR-1 is characterized by its semi-rural character including large
single family lots surrounded by ample open-space and large setbacks.
Lots are free from agricultural uses. Streets are not typically built to City
Standards and maintain a rural cross section; some areas may be served
with municipal sewer or water, but most do not. The RR-1 is a closed
district, new zoning to the RR-1 would only be recommended in newly
annexed areas (Minimum 3/4 Acre Lot)
Bulk Regulations 176.51-Table1 establishes bulk regulations for the residential districts.
Section 176.35 specifies permitted encroachments in yards and setbacks applicable to
accessory buildings and structures.
Permitted and Conditional Uses 176.51-Table 4 lists permitted, conditional uses, and
permitted as accessory uses for the residential districts.
176.51-Table 1
AGRICULTURAL AND RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT BULK REQUIREMENTS
ft = feet ZONINGDISTRICT
sf = square feet
du = dwelling unit AG RR-1
MinimumLot Area 35 acres 1 acre (43,560 sf)
MinimumLotWidth 150 ft 150 ft
MaximumBuilding Height 35 ft or 2 1/2 stories,
whichever is less
35 ft or 2 1/2 stories,
whichever is less
MinimumFront Yard1 50 ft 50 ft
MinimumSide Yard (Interior) 25 ft 25 ft
MinimumSide Yard (Corner) 50 ft 50 ft
MinimumRear Yard 50 ft 50 ft
MinimumOpen Space -- --
1Where 50% or more of the street frontage of the block has existing principle building setbacks less than the front
or corner side yard required by the zoning district, the required front yard or corner side yard may be reduced to
the average of the existing front or exterior side yard setbacks on that street frontage of the block. Only front
yard setbacks shall be used to compute the reduced front yard setback, only corner side yard setbacks shall be
used to reduced corner side yard setback.
Suburban Residential Districts
1. SR-E Suburban Residential Estate District
A. The SR-E, Suburban Residential Estate District is intended to
accommodate low density single family residential development
primarily occurring in the City. The SR-E District is characterized by its
semi-rural character including large single family lots surround by ample
open-space and large setbacks. SR-E District may include developments
annexed into the City after development but are generally built to City
Standards and do not maintain a rural cross-section; areas are generally
served with municipal sewer and water. (Minimum 1/2 Acre Lot)
2. SR-1 Suburban Low-Density Single-Family Residential District.
A. The SR-1, Suburban Low Density Single-Family Residential
District is intended and designed for lower density single-family areas of
the City free from other uses except those which are both compatible
with and convenient to the residents of such a district. (10,000 Minimum
Lot)
3. SR-2 Suburban Medium-Density Single-Family Residential District.
A. The SR-2, Suburban Medium Density Single-Family Residential
District is intended and designed for medium-density Single-Family
areas free from other uses except those which are both compatible with
and convenient to the residents of such a district. (8,000 Minimum Lot)
4. SR-3 Suburban Medium-Density Single-Family Residential District
(Previously R- 2 District)
A. The SR-3, Suburban Medium Density Single-Family Residential
District is intended and designed for medium-density Single-Family
areas free from other uses except those which are both compatible with
and convenient to the residents of such a district. (6,000 Minimum Lot)
5. SR-4 Suburban Two-Family Residential District.
A. The SR-4, Suburban Two-Family Residential District is intended
and designed for certain medium density residential areas of the City free
from other uses except those which are both compatible with and
convenient to the residents of such a district. SR-4 District is
characterized by two-family dwellings, typically developed within a
condominium regime, but does not include zero lot line development.
(8,000 Single Family / 10,000 Two-Family Attached Minimum Lot)
6. SR-5 Suburban Three and Four-Family Residential District
A. The SR-5, Suburban Three and Four-Family Residential District
is intended and designed for certain medium to high density residential
areas of the City free from other uses except those which are both
compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district. SR-5
is characterized by three or four family dwellings, typically developed
within a condominium regime. This district is designed to serve as a
buffer between lower density residential districts and more intensive
districts such as medium and high density suburban multiple- family
residential or business districts. (12,000 Three-Family / 15,000 Four-
Family Attached Minimum Lot)
Bulk Regulations 176.51-Table2 establishes bulk regulations for the residential districts.
Section 176.35 specifies permitted encroachments in yards and setbacks applicable to
accessory buildings and structures.
Permitted and Conditional Uses Table176.51-Table4 lists permitted, conditional uses,
and permitted as accessory use for the residential districts.
176.51-Table 2
1Where 50% or more of the street frontage of the block has existing principle building setbacks less than the front or corner side yard required by the zoning
district, the required front yard or corner side yard may be reduced to the average of the existing front or exterior side yard setbacks on that street frontage of the
block. Only front yard setbacks shall be used to compute the reduced front yard setback, only corner side yard setbacks shall be used to compute the reduced
corner side yard setback.
SUBURBAN RESIDENTIALDISTRICT BULK REQUIREMENTS
ft = ft
sf = square feet
du = dwelling unit
ZONING DISTRICT
SR-E SR-1 SR-2 SR-3
(Old R-2) SR-4 SR-5
MinimumLot Area 1/2 acre
(21,780 sf)
10,000 sf 8,000 sf 6,000 sf Single Family: 8,000 sf
Two Family: 10,000 sf
Three Family: 12,000
Four Family: 15,000
MinimumLotWidth 90 ft 80 ft 70 ft 60 ft Single Family: 70 ft
Two Family: 105 ft
Single Family: 70 ft
Two Family: 105 ft
Three Family: 120 - 140 ft
Four Family: 150 ft - 175 ft
MaximumBuilding
Height
40 ft or 2 1/2
stories,
whichever is
less
40 ft or 2 1/2
stories,
whichever is
less
35 ft or 2 1/2
stories,
whichever is
less
35 ft or 2 1/2
stories,
whichever is
less
35 ft or 2 1/2 stories,
whichever is less
35 ft or 2 1/2 stories,
whichever is less
MinimumFront Yard1 40 ft 30 ft 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft
MinimumSide Yard
(Interior)
10 ft 7 ft 7 ft 7 ft 7 ft 7 ft
MinimumSide Yard
(Corner)
20 ft 12 ft 12 ft 12 ft 12 ft 12 ft
MinimumRear Yard 50 ft 35 ft 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft
MinimumOpen
Space
-- -- -- -- 30% 40%
Traditional Residential Districts
1. TR-1 Traditional Low-Density Single-Family Residential District.
A. The TR-1, Traditional Low Density Single-Family Residential
District is intended to stabilize and protect the characteristics of mature
residential areas typically located near Uptown Marion or a part of the
Original City. The district is designed for the preservation of low density
single-family areas free from other uses except those which are both
compatible with and convenient to the residents of such a district. (6,000
Minimum Lot)
2. TR-2 Traditional Medium-Density Single-Family Residential District.
A. The TR-2, Traditional Medium Density Single-Family
Residential District is intended to stabilize and protect the characteristics
of mature residential areas typically located near Uptown Marion or a
part of the Original City. The district is designed for the preservation of
medium density single-family areas free from other uses except those
which are both compatible with and convenient to the residents of such
a district. (5,000 Minimum Lot)
3. TR-3 Traditional Two-Family ResidentialDistrict.
A. The TR-3, Traditional Two-Family Residential District is
intended to stabilize and protect the characteristics of mature residential
areas typically located near Uptown Marion or a part of the Original City.
The district is designed for the preservation of medium density single
and two-family Residential homes free from other uses except those
which are both compatible with and convenient to the residents of such
a district. Generally multiple family dwellings are converted large
single-family homes. (5,000 Minimum Lot)
4. TR-4 Traditional Four-Family Residential District.
A. The TR-4, Traditional Four-Family Residential District is
provided to accommodate those older established areas of the City which
contain a mix of single to four family residential homes development
near Uptown Marion or a part of the Original City. Generally multiple
family dwellings are converted large single-family homes. (5,000
Minimum Lot)
Multiple-Family Residential Districts
1. MR-1 Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential District.
A. The MR-1, Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential
District is intended and designed for certain medium density residential
areas of the City. The MR-1 is characterized by medium sized
multifamily buildings on a single lot or a multifamily complex consisting
of several multiple family buildings on a single lot. The maximum
density in the MR-1 is 8 units per acre. The MR-1 also provides for
limited institutional uses that are compatible with surrounding residential
neighborhoods.
2. MR-2 High Density Multiple-Family Residential Density.
A. The MR-2, High Density Multiple-Family Residential District is
intended and designed for certain high-density residential areas of the
City. The MR-2 is characterized by large multifamily buildings on a
single lot or multifamily complex consisting of several multiple family
buildings on a single lot. The maximum density in the MR-2 is 20 units
per acre. The MR-2 also provides for limited institutional uses that are
compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods.
Bulk Regulations 176.51-Table3 establishes bulk regulations for the residential districts.
Section 176.35 specifies permitted encroachments in yards and setbacks applicable to
accessory buildings and structures.
Permitted and Conditional Uses Table176.51-Table4 lists permitted, conditional uses,
and permitted as accessory use for the residential districts.
176.51-Table 3
TRADITIONAL&MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT BULK REQUIREMENTS
ft = ft
sf = square feet
du = dwelling unit
ZONINGDISTRICT
TR-1 TR-2 TR-3 TR-4 MR-1 MR-2
MinimumLot Area 6,000 sf 5,000 sf 5,000 sf 5,000 sf 8,000 sf 2 acres (87,120 ft)
MinimumLotWidth 60 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 100 ft 200 ft
MaximumBuilding Height 35 ft or 2 1/2
stories
35 ft or 2 1/2
stories
35 ft or 2 1/2
stories
35 ft or 2 1/2
stories
45 ft or 3
stories 45 ft or 3 stories1
MinimumFront Yard2 15-20 ft 15-20 ft 15-20 ft 15-20 ft 25 ft 25 ft
MinimumSide Yard
(Interior) 7 ft 5 ft 5 ft 5 ft 12 ft 12 ft
MinimumSide Yard (Corner) 12 ft 12 ft 12 ft 12 ft 12 ft 12 ft
MinimumRear Yard3 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft
MinimumOpen Space -- -- -- 40 % 40% 40%
LandscapeRequired -- -- Yes Yes Yes Yes
1Whichever is less, except that the maximum height may increase by one (1) foot for each one-half (1/2) foot that the front, rear and interior and corner side yard setbacks are
increased over the required minimums up to a maximum of 100' in height with no limit on the number of stories.
2Where 50% or more of the street frontage of the block has existing principle building setbacks less than the front or corner side yard required by the zoning district, the
required front yard or corner side yard may be reduced to the average of the existing front or exterior side yard setbacks on that street frontage of the block. Only front
yard setbacks shall be used to compute the reduced front yard setback, only corner side yard setbacks shall be used to compute the reduced corner side yard setback.
Shall only apply to the TR-1, TR-2, TR-3 and TR-4 zoning district.
3 25 ft or 20% of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller, but in no event less than 15 ft shall only apply to the TR-1, TR-2, TR-3 and TR-4 zoning district.
176.51-Table 4
Zoning Districts -- Permitted and Special Uses
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
A = Permitted as Accessory Use
AG RR SR-E SR-1 SR-2 SR-3 SR-4 SR-5 TR-1 TR-2 TR-3 TR-4 MR-1 MR-2 Specific Use
Standards
RESIDENTIAL USES
Artist Live/Work Space Y
Assisted Living Facility C C C
Dwelling Unit, Auxiliary (attached) C C C C C C C C C C Y
Dwelling Unit, Auxiliary (detached) C C C C C C Y
Dwelling, Efficiency/Micro
Dwelling, One Unit P P P P P P P P P P P P
Dwelling, Townhouse P P P P P P P
Dwelling, Two-unit (duplex) P P P P
Dwelling, Three-unit (triplex) P P
Dwelling, Four-unit P P
Dwelling,Multi-Unit P P
Dwelling, Upper level
FamilyHome P P P P P P P P P P P P
Group Home, Large C C C C C C C C C C C C C Y
Group Home, Small P P P P P P P P P P P P P Y
Independent Living Facility P P P
176.51-Table 4
Zoning Districts -- Permitted and Special Uses
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
A = Permitted as Accessory Use
AG RR SR-E SR-1 SR-2 SR-3 SR-4 SR-5 TR-1 TR-2 TR-3 TR-4 MR-1 MR-2 Specific Use
Standards
CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS, RECREATIONAL AND ENTERTAINMENTUSES
Art Gallery/Studio
Carnival (as temporary use) Y
Convent/Monastery A A A A A A A A A A A P P P
Cultural Facility
Golf Course
Indoor Recreation and Amusement
Live Entertainment
Lodge or Private Club
Outdoor Dining
OutdoorAmusement
Outdoor Recreation
Outdoor Entertainment, Temporary
Park,Neighborhood P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Place ofWorship C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Public Plaza
Theater (Small/Large)
176.51-Table 4
Zoning Districts -- Permitted and Special Uses
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
A = Permitted as Accessory Use
AG RR SR-E SR-1 SR-2 SR-3 SR-4 SR-5 TR-1 TR-2 TR-3 TR-4 MR-1 MR-2 Specific Use
Standards
OTHER
Horse Stables, Private p
ParkingGarage/Structure
Parking Lot, Private A A A A A A A A A A A A A A
Parking Lot, Public
Transportation Operations Facility
Communication Tower C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Chapter 176.40,
Code of Ord.
CommunicationAntenna A A A A A A A A A A A A A A Chapter 176.40,
Code of Ord.
Urban Agricultural P
Utility,Community/Regional C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Utility, Local P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Wind Turbine, StructureMounted Chapter 176.40,
Code of Ord.
Wind Turbine, TowerMounted Chapter 176.40,
Code of Ord.
Business and Mixed-Use Districts
1. BL Local Business District
A. The purpose of the BL Local Business District is to provide
locations for small-scale service and retail uses that primarily serve the
convenience needs of residential neighborhoods. The BL District permits
a mix of uses, but care must be taken to ensure that adequate access,
parking and screening is provided so as not to negatively impact
adjoining residential neighborhoods and building design should be
compatible with residential properties.
2. BC Community Business District
A. The purpose of the BC Community Business District is to
accommodate mid-size retail and service development along Strategic
Regional Arterial corridors such as Tower Terrace Road and Marion
Boulevard. Uses in the BC District have the potential to generate
significant automobile traffic, and therefore care must be taken to
properly design access and parking facilities. Since this district is located
along the roads that serve as gateways into Marion, quality building
architecture, landscaping and other site improvements are necessary to
ensure this type of development enhances Marion’s image.
3. BR Regional Business District
A. The purpose of the BR Regional Business District is to provide
locations along Strategic Regional Arterial corridors for shopping
centers and business uses that draw patrons from Marion’s, surrounding
communities and the broader region. The BR District consists primarily
of large-scale development that has the potential to generate significant
automobile traffic. It should be designed in a coordinated manner with
an interconnected street network that is consistent with the City’s
Comprehensive Plan. Uncoordinated, piecemeal development of small
parcels that do not fit into a larger context are discouraged in the BR
District. Compatible land uses, access, traffic circulation, storm water
management and natural features, all should be integrated into an overall
development plan. Because this district is primarily at high- visibility
locations, quality building architecture, landscaping and other site
improvements are required to ensure superior aesthetic and functional
quality.
Bulk Regulations 176.51-Table5 establishes bulk regulations for the residential districts.
Section 176.35 specifies permitted encroachments in yards and setbacks applicable to
accessory buildings and structures.
Permitted and Conditional Uses 176.51-Table6 lists permitted, conditional uses, and
permitted as accessory uses for the residential districts.
176.51-Table 5
BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT BULK REQUIREMENTS
ft = ft ZONINGDISTRICT
sf = square feet
du = dwelling unit
BL
Local Bus
BC
Community
BR
Regional
MinimumLot
Area 6,000 sf 1 acre (43,560 sf) 1 acre (43,560 sf)
MinimumLot
Width 60 ft 0 ft 0 ft
Maximum
BuildingHeight
2.5 stories
35 ft
3 stories
45 ft
3 stories1
45 ft
MinimumFront
Yard 25 ft 20 ft 20 ft
MinimumSide
Yard (Interior) 0 ft2 0 ft 15 ft
MinimumSide
Yard (Corner) 12 ft 12 ft 15 ft
MinimumRear
Yard 0 ft3 0 ft 0 ft
MinimumOpen
Space --
25% of first 3
acres and 10%of
Balance
25% of first 3 acres
and 10% of
Balance
Landscape
Required Yes Yes Yes
1 Except that the maximum height may increase by one (1) foot for each one-half (1/2) foot that the front, rear and
side yard setbacks are increased over the required minimums, up to a maximum of 150 feet in height with no limit
on the number of stories.
2 Except when a lot abuts a Suburban Residential or Traditional Residential District, in which case there shall be a
side yard setback of 7 ft.
3 Except when a lot abuts a Suburban Residential or Traditional Residential District, in which case there shall be a
rear yard setback of 25 ft or 20 percent for the lot depth, whichever amount is smaller, but in no event less than 15
ft.
176.51-Table 6
Zoning Districts -- Permitted and Special Uses
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
A = Permitted as Accessory Use
BL BC BR Specific Use
Standards
RESIDENTIALUSES
Artist Live/Work Space Y
Assisted Living Facility C
Dwelling Unit, Auxiliary (attached) Y
Dwelling Unit, Auxiliary (detached) Y
Dwelling, Efficiency/Micro
Dwelling, One Unit
Dwelling, Townhouse
Dwelling, Two-unit (duplex)
Dwelling, Three-unit (triplex)
Dwelling, Four-unit
Dwelling,Multi-Unit
Dwelling, Upper level P P
FamilyHome
Group Home, Large Y
Group Home, Small Y
Independent Living Facility
RETAIL AND SERVICE USES
Bank P P P
Bed and Breakfast Y
CarWash C P Y
Coffee or Tea Room P P P
Day Care Center P P P
Delayed Deposit P P Y
Drive-Thru Facility C P Y
Financial Institution P P P
Firework Sales
Funeral Home / Mortuary P P
Gas Station C P Y
Grocery
Grocery - Neighborhood
Heavy Retail and Service P
Home Improvement Center P
176.51-Table 6
Zoning Districts -- Permitted and Special Uses
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
A = Permitted as Accessory Use
BL BC BR Specific Use Standards
RETAIL AND SERVICE USES
Hotel/Motel C P
Kennel Y
Medical Cannabidiol Dispensaries (Sales) Y
Medical/Dental Clinic P P
Medical/Dental Clinic, Not exceeding 2500
gross floor area.
Microbrewery/Micro-Distillery/Micro- P P
Motor Vehicle Rental A
Motor Vehicle Sales and Leasing P Y
Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Major Y
Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor P P Y
Office, Business and Professional P P P
Outdoor Sales, Permanent CA CA Y
Outdoor Sales, Temporary A A A Y
Pawn Shop CA
Personal Services P P P
Personal Services, Limited
Professional Training Center
Restaurant C P P
Retail Sales Not exceeding 2,500 gross
floor area
Retail Sales Large P P
Retail Sales, Medium P P
Retail Sales, Small P P P
Retail Sales, Specialty P P P
Sexually Oriented Business C Chapter 127, Code of Ord.
Tattoo Parlor / Body Piercing Studio C P
Tavern/Bar C P
Veterinary Office/Animal Hospital P P Y
176.51-Table 6
Zoning Districts -- Permitted and Special Uses
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
A = Permitted as Accessory Use
BL BC BR Specific Use Standards
INDUSTRIAL/STORAGE USES
Crematory Retort A A
Junk/Salvage Yard
Manufacturing,Heavy
Manufacturing, Light
Medical CannabidiolManufacturing Y
Mini-Warehouse
Motor Vehicle Storage, Permanent Y
Motor Vehicle Storage, Temporary P Y
Outdoor Storage
Recycling Facility
Research and Development Use
Warehouse/Distribution
CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS, RECREATIONAL AND ENTERTAINMENT USES
Art Gallery/Studio P P P
Carnival (as temporary use) P P Y
Convent/Monastery
Cultural Facility P P
Golf Course
Indoor Recreation and Amusement P P
Live Entertainment A A
Lodge or Private Club P P P
Outdoor Dining P P
OutdoorAmusement CA
Outdoor Recreation P P
Outdoor Entertainment, Temporary A A A
Park,Neighborhood P
Place ofWorship P P P
Public Plaza A A A
Theater (Small/Large) P P
176.51-Table 6
Zoning Districts -- Permitted and Special Uses
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
A = Permitted as Accessory Use
BL BC BR Specific Use Standards
GOVERNMENTAL AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
Cemetery
College/University P P
Correctional Facility
Emergency Medical Center P
Fairground C
Homeless Shelter
Hospice
Hospital P
Library
Nursing Home
Office, Government P
Post Office P P
Police Firearms Training Range
Public Service Facility P P
School, Specialized Instructional P P P
School, Primary or Secondary
OTHER
Horse Stables, Private
Parking Garage/Structure A
Parking Lot, Private A A A
Parking Lot, Public
TransportationOperations Facility C P
Communication Tower C C Chapter 176.40, Code of Ord.
CommunicationAntenna P P P Chapter 176.40, Code of Ord.
Urban Agricultural
Utility,Community/Regional C C C
Utility, Local P P P
Wind Turbine, StructureMounted A A A Chapter 176.40, Code of Ord.
Wind Turbine, TowerMounted C C Chapter 176.40, Code of Ord.
Office/Service and Manufacturing Districts
1. OS Office/Service District
A. The OS Office/Service District is designed to accommodate
office and certain service and research uses that require a percentage of
lower building coverage and larger setbacks than those types of office
and service uses found within the commercial districts. The OS District
is designed to provide an open, landscaped appearance along public
streets and to provide a buffer area between residential uses and other
commercial or industrial uses.
2. M-1 Light Manufacturing District
A. The purpose of the M-1 Light Manufacturing District is to
accommodate a wide range of industries whose primary operations occur
entirely within enclosed structures and which pose limited potential for
environmental impacts on neighboring uses. While the emphasis is on
industrial, manufacturing, and related uses, small-scale office and
commercial uses intended to serve nearby industries and employees are
permitted. The uses typically will include clean, non- objectionable
industries whose operating characteristics are either confined
completely within the property or result in limited secondary impacts in
terms of traffic, air emissions, and hours of operation.
3. M-2 General Manufacturing District
A. The purpose of the M-2 General Manufacturing District is to
accommodate a wide range of manufacturing, assembly, processing, and
warehousing and office/research activities, both as individual users and
in a business park setting. New development and redevelopment in this
District shall focus on providing sufficient setbacks, and adequate
landscaping and buffering from adjacent non-industrial uses and public
rights-of-way. Outdoor storage and loading, and other outdoor activities,
shall be adequately screened. Certain general industrial uses that may
tend to be objectionable due to their odor, vibrations, smoke, glare, hear,
noise, or similar characteristics are provided as conditional uses in this
district.
Public Institutional and Recreation and Open Space District
1. PI Public Institutional District
A. The purpose of the PI District is to protect and maintain
properties owned by the City, the School District, and public and private
outdoor recreation. The development standards are intended to provide
flexibility to the public and semi- public entities in the use of their land
while protecting surrounding uses.
2. ROS Recreation and Open Space District
A. The purpose of the ROS District is to recognize and protect the
environmental functions of certain natural and passive recreational
areas, including large City greenways, parks, storm water management
areas, golf courses and similar areas. Development within the district is
limited in order to protect natural drainage ways and water retention
areas, natural habitat for plant and animal life, steep slopes, woodlands
and other resources beneficial to the community.
Bulk Regulations 176.51-Table7 establishes bulk regulations for the Office/Service,
Manufacturing, Public Lands and Recreation and Open Space districts. Section 176.35
specifies permitted encroachments in yards and setbacks applicable to accessory
buildings and structures.
Permitted and Conditional Uses 176.51-Table8 lists permitted, conditional uses, and
permitted as accessory uses for the Office/Service, Manufacturing, Public Lands and
Recreation and Open Space districts.
176.51-Table 7
OFFICE, INDUSTRIAL, PUBLIC LANDS AND RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE
BULK REQUIREMENTS
ft = feet
ZONING DISTRICT
sf = square feet
du = dwelling unit OS
Office/Service
M-1
Conditional
Industrial
M-2
Limited
Industrial
PI
Public
Institutional
ROS
Recreation and
Open Space
Minimum Lot Area 21,000 sf -- -- -- --
Minimum Lot Width None None None None --
Maximum Building
Height
3 stories or 45
ft1
3 stories or 35
ft
3 stories or
45 ft1
3 stories or
45 ft1 --
Minimum Front Yard 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft 25 ft --
Minimum Side Yard
(Interior)
15 ft 0 ft 0 ft 25 ft --
Minimum Side Yard
(Corner) 15 ft 15 ft 15 ft 25 ft --
Minimum Rear Yard 25 ft 0 ft 0 ft 25 ft --
Minimum Open
Space
25% of first 3
acres and
10% of
Balance
-- -- 40% --
Landscape Required Yes Yes Yes Yes --
1 Maximum height may increase by one (1) foot for every one-half (1/2) foot that the front, rear and side yard setbacks are
increased over the required minimums, up to a maximum of 150 feet in height with no limit on the number of stories.
176.51-Table 8
Zoning Districts -- Permitted and Special Uses
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
A = Permitted as Accessory Use
OS M-1 M-2 PI ROS Specific Use
Standards
RESIDENTIAL USES
Artist Live/Work Space C Y
Assisted Living Facility P
Dwelling Unit, Auxiliary (attached) Y
Dwelling Unit, Auxiliary (detached) Y
Dwelling, Efficiency/Micro
Dwelling, One Unit
Dwelling, Townhouse
Dwelling, Two-unit (duplex)
Dwelling, Three-unit (triplex)
Dwelling, Four-unit
Dwelling, Multi-Unit
Dwelling, Upper level
Family Home
Group Home, Large Y
Group Home, Small Y
Independent Living Facility
RETAIL AND SERVICES USES
Bank P
Bed and Breakfast Y
CarWash P P Y
Coffee or Tea Room
Day Care Center P P
Delayed Deposit Y
Drive-Thru Facility P Y
Financial Institution P
Firework Sales P P
Funeral Home / Mortuary P
Gas Station P P Y
Grocery
Grocery - Neighborhood
Heavy Retail and Service P P
Home Improvement Center
176.51-Table 8
Zoning Districts -- Permitted and Special Uses
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
A = Permitted as Accessory Use
OS M-1 M-2 PI ROS Specific Use
Standards
RETAIL AND SERVICES USES
Hotel/Motel P
Kennel P P Y
Medical Cannabidiol Dispensaries (Sales) Y
Medical/Dental Clinic P P
Medical/Dental Clinic, Not exceeding 2500
gross floor area.
Microbrewery/Micro-Distillery/Micro-
Winery
Motor Vehicle Rental P P P
Motor Vehicle Sales and Leasing Y
Motor Vehicle Service and Repair,Major C P Y
Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor P P Y
Office, Business and Professional P P P
Outdoor Sales, Permanent A P Y
Outdoor Sales, Temporary A A A Y
Pawn Shop
Personal Services
Personal Services, Limited P
Professional Training Center P P
Restaurant
Retail Sales Not exceeding 2,500 gross
floor area
Retail Sales Large
Retail Sales,Medium
Retail Sales, Small
Retail Sales, Specialty
Sexually Oriented Business Chapter 127,
Code of Ord.
Tattoo Parlor / Body Piercing Studio
Tavern/Bar
VeterinaryOffice/Animal Hospital P P P Y
176.51-Table 8
Zoning Districts -- Permitted and Special Uses
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
A = Permitted as Accessory Use
OS M-1 M-2 PI ROS Specific Use
Standards
INDUSTRIAL/STORAGE USES
Crematory Retort A P P
Junk/Salvage Yard C
Manufacturing, Heavy C
Manufacturing, Light P P
Medical Cannabidiol Manufacturing P P Y
Mini-Warehouse P P
Motor Vehicle Storage, Permanent P P Y
Motor Vehicle Storage, Temporary A Y
Outdoor Storage A A A
Recycling Facility C
Research and Development Use P P P
Warehouse/Distribution P P
CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS, RECREATIONAL AND ENTERTAINMENT USES
ArtGallery/Studio P P A A
Carnival (as temporary use) P P Y
Convent/Monastery A
Cultural Facility P P P P P
Golf Course P P
Indoor Recreation and Amusement P C P P A
Live Entertainment P P
Lodge or Private Club P
Outdoor Dining
OutdoorAmusement P P
Outdoor Recreation P P
Outdoor Entertainment, Temporary P P P P
Park,Neighborhood P P
Place ofWorship P C C C
Public Plaza P P
Theater (Small/Large) P
176.51-Table 8
Zoning Districts -- Permitted and Special Uses
P = Permitted Use
C = Conditional Use
A = Permitted as Accessory Use
OS M-1 M-2 PI ROS Specific Use
Standards
GOVERNMENTAL AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
Cemetery P P
College/University P P
Correctional Facility C P
EmergencyMedical Center P
Fairground P P
Homeless Shelter P
Hospice P P
Hospital P P
Library P
Nursing Home P P
Office, Government P P P P
Post Office P P
Police Firearms Training Range C P
Public Service Facility P P P
School, Specialized Instructional P P P P
School, Primary or Secondary P
OTHER
Horse Stables, Private
Parking Garage/Structure A A A P
Parking Lot, Private A A A A A
Parking Lot, Public P P P P A
TransportationOperations Facility C P P
Communication Tower P P P P C Chapter 176.40,
Code ofOrd.
CommunicationAntenna P P P P C Chapter 176.40,
Code ofOrd..
Urban Agricultural P P P P P
Utility,Community/Regional C C C P P
Utility, Local P P P P P
Wind Turbine, StructureMounted A A A C C Chapter 176.40,
Code ofOrd.
Wind Turbine, TowerMounted C C C C C Chapter 176.40,
Code ofOrd.
(Ord. 18-22 – Nov. 18 Supp.)
176.52 USE STANDARDS.
Any use that is not specifically listed in a zoning district or overlay and that does not fall within a
general land use definition of Section 176.06, is prohibited within that district or overlay.
The Accessory Uses specifically listed in the tables of permitted and conditional uses for the
zoning districts shall be allowed only as specified in the table. Accessory Uses other than those
specifically listed are permitted in all zoning districts, as indicated in the tables of permitted and
conditional uses.
1. General Land Use Standards.
A. Agriculture. Agriculture is permitted only on lots of thirty-five (35) acres
or more, and the following standards shall be met:
(1) Retail sales of agricultural products shall be conducted on the
premises.
(2) Agricultural uses are distinct from urban agriculture and private
horse stables.
B. Outdoor Uses Generally. All business, sales, service, storage and display
of goods, manufacturing, and repairs shall be conducted wholly within enclosed
buildings, except where a permanent or temporary outdoor use is specifically
allowed by this Ordinance.
C. Outdoor Dining.
(1) Outdoor Dining shall be permitted only as an accessory use to a
restaurant or when specifically permitted in conjunction with a temporary
use.
(2) Outdoor Dining areas shall not be located in a required yard abutting
any residential district.
(3) The sound level of any music or other sound shall not exceed the
regulations set in Chapter 53, Noise and Noise Limits of the Marion Code
of Ordinances.
D. Outdoor Sales. This section regulates Outdoor Sales areas that are used for
longer periods of time than Temporary Outdoor Sales areas, whether permanent or
seasonal. These Outdoor Sales areas are permitted only if allowed by the
regulations of the zoning district in which the lot is located, and shall conform to
the following requirements:
(1) Outdoor Sales shall not be conducted within 50 ft. of any residential
zoning district or public street unless completely screened from view.
Complete screening shall consist of an opaque barrier of landscaping, walls,
fencing, berms or other methods sufficient in density and height to render
the Outdoor Sales operation invisible from the lot line of any lot in a
residential zoning district, and from the street. Outdoor sales located more
than 50 feet from residential zoning districts and public streets need not be
screened.
(2) The lot coverage of Outdoor Sales areas on the lot shall be limited
to not more than five percent (5%) of the lot area; the lot coverage of
Temporary Outdoor Sales areas shall not be included in this calculation.
(3) Outdoor Sales shall be conducted only within a designated area.
(4) Outdoor Sales areas and the surrounding premises shall be
maintained in an orderly manner, free of litter and other refuse. Storage of
goods for sale shall be no more than five (5) feet in height. Outdoor Sales
shall not obstruct required access to buildings or parking spaces on the site,
or to adjoining property.
(5) Outdoor Sales areas accessory to a Gas Station are permitted without
a conditional use, provided their area is limited to a total lot coverage of 30
square feet multiplied by the number of dispensing pumps on the lot, and
shall be located only within the pump islands or on a sidewalk adjoining the
building. Outdoor Sales accessory to a Gas Station in excess of this
limitation shall require a Conditional Use, if required by the district
regulations.
E. Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage, other than parking and storage of
commercial and recreational vehicles shall only be allowed as an accessory use as
provided in the district regulations, and shall be screened in accordance with
Section 176.43.
F. Refuse Dumpsters and Recycling Containers. Outdoor refuse dumpsters,
recycling containers, compacting equipment, pallet storage, baled cardboard, and
other refuse and recycling materials are permitted as an accessory use in any zoning
district, provided that they are screened in accordance with Section 176.43, and that
the refuse and recycling materials shall only be permitted to be present on the lot
until the next regular refuse and recycling pickup date for the property served.
2. Standards for Specific Uses. The following requirements shall apply to the
specified uses allowed as permitted or conditional uses in the zoning districts, in addition
to all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance:
A. Artist Live/Work Space. Artist live/work space shall conform to the
standards applicable to home occupations, except that the floor area devoted to nonresidential
activity shall not be limited.
B. Bed and Breakfast Establishment. Bed and breakfast establishments shall
comply with the following standards:
(1) Guest rooms shall not include cooking facilities.
(2) A maximum of five (5) bedrooms may be provided for registered
guests.
(3) The maximum stay by any guest shall be limited to thirty (30) days.
(4) All required guest parking shall be provided on-site.
C. Car Washes.
(1) When adjacent to a Residential District, the interior side yard
setback and rear yard setback shall be fifteen (15) feet.
(2) Vacuum stations and related equipment shall comply with the
setbacks of the primary structure.
(3) Section 176.43, Landscaping & Screening Standards shall be
followed; except that the bufferyard between a residential district and a car
wash shall be limited to the structural bufferyard standard.
(4) All carwash bays and tunnels and all related equipment shall be
designed to minimize the creation of, and reduce the carrying off premise,
of airborne particles of water, chemicals, and dust.
(5) An on-site queuing plan showing a minimum capacity of three (3)
vehicles shall be approved by Planning and Engineering staff.
(6) A maximum of two (2) access points are allowed and can be from
either the primary or secondary facing street, provided they meet the
following standards and receive approval from the City Engineer:
(a) SUDAS standards
(b) Adopted local regulations
(7) If accessory to a gas station, the carwash building shall be
constructed of similar materials to the primary structure.
D. Delayed Deposit Services. Delayed deposit services shall have a distance
separation of 1,000 feet from any child care center, educational facility, park or
recreational facility, religious institution or other delayed deposit service use.
E. Drive-Thru Facilities.
(1) An on-site queuing plan shall be approved by Planning and
Engineering staff.
(2) Landscaped barriers shall separate the stacking lane(s) from parking
areas and driveways; except that the bufferyard between a residential
district and a drive-thru facility shall be limited to the structural bufferyard
standard.
(3) An escape opening shall be provided within the landscaped barrier
between the stacking lane and driveways when the barrier is longer than 120
feet.
(4) One menu board per stacking lane is allowed.
(5) On site circulation should be designed to minimize conflict points
between pedestrians and vehicles.
(6) All signage shall follow Section 176.31 of the Marion Code of
Ordinances.
F. Dwelling Units, Auxiliary. Auxiliary dwelling units, attached and
detached, are subject to the following standards:
(1) Occupancy of any auxiliary dwelling unit shall be limited to no more
than two (2) persons.
(2) Only one (1) auxiliary dwelling unit, either detached or attached,
shall be permitted on a lot.
(3) The auxiliary dwelling unit shall have a maximum floor area of not
more than seven hundred (700) square feet.
(4) Auxiliary dwelling units shall comply with all yard requirements of
the zoning district.
(5) The vehicle access door of any new garage associated with the
construction of an auxiliary dwelling unit shall be set back a minimum of
twenty-five (25) feet from any street right-of-way line.
(6) No more than one (1) of the units, either the principal dwelling unit
or the auxiliary dwelling unit, may be non-owner occupied. A deed
restriction shall be recorded prior to issuance of a building permit for the
auxiliary dwelling unit to provide notice of this requirement to subsequent
owners.
(7) Annual registration and inspection of the non-owner-occupied
dwelling unit (auxiliary or primary) is required. If the owner fails to register
and submit to an inspection, the auxiliary dwelling unit shall not be
occupied until compliance is obtained.
(8) The auxiliary dwelling unit shall not be larger in area or height than
the principal dwelling unit.
(9) A new separate driveway providing exclusive access to the auxiliary
dwelling unit shall not be permitted.
(10) Detached auxiliary dwelling units shall be located at least ten (10)
feet from the principal dwelling unit.
(11) Detached auxiliary dwelling units shall not be located closer to the
street than the principal dwelling unit.
G. Gas Station.
(1) Restaurants in gas stations shall be required to meet the parking
requirements for restaurants in addition to those for gas stations.
(2) Fuel pumps shall be located no closer than twenty (20) feet from any
lot line and shall be located so that a vehicle using the fuel pump does not
encroach into the public right of way or onto adjoining property.
(3) Pumps and canopies shall be located either:
(a) Behind the principal building, not visible from the street or
public space; or
(b) On corner lots may be located on the side of the principal
building. However, corner side pumps and canopies shall not be
located towards 6th Avenue, 7th Avenue, or public parks, schools,
and open spaces.
(c) On corner lots, the principal building shall be built to the
intersection.
(d) These regulations do not apply to the BR, M-1, and M-2
districts.
(4) Gas stations shall be buffered from any residential use including
mixed-use buildings by a ten (10) foot planting strip, with shrubs and/or
trees that form a barrier at least thirty (30) inches tall. A decorative fence or
other non-natural barrier can be used with fewer plantings to form an
opaque barrier. Other screening requirements in the code for trash and
mechanical equipment shall be met.
(5) Lighting shall be shielded downward to prevent glare onto adjacent
properties.
(6) Pedestrian routes shall be defined, differentiated from vehicle areas,
to the building entrance from the public sidewalk and pumping areas.
(7) A maximum of two (2) access points are allowed and can be from
either the primary or secondary facing street, provided they meet SUDAS
standards and receive approval from the City Engineer.
(8) Electric charging stations count towards minimum parking
requirements.
(9) No outdoor storage or automotive repairs are allowed on site.
(10) Canopies shall have similar color and architectural features as the
primary building.
(11) One freestanding monument sign is allowed (see 176.31 for
regulations).
H. Group Homes.
(1) Group Home, Small: Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements for dwelling units.
(2) Group Home, Large: If off-street parking is needed in excess of what
is required for a single- family dwelling, it shall be provided in accordance
with the specific needs of the group home, as a condition of the granting of
a conditional use.
I. Kennels. Kennels shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Outdoor runs and exercise areas shall be a minimum of one thousand
(1000) feet from any residential zoning district.
(2) Outdoor kenneling shall be limited to veterinary offices/animal
hospitals in a Manufacturing District.
(3) All animals shall be kept either within completely enclosed
structures or under direct control of the kennel operator or staff at all times,
and shall be kept within completely enclosed structures between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(4) The operation of the kennel shall not allow the creation of noise by
any animal or animals under its care which can be heard by any person at
or beyond the property line of the lot on which the kennel is located, which
occurs a) repeatedly over at least a seven-minute period of time at an
average of at least twelve animal noises per minute, or b) repeatedly over at
least a fifteen minute period of time, with one minute or less lapse of time
between each animal noise during the fifteen-minute period.
J. Medical Cannabidiol Manufacturers. A medical cannabidiol manufacturer
shall not operate in any location, whether for manufacturing, possessing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting, packaging, processing, or suppling, within one
thousand (1,000) feet of a public or private school existing before the date of the
medical cannabidiol manufacturer’s licensure by the department. [Iowa Code
124E.7-10]
K. Medical Cannabidiol Dispensaries.
(1) A medical cannabidiol dispensary shall not operate in any location
within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public or private school existing before
the date of the medical cannabidiol dispensary’s licensure by the
department. [Iowa Code 124E]
(2) A registered dispensary shall not be located in a house, apartment,
condominium, or an area zoned for residential use.
L. Motor Vehicle Sales and Leasing Establishments.
(1) Newly established Motor Vehicle Sales and Leasing establishments
shall have a minimum lot area of one hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet.
(2) All Outdoor Motor Vehicle Display areas shall be landscaped in
accordance with Section 176.43, except:
(a) Where an Outdoor Motor Vehicle Display area adjoins a
building wall containing showroom display windows, Building
Foundation Landscaping may be relocated when:
i An equivalent amount of Building Foundation
Landscaping is provided at an alternate location between the
building wall and the street, at a location not more than 125
feet from the building wall.
ii The vehicle display area adjacent to the building wall
is constructed as a concrete-curbed platform, paved with
decorative concrete or masonry.
iii Building Foundation Landscaping is provided
adjacent to or within 16 ft. of all exterior corners of the
building wall.
(b) Internal Parking Lot Landscaping may be relocated to the
perimeter of the Outdoor Motor Vehicle Display area in a location
visible from streets adjoining the lot; however, landscape islands
shall be required at the end of all vehicle display rows.
M. Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Major. Major motor vehicle service and
repair shops shall not store or park any vehicle on the lot, including but not limited
to wrecked or junk vehicles, for longer than forty-five (45) days. All repair
operations shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings and all storage of
vehicles and equipment shall be fully screened by means of fencing or landscaping
or a combination thereof.
N. Motor Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor. Minor motor vehicle service and
repair shops shall not store or park any vehicle on the site for longer than five (5)
business days. Minor motor vehicle service and repair shops with fuel pumps shall
also comply with the requirements applicable to Gas Stations. All repair operations
shall be fully enclosed, and wrecked or junked vehicles shall not be stored for
longer time periods than those specified above.
O. Motor Vehicle Storage. Motor Vehicle Storage shall comply with the
following standards.
(1) Off-street parking facilities designed to conform with the
requirements of Chapter 176.29, Parking & Loading Regulations may be
used for Motor Vehicle Storage, in compliance with the following
requirements:
(a) No vehicles shall be stored in an off-street parking space
required for any other use located on the same or another lot.
(b) Vehicles shall be parked within designated off-street parking
spaces and shall not obstruct vehicular access to parking stalls or
any portion of the lot.
(2) Newly established Motor Vehicle Storage lots shall comply with the
requirements applicable to Off-Street Parking Facilities, except:
(a) 176.43-8 Parking Lot Landscaping
(b) Direct access to individual spaces shall not be required.
(3) Motor Vehicle Storage lots shall not be used as Off-Street Parking
Facilities unless modified to comply with all requirements of this
Ordinance.
(4) Commercial Vehicles shall only be stored in the M-2 district.
(5) Stored vehicles shall be operable, and no wrecked or junked vehicles
shall be permitted.
(6) Signage advertising the vehicles for sale or rental is prohibited.
(7) Motor Vehicle Storage lots shall not be used to conduct retail sales
and no retail customers shall be present at any time.
(8) Motor Vehicle Storage lots in the M-1 Light Manufacturing District
shall:
(a) Not be located closer than 500 feet to any residentially zoned
property.
(b) Not be located on a lot that is less than 2-acres in area.
P. Outdoor Entertainment. Outdoor Entertainment shall be permitted only as
an accessory use to a restaurant, except as a temporary use in accordance with
Section 176.51.
Q. Sexually Oriented Businesses (as defined and regulated under Chapter 127
of this Code of Ordinances), provided that adult uses shall be subject to the
following standards:
(1) No adult use shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any
residential district, U-1, U-2, or PI District, or within one thousand (1,000)
feet of a place of worship, public park, licensed day care center, school or
another adult use.
(2) No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the
observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to “Specified
Sexual Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas” from any public way
or from any adjacent property. This provision shall apply to any display,
decoration, sign, show window or other opening.
R. Veterinary Office/Animal Hospital. Veterinary Office/Animal Hospital
shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Outdoor exercise areas that directly abut or face any residentially
zoned properties, commercially zoned properties, and any public street shall
be screened with a 100% opaque non-see-through fence or wall.
(2) All animals shall be kept either within completely enclosed
structures or under direct control of the facility operator or staff at all times,
and shall be indoors between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(3) Veterinary offices/animal hospitals providing onsite service to
domestic animals only and include: outdoor kennels, commercial boarding
services accept as an accessory use, crematory services or 24-hour
emergency service shall be located at least 100 feet from any lot in any
Residential District; all outdoor kenneling shall be limited to clinics located
in a Manufacturing District.
(4) Noise regulations shall conform with standards set forth in Chapter
53, Noise and Noise Limits of the City of Marion Code.
3. Temporary Uses – General Provisions. A permit shall be required for temporary
uses allowed in this Ordinance, except that temporary uses operated or sponsored by a
governmental entity and located on a lot owned by that entity do not require a permit, but
shall otherwise be subject to the requirements of this Section. The applicant shall submit
a site plan or other suitable description to the Zoning Official, with any required permit
fee. As a condition of permit issuance, the Zoning Official may require conformance with
specific conditions regarding the operation of the temporary use as may be reasonably
necessary to achieve the requirements of this Section. If the Zoning Official finds that the
applicable requirements have not been met, he may revoke the permit and may require the
cessation of the temporary use. Where a permit for a temporary use has been revoked, no
application for a new permit shall be approved within six months following revocation.
All temporary uses, shall comply with the following requirements:
A. No temporary use shall be established or conducted so as to cause a threat
to the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare, either on or
off the premises.
B. Temporary uses shall comply with all requirements of the Fire Code and
other applicable codes and regulations. If necessary to ensure the protection of
public safety due to the presence of a particular hazard, the Fire Chief may require
the operator of the temporary use to employ a fire watch team and/or appropriate
security personnel.
C. Temporary uses shall not obstruct required fire lanes, access to buildings or
utility equipment, or egress from buildings on the lot or on adjoining property.
D. Temporary uses shall be conducted completely within the lot on which the
principal use is located, unless the City Council authorizes the use of City-owned
property or right of way.
E. When a permit is required for a temporary use, the Zoning Official shall
make an assessment of the number of parking spaces reasonably needed for the
permanent uses on the lot where the proposed temporary use is to be located, on the
basis of the particular temporary use, the seasonal demand for parking on the lot at
the time the temporary use is proposed, and the availability of other public and
private parking facilities in the area. The Zoning Official may deny the permit for
a temporary use if he finds that the temporary use will result in inadequate parking
being available for permanent uses on the same lot that are not connected with the
business proposing the temporary use.
F. During the operation of the temporary use, the lot on which it is located
shall be maintained in an orderly manner, shall be kept free of litter, debris, and
other waste material, and all storage and display of goods shall be maintained
within the designated area. Storage of goods for sale shall be no more than five (5)
feet in height.
G. Signs for a temporary use shall be permitted only in accordance with the
Section 176.31, Signs.
4. Permitted Temporary Uses.
A. Temporary Outdoor Sales. Temporary Outdoor Sales shall be limited to
three (3) events within one (1) calendar year per lot. These events shall be restricted
to the following time limits: one (1) event of not more than sixty (60) days, and two
(2) events of not more than thirty (30) days each. This does not include residential
sales as defined within Section 176.35, Supplemental Regulations.
B. Outdoor Arts, Crafts and Plant Shows, Exhibits and Sales. Outdoor arts,
crafts and plant shows, exhibits and sales conducted by a nonprofit or charitable
organization shall be permitted in any nonresidential zoning district, and may be
conducted in addition to the time limits for Outdoor Sales Areas for a period of not
more than seven (7) days.
C. Carnivals. Carnivals shall meet the requirements of Chapter 131,
Amusement Licenses, of the Marion Code of Ordinances. Carnivals shall be limited
to a maximum of 14 days, and a maximum of three (3) permits may be issued within
one calendar year per lot.
D. Temporary Contractor Trailers and Real Estate Model Units. Temporary
contractor trailers and real estate sales trailers or model units shall be permitted in
any zoning district when accessory to a construction project for which a building
permit or site development permit has been issued. Such uses shall be limited to a
period not to exceed the duration of the active construction phase of such project or
the active selling and leasing of space in such development, as the case may be. No
such use shall contain any sleeping or cooking accommodations, except those
located in a model unit.
E. Temporary Motor Vehicle Storage. Temporary Motor Vehicle Storage
shall be limited to a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. No lot shall be used
for Temporary Motor Vehicle Storage for more than one hundred eighty (180) days
in any one-year period.
(Ord. 18-28 – Nov. 18 Supp.)